Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session suspended on Thursday 7 June 2007 .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Membership of committees : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Written statements ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Oral questions and written statements ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft of the agenda for this part-session , as laid down by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 14 June 2007 pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
It has been requested that this draft be amended as follows .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has requested a statement by the President of Parliament on the situation in Palestine , followed by short speeches by the chairmen of the groups .
I suggest this statement be made at 9 a.m. tomorrow , as the first item on the agenda .
Are there any objections to this ?

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , this is not an objection , but just a suggestion : perhaps representatives of the Commission and Council could make a brief statement on this very precarious situation .
After all , these two bodies have an overview of the situation . Since this is an exceptional situation , it should be possible for the Council , too , to make a statement .
Is that the case ?
We can request it , although I am doubtful whether there will be anyone from the institutions you mention available tomorrow at 9 a.m.
We shall try , however .
Parliament adopted the motion .
I have not received any amendments for today - Monday .
Tuesday :
I should like to pass on a message from the Council : it cannot be present tomorrow afternoon for the statements on the conclusions of the G8 Summit .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I think that that is very regrettable , to put it mildly .
The Council was asked as long as a month or so ago to be present without fail at this debate , and we were even promised that it would be .
I do not understand why there is no minister or other representative of the government of the country holding the Council Presidency who is able to be present .
In my opinion , you should make it quite clear that we are very disappointed about the situation .
Mr Swoboda , I , too , have only just found this out .
We shall make our message suitably clear .
Wednesday :
No amendments have been received .
Thursday :
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has requested postponing the vote on the motions for resolutions on the Middle East until the July part-session .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you .
Given the recent developments in the Palestinian regions , it is more important , as we see it , that we indeed hold a brief debate tomorrow morning to discuss the situation , the new developments , the challenges being faced and then follow this up possibly with a resolution in July where we can take all new developments into consideration , rather than the other way round .
My group fully supports the proposal of having a debate tomorrow , as you suggested , Mr President , and of taking the time to propose a more well-founded and , above all , a more up-to-date resolution by the next part-session .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , this has the full support of our group .
The situation is so confusing , and the things we say today may no longer apply as soon as tomorrow or the day after .
Therefore , it undoubtedly makes sense to take account of the situation now , and then adopt such a resolution in July .
( Parliament adopted the motion )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Conference of Presidents decided unanimously last week to hold a major debate on Cuba in autumn , as there is no current occasion for a debate on Cuba .
Yet the General Affairs Council has been discussing Cuba today and yesterday and has issued conclusions showing the Council 's position in a slightly different light .
For example , the Council invites a Cuban delegation to Brussels for exploratory talks , and declares its willingness to conduct comprehensive , open dialogue with the Cuban Government on all issues of mutual interest .
This constitutes a current occasion , and so we should be much obliged if , despite last week 's discussion by the Conference of Presidents , the subject could now be placed on the agenda after all .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I , too , attended this Conference of Presidents , and the proposal to hold a comprehensive debate on policy on Latin America , in which Cuba is to play a special role , in autumn was my motion on behalf of my group .
Mr Nassauer is an extremely honourable , proper MEP , and what I am about to say does not apply to him , as he joined us in voting in favour of the proposal for an autumn debate at this Conference of Presidents .
Nevertheless , as we know , some members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats took the view - not in response to today 's decisions by the General Affairs Council but as early as last Thursday , immediately after the Conference of Presidents - that that was not on ; that Cuba was at all events to be discussed immediately under urgent procedure .
We also know who this was : it was chiefly the Spanish delegation in the PPE-DE Group .
We have been wondering for some time whether ' PPE ' stands for ' Partido Popular Español ' . One thing is completely clear : it is these people in the PPE-DE Group who are responsible for the fact that every opportunity is taken in this House for domestic Spanish idealogisation .
I repeat , therefore : there is absolutely no point in debating Cuba under urgent procedure on Thursday afternoon .
The debate would attract maybe 15 people .
The European Council 's decision today to invite a Cuban delegation is a confirmation that it makes perfect sense to await this dialogue before we hold a debate here in autumn , for which we shall then be properly prepared : this is respectable politics .
What we are seeing here now is domestic Spanish manoeuvring ; that is what this is .
( Applause )
( Parliament approved the motion by electronic vote . )
( Uproar in the Chamber )
Ladies and gentlemen , that is the result of your vote .

( DE ) Mr President , I think that was a technical error - I am truly sorry .
During the vote , the lights went out on a large number of machines , for example those of Mr Karas and Mr Nassauer , who then wished to complain to you , albeit unaware of the actual result - which I can understand .
I therefore formally request that you repeat the vote .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , please , let us not quarrel over such an issue ; there is enough discord in Europe .
It was a very close result , and it is true that some machines did not work , including those of Mr Nassauer , Mr Swoboda and others .

Therefore , I request your consent to repeat the vote .
( DE ) Mr President , I would refer to the standard procedure , whereby anyone whose voting machine has failed to work can place his or her position on the record without the need to repeat the vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , in view of the close outcome of the vote and the fact that some machines did not work , I recommend that the vote be repeated .
( ES ) Mr President , the vote has been carried out properly and on time and , as far as I can remember , Mr President , I have never known a vote to be repeated in this House as a result of a machine failing .
I have never seen that .
Ladies and gentlemen , a consensus was required for the vote to be repeated , and I recommended doing so , but regrettably we have been unable to reach agreement .
Unfortunately , it has not been possible to obtain your consent .
According to the legal situation , then , the vote has taken place .
Nevertheless , I give you the floor , Mrs Scheele .
( DE ) Mr President , the light was on when we voted , and suddenly all the lights disappeared .
This is different from when machines are not working and we have to inform the technicians .
The question is whether majorities have to be obtained in this devious way in such an important matter .
We could carry on discussing this for hours .
I shall now read out what has been written down for me :
The technical people tell us that there was a technical problem .
In fact they closed the vote a bit earlier than I announced it was closed .
If the technicians say they closed the vote before the President announced it was closed , I have to declare it invalid .
We shall therefore repeat the vote .
( Parliament adopted the motion )
( The agenda was therefore adopted )
Definition , description , presentation and labelling of spirit drinks ( debate )
The next item is the report by Horst Schnellhardt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the definition , description , presentation and labelling of spirit drinks C6-0440 / 2005


Mr President , honourable Members , I am speaking on behalf of my colleague , Commissioner Fischer Boel , who wishes to thank the rapporteur , Mr Schnellhardt , and the members of the various committees involved in drawing up this excellent report .
She also wishes to express her appreciation for the good cooperation between all involved in Parliament and the Council , and to thank the Council for its work .
As a result of this cooperation , the work has moved smoothly and steadily towards achieving the result of which we are all aware .
On 15 December 2005 , the Commission submitted a proposal for a new regulation on the definition , description , presentation and labelling of spirit drinks .

Since then , a whole series of discussions have taken place : a public hearing took place in Parliament on 20 July 2006 ; there were reports from the Committee responsible , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety ; there were opinions from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
This process has been very intensive and constructive under the codecision procedure .
A series of informal trialogues took place which led to the Council 's general approach , which not only accommodates most of the Member States ' concerns , but also reflects the European Parliament 's powers of codecision by taking the vast majority of its proposals on board .
One proposal in particular that has been taken on board is the abolition of the initial proposal for the categorisation of spirit drinks ; secondly , the introduction of a strong quality policy for spirit drinks ; thirdly , the withdrawal of the proposal to allow flavours to be added to eau de vie ; and fourthly , the strengthening of the powers of the European Parliament by introducing the regulatory committee with scrutiny procedures in most of the cases for which provision is made for comitology .
Those are just a few of the essential amendments which were introduced on the initiative of the European Parliament .
During this whole procedure , my colleague , Commissioner Fischer Boel , has played a constructive and pragmatic role with a view to finding a result that we hope the European Parliament will be able to endorse .
In line with the international obligations deriving from the TBT Agreement and following the Council 's request of 23 April 2007 , the Commission sent the file to the WTO , setting a two-month period for comments .
This notification was formally made on 1 June 2007 .
As regards vodka , the Commission still has some reservations at this stage , which are primarily of a legal nature .
The Commission has always taken a clear stance that it must ensure that a definition of vodka is compatible with EU law and fits the WTO context .
The definition of the raw-material bases for this popular product - which is enjoying considerable market buoyancy worldwide - has been subject to considerable debate in the last month .
The general approach of the Council distinguishes the labelling of vodka between one group based on potatoes and cereals , and those products which are derived from other raw materials which shall bear the indication ' produced from ' and list the products that go into it .
The Commission 's legal service has expressed concern about the compatibility of this solution both with EU law and with WTO obligations .
Any restriction of the present legislation needs to be duly justified and proportionate ; the least intrusive way has to be found to serve this goal .
So my colleague would like to conclude with these words : ' For the time being , let me congratulate the Council Presidency and Parliament for their very successful collaboration , which I hope will be endorsed as a first-reading agreement by Parliament in view of a final adoption once the WTO notification procedure has been brought to an end in two months ' time ' .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you all heard what the Commissioner said , which , I can honestly say , expressed my feelings exactly .
All of us in this room heard it , and we shall take it into account during tomorrow 's vote , too .
What was the starting point ?
When we held the hearing on 26 June of last year , we soon found that there were very great differences in the implementation of the Regulation .
The Council was divided , Parliament was divided , and we really wondered how all this was to be overcome .
I regard the fact that we have before us today a compromise involving the Council , the Commission and sections of Parliament - after first reading , mark you - as rather sensational , considering the starting situation .
It is a result for all those involved , and so I should like to thank the Commission , the Council and those fellow Members who have helped to work on it : Mrs McAvan , Mr Schlyter , and Mr Maaten of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , to name but a few .
Their cooperation was excellent , and indeed this is the only way of achieving a positive result .
Not only did this come together at the drawing board , it was also the result of a clear vote in committee : 58 votes in favour to only 2 against , with 2 abstentions - that was a result we could build on .
As the Commissioner said , many of Parliament 's proposals have been implemented .
We already agreed back then that the quality of the Regulation had to be improved , it had to include more consumer information , and it had to be brought into line with the internal market .
This Regulation was necessary . There had been two regulations and many Acts of Accession , but they could not achieve all this .
How wonderful - there is no system of categories .
We are not classifying spirit drinks according to quality - that would have been a very bad thing - but in the field of quality we do have a ban on flavouring spirits .
This means that it is forbidden to add flavourings to spirits .
I once said , exaggerating somewhat , that I wanted to see spirit drinks falling under the Regulation on spirit drinks , not containing so many chemicals that they ended up under the Regulation on chemicals .
What is important , however , is the protection of producers who use proper methods , and we cannot allow - to exaggerate - the production of spirit drinks to become the preparation of toxic cocktails .
The issue of sweetening is another that was pushed through by Parliament .
I should like to say to the Commission now that , when we discuss sweetening under the extended comitology procedure , we shall take great care that the addition of sugar is kept within reasonable bounds .
Figures have been mentioned : 20 grams per litre , which corresponds to five teaspoons .
I have to say that tea with five teaspoons of sugar added starts to lose its appeal !
We shall keep an eye on this .
The methanol content of 50 grams per hectolitre in the old Regulation has been reduced to 10 grams per hectolitre .
This had been a health problem .
The hydrocyanic acid content of stone-fruit marc spirit has been reduced by 3 grams to 7 grams per hectolitre of pure alcohol .
These are achievements that cannot be praised enough .
The new proposal also reflects traditional methods .
We have been at pains to ensure , in particular , that traditionally produced products can continue to be produced .
That is a very important point .
Moving on , now , to vodka : a very contentious issue .
I could have lived with the Commission proposal that the raw-material basis of vodka always be included on the label ; but the traditional producing countries , for example Poland and Finland , objected .
I took account of these objections , which related to traditions , and said : in that case , we shall exempt potatoes and cereals from the labelling requirement , and only the other agricultural raw materials used to produce vodka must be stated .
That was the right solution as , when I look at the amendments that have been tabled and hear what the Commissioner has to say , I can already tell that all the amendments stating otherwise will fail to gain any support from within the Council , the Commission or the WTO .
We are right to exempt these two products from the labelling requirement , in order to take account of traditions in Poland and Finland .
We must not be tempted to introduce legislative amendments banning the manufacture of products when there is no basis for this in either health considerations or internal-market rules or consumer-protection rules .
That would be taking things too far .
We have always done things that way in previous legislation , too .
Therefore , I would appeal to you to support the compromise tomorrow .
There is no alternative compromise .
Failure to adopt the present proposal will render all the other parts of the compromise invalid .
The Commission will then try again to enforce its ideas , which were strongly contested , the Council will start quarrelling again , and we shall have no regulation for the coming years .
I should like to point that out so that no one tries to say later on that they would have voted differently if I had only told them that .
That is the reason for my request .
I look forward to the discussion .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Schnellhardt on his patience above all else .
The spirit industry is extremely important to us , creating jobs , status , export and tax revenue .
Therefore it has been important to update the 1989-1990 regulations , to bring greater clarity and greater legal certainty to improve the definition of the main spirit drinks and to resolve any problems with spirits with a quasi-geographical indication status .
What we now have is a proper registration system for geographical indication , which is important , and I am glad we have got rid of the three categories of spirits .
We have now ended up with something that is compatible with the WTO and TRIPS , which ensures smooth running in the internal market , prevents fraud and counterfeiting , protects the consumer and does not underplay and undermine solid , long-established industries , such as the second biggest vodka producer in Europe - the United Kingdom - where in Scotland vodka is such an important industry .
That is why we must support these proposals .
I think the Commission proposal was better than the compromise , but it is important to move forward with the compromise on vodka , bearing in mind geographical indications will protect forever Polish vodka , Finnish vodka , Swedish vodka , Lithuanian vodka , and so on .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if we have to take decisions about food legislation and end up encroaching on territory which people and Member States believe to form part of their own individuality and tradition , then it has never been easy to reach sound agreements .
The fact that Mr Schnellhardt has managed to do exactly that for this regulation on spirit drinks deserves the respect of us all .
We need a fresh regulation , because the present one is no longer up to date , technologically speaking and because it requires clarification in the area of the WTO rules and also further to the recent enlargement .

Mr Schnellhardt has achieved a widely supported agreement in this House and with the Council , which will bring us better consumer protection , allow our European products to occupy a clearly defined position on the global market within the WTO framework and also promote the smooth running of the internal market .
Moreover - and this is not insignificant - it recognises , by means of labelling and the system of geographical designations among other things , the specificity of each product , although there are still doubts among some , not least in our group , about the vodka provisions .
Here too , though , the rapporteur has done a sterling job by requiring that , if vodka is made from raw materials other than grain or potatoes , this raw material should be indicated on the label next to the product name .
In doing so , we are using techniques that have been used before with great success .
Years ago , in relation to beer and chocolate , we held a similar discussion on traditions , values , interests of suppliers of raw materials and of large and small producers ; when those discussions were over , we reached a compromise much like Mr Schnellhardt 's present compromise with the Council .
This is why I would urge all those doubting Thomases among you to revisit the compromise and to give it your backing if possible .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , the Socialist Group will be supporting the trialogue compromise and all its elements , as outlined by the rapporteur , Mr Schnellhardt .
I should like to thank him for all his hard work and , like Mr Titley , his patience , because this has become a very complex dossier and one on which emotions have started to run high .
We are supporting this compromise because we want the European drinks industry to have high-quality products for consumers and we want to protect our industry on the world markets .
What we do not want to do with this legislation is to give one country 's type of production an advantage over another country 's type of production .
That is not the aim of the legislation .
There is room for all European producers , as long as they meet high quality standards .
That brings me to the vodka compromise .
I think it is a good compromise .
Why ?
Because , as Mr Schnellhardt has said , for the first time it recognises that there is a special place for traditional manufacturers using cereals and potatoes .
But , at the same time , it allows other long-standing producers of vodka to continue to market their products on the European market - and they will be labelled .
We cannot have a situation as proposed by some of the amendments which seek to take certain European producers off the market .
That would never get a majority in this House and would never get a majority in the Council .
Everybody has to work in a spirit of compromise and what we have got on the table has something for everybody .
We have also got to work with facts .
It is simply not true that the compromise on vodka would allow you to make vodka , for example , from animal waste , as has been circulated again in this House today .
That is not true .
It is made from very high-quality agricultural products .
I want to say something to the British Conservatives about vodka .
I understand from their press release last week they are not supporting the compromise now and they have accused Labour of selling the British vodka industry down the river .
I have to say that this is vital for European jobs , it is vital for the drinks industry , which employs 60 000 people , and has the support of British industry as well as European vodka producers and other drinks manufacturers .
I can see surprise from some Members .
I hope we will have this clarified because I have the press release here .
Finally , it is not just about vodka , it is about high-quality drinks .
Many colleagues from different countries have come to Mr Schnellhardt , myself and other colleagues and asked for certain changes because of their traditional production .
All those things have been met .
The Council and the Commission have been very helpful and I very much hope that tomorrow , after , as Mr Titley has said , 18 years have passed since we started trying to get this legislation on the statute book , we just go ahead and do it and protect European jobs .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the discussion on the Schnellhardt report is being hijacked by the discussion on vodka , which is unfortunate , because it is a report that says so much more in many areas that are so crucial to Europe and to this industry in Europe .
This is why I should like to single out a number of those other points .
The directive 's first concern is , of course , the quality of the European drinks industry .
It also says something about Europe , because wherever you go in the world , we see European drinks , distilled in Europe , available in all shapes and sizes , and with a recognition of the quality which we produce in Europe .
This is important in a situation in which not everything that is said about Europe is always positive , because this is something in which Europe excels .
What the rapporteur has done is to reinforce this very element , more so , it has to be said , in his original report than in the compromise which was eventually struck with the Council .
It is , to my mind , a fantastic achievement and something we should hold onto .
Distillation is a craft , a truly traditional craft .
Anyone who visits distilleries - and I recently visited some gin distilleries in my own country - can see for themselves that it is a craft .
It is an art to make these products well and in a way that the quality is retained at all times .
This is without a doubt the most important element in this report .
Rather than adding sugar or flavourings at random , we have clear definitions for these drinks , even very strict definitions , not least at the industry 's request .
This is how consumers receive sound information about the product .
They know what they buy , and can rely on the fact that what they are getting is quality .
This directive also allows the European drinks industry , thanks to this quality , to remain a strong contender in the competition .
It also says something about Europe , namely about the regional origin of many of these drinks .
In this respect , this directive is almost like a microcosm of the European Union , as it demonstrates the diversity of the European Union and how we together , in this very diversity , can all still be European .
This too is very important to my mind .
I will now briefly turn to the subject of vodka , on which the rapporteur has tried to reach a compromise which received my wholehearted support during the discussion .
He has , as I see it , made a valiant attempt at trying to strike a sound compromise between the old vodka industries in the European Union , which existed at the time the definition was drafted - even before Sweden , Finland , Poland and all the other countries joined the Union - and these more recent Member States , and has done a reasonable job of it .
Despite this , most of my group are in favour of a much stricter definition of vodka , and I have to say that their arguments are valid .
This is why it is good that this issue is on the table , so that it can be thrashed out .
Firstly , as regards consumer information , my group takes the view that every consumer must be able to rely on the fact that vodka is made from potatoes or cereals - these are of the essence - and sugar beet perhaps .
As the majority in my group see it , consumers should be able to take this as read .
It goes further than this though .
This is not just about the product .
There is also a discussion about the individuality and identity of the countries where it is produced .
After all , what would our reaction have been if this discussion with these countries had been held before ?
Would we have said : for the sake of consumer information , it is also possible to introduce onto the market cognac made from potatoes or whiskey made from grapes ?
No , of course we would never have done this , and my group wants us to be consistent in the case of vodka too .
They have a point , of course .
I would like to see us reach agreement at first reading .
I welcome the fact that this argument is on the table , and in this respect , I support my group 's amendment .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , objections have been raised concerning the proposal for a regulation on spirit drinks for a number of reasons .
First of all , broadening the definition of vodka to include spirit drinks based on raw ingredients other than those traditionally used infringes the law and is damaging to the economic interests of current vodka producers and consumers .
Secondly , as a result of the proposed changes , the new Member States will yet again lose out .
Poland , one of the main vodka producers in the European Union and the world , will be particularly affected .
Thirdly , this move will be yet another blow for farmers who grow cereal crops , potatoes and beet .
They will not have the slightest chance of compensating for their losses with other crops .
Fourthly , the name ' vodka ' is a trade name , linked with a specific product that is manufactured according to a specific recipe and using specific ingredients , namely grain , potatoes and beet molasses .
Any product made from other raw ingredients will be a different product .
Therefore , it cannot be labelled as ' vodka ' .
It has to have its own , distinct name .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , I wish , above all , to thank Mr Schnellhardt for the piece of work that we now have and that demanded so much patience .
What patience we have all shown towards the lobbyists of the spirits industry !
It will be a great relief to be rid of them .
This package is really all about we politicians regulating sales advantages through origin marking and similar measures .
That being said , I nonetheless think that even when it comes to spirits - which are not in themselves useful products that politicians should encourage - origin marking and similar measures may have a large role to play in defending local patterns of production against unfair competition .
What I think we have so far forgotten to talk about in the debate is the work we have done to reduce the sugar content of spirits and the use of synthetic flavourings and colorants .
That is also an important aim of the compromise : to produce a smaller quantity of synthetic spirits .
We now move on to vodka .
Incidentally , I have tabled an amendment , number 149 , designed to stop all traditionally unsweetened types of spirit from being sweetened .
Let us return to vodka , however .
The compromise arrived at states that grain and potatoes are the basis for vodka and that the product should be labelled accordingly if it is made of anything else .
If producers begin to cheat where labelling is concerned and try to evade the issue and sell non-traditional vodka as ordinary vodka , we shall have to come back to this issue , as it is not intended that they should do that .
If vodka is made of anything other than grain or potatoes , this must be stated on the bottle .
Sugar beet has been added in the amendments designed to afford still more protection to vodka .
It is not traditional in my country to make vodka from sugar beet .
Why should I support amendments that add sugar beet and put it on a par with grain and potatoes ?
I am therefore voting against those amendments .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank Mr Schnellhardt for his sterling efforts in drawing up this report .
I feel that he was able , despite initial difficulties , to strike a balance , and reach a compromise in terms both of technology and of the various national interests .
I should like to highlight two points , the first of which is the definition of vodka .
In our proceedings in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety I have already said that we should not succumb to the pressure that has been brought to bear by the so-called traditional producers .
It is my firm belief that the argument so often put forward that we should have the same precise definition of what raw materials vodka can be made from as we do for whiskey and rum , is not entirely valid .
After all , the technology of vodka-making is completely different .
I therefore feel that the current definition of vodka is workable and sufficient .
With regard to the current situation and to the opinions of the traditional producers , I feel that the compromise definition in point 145 of the report could be a solution , and as shadow rapporteur I recommend that at least some MEPs from my group should support it .
I cannot finish without mentioning the definition of slivovice , a specific issue for the Czech Republic .
Mr Schnellhardt knows that there was a technical oversight , and that the Committee on the Environment ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Schnellhardt on the compromise that is before us .
It has been some time coming , but with this result , there is a good chance of an agreement at first reading .
I am delighted that the point that I have mentioned during the debate in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has been accepted .
It concerns the ambiguous clause of creating the impression that there is mention of a certain age on the label .
I am pleased that this clause has now been scrapped , because in this way , the Dutch young gin and old gin remain safeguarded .
Indeed , this indication of gin refers to the preparation method of the gin and not the age .
I should like to finish off with a brief comment about vodka .
Whilst I , as a Dutchman , am not used to drinking much vodka , I do sympathise with my Eastern European colleagues .
This is why I have decided to back the vodka definition in which only potatoes , cereals and sugar beet can be used as raw materials .
Further to the rapporteur 's appeal , I will give this matter some more thought .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I welcome the fact that our discussion here and now on labelling , designations of origin and the production of spirit drinks is based on a workable compromise that is clearly suitable for preserving tradition and the typical national means of producing spirit drinks across Europe .
However , I should like to make a few observations on a related problem .
The age at which people are starting not only to smoke but also to drink alcohol has fallen .
In the case of the former , the EU has already brought itself to undertake common action and also campaigns to strengthen young people 's self-confidence .
It is time we did the same in the case of the latter , in my opinion .
What a drink is called is probably of secondary importance as far as young consumers are concerned , and will probably not make any difference to the problem .
For example , the introduction of a special tax on alcopops only led people to switch to beer and to wine-based pre-mixed drinks , which explains why the number of young people drinking themselves into a coma has not gone down .
Young people are probably not drinking any more than before ; the reasons for alcohol consumption have not changed .
What are significant , however , are the break-up of social structures such as the traditional family , the increasing isolation of young people in front of the television or computer screen , and often the lack of alternatives .
High-quality production of spirit drinks across Europe is an important matter .
On the other hand , however , there is no doubt that the protection of young people from related problems is just as important .
( SK ) First of all , let me express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Schnellhardt , for his work on this topic .
I would also like to praise the work of several Polish Members in connection with the drafting of amendments aimed at protecting the vodka tradition , which has long been a speciality of Eastern European countries .
These amendments were also aimed at protecting customary , time-honoured methods of production which date back to the 15th century , and which should be employed in accordance with the traditions of the countries that were the first to produce such beverages .
The biggest ' apple of discord ' in this report is the definition of vodka , namely what ingredients the beverage must contain in order to be designated as vodka .
Throughout the centuries , vodka has been defined in Eastern European countries as a spirit made from grain , potatoes or sugar-beet molasses .
To reiterate the point , since vodka is a speciality of the countries of Eastern , rather than Western , Europe , I would ask my colleagues from other countries to respect the definition and not to expand it to include citrus-flavoured spirits , etc .
These and different spirits , which are the specialities of other countries , need another designation , primarily to prevent attempts at misleading customers .
( SK ) Member States rightfully take pride in the fact that long-established methods of production and processing raw materials are respected , recognised and protected when applied to traditional designations , such as cognac , champagne , Scottish whiskey , rum , port wine , etc .
These are conventional terms , and it is natural that manufacturers have clear definitions of the technological processes used in production and , similarly , of the primary raw materials .
It is only natural that manufacturers from traditional countries of origin jealously and carefully guard these definitions .
For that reason , Slovak producers , for example , had to replace the word ' rum ' with a different designation , because the Slovak beverage was not made from sugar cane using the original method .
In other words , manufacturers from the new Member States paid their harmonisation dues long ago .
Now we are facing a situation where it is mostly the EU 15 Member States that must show that they can behave in a fair and proper manner and consistently comply with the same requirements that in the past were imposed on us .
The matter at hand is vodka , as has been discussed here .
All of a sudden we are witnessing a requirement to designate as vodka second- and third-rate spirits made of bananas and other fruits .
Consumers will then be misled into believing that they are drinking vodka and will stop buying the genuine product .
This will harm the bona fide producers that follow the tradition and make vodka exclusively from the appropriate raw materials .
Ladies and gentlemen , in Finland , Poland , Slovakia , the Czech Republic and all other Scandinavian countries , the designation vodka may traditionally be granted only and exclusively to a product made from either grain or potatoes .
Therefore , I ask you to take this into account and to subscribe to these arguments during the vote .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , when we discuss the report on the labelling of alcohol , we should take into account not only the technical aspects and the need to ensure the transparency of the European market , but also the fact that the production and drinking of alcohol is often linked to local traditions and customs .
European legislation should therefore not in any way restrict these traditions and customs and certainly not prohibit them .
In my country , the Czech Republic , slivovice is one of the traditional drinks .
Maintaining traditional methods of producing slivovice is guaranteed under the country 's treaties of accession to the EU and should therefore not be undermined , certainly not by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
I should therefore like to call on you , ladies and gentlemen , to support Amendment 144 tomorrow in the vote , and to rectify the mistake that has crept into the report .
Please lend your support to this tradition , which is not just a Czech and Moravian drink , but also a wonderful European one .

( SV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are two reasons why it is important to preserve the traditional definition of vodka : the historically significant regional aspect and the consumer aspect .
In the Nordic countries and in many of the EU 's new Member States , we have a long , Slavic-inspired history and tradition of vodka production , in which alcohol is manufactured from potatoes and grain .
Champagne and cognac are strictly defined .
It must be possible for the same rule to apply to vodka - the spirit produced from grain or potatoes .
If no one knows what vodka is , we cannot make informed choices .
Consumers are entitled to expect vodka to be based on certain ingredients , just as we all expect wine to be produced from grapes , and gin from juniper berries .
If we agree that any old alcohol produced from , for example , bananas or grapes may be called vodka , the consumer knows that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , today , after many months of work and lively debate involving representatives of alcohol and raw ingredients producers , as well as distributors and consumers , we are discussing Mr Schnellhardt 's report .
Unfortunately , the solutions put forward in this report have been universally criticised , and satisfy no one .
Products have been artificially divided into three categories , where the vodka category contains no vodkas .
Instead , this group includes brandy , whisky , rum , aquavit , and could easily also include our bootleg or moonshine vodka .
Splitting alcohols up according to specific names gives the impression that we are involved in subliminal advertising rather than trying to find a solution to this problem .
There is no logic in how this matter is being dealt with .
As a result , and in spite of my sincere wishes and best intentions , I have to agree with the dissenting voices in this House and vote against this report .
Mr President , as a Scots MEP I have an obvious interest in any regulation that relates to whisky .
However , we also have other national drinks , including a very significant economic interest in vodka and gin distillation and bottling .
The debates in which I have taken part in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection have been interesting , at times heated , and I have argued strongly for a flexible definition of ' vodka ' .
Some say that spirits should be treated the same , but vodka and whisky are not the same , and this proposal simply has to recognise that fact .
Vodka has traditionally been made from different ingredients in different areas ; Scotch whisky is a product of centuries of traditional practice , by contrast .
The first reference to Scotch whisky in Scotland was in Exchequer records in 1494 / 95 .
The first taxes were imposed in 1644 .
Some spirits have traditionally been rounded off using sugar .
Scotch whisky has not , and this regulation must not allow that to happen .
Protecting the term ' Scotch whisky ' , as well as the methods of production under geographic definition , is extremely important for Scotland for obvious reasons .
Some details still have to be underlined in the technical files , and I look forward to that .
However , this first-reading compromise - the product of lengthy and very heated exchanges - is something that , in the spirit of that compromise , I am now prepared to accept , and I hope that the House will accept it tomorrow .
( SV ) We are now to adopt a definition of vodka .
My question is : why ?
As a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I wish to devote all my time and energy not to defining varieties of spirit but to working for a better environment and better public health .
Public health is genuinely threatened .
Europe is far and away the continent on which more alcohol is consumed than anywhere else in the world .
In my own country , Sweden , consumption has increased by more than 30 % since we became Members of the EU .
All that a definition sanctioned by the EU will do is paint a picture of vodka as something desirable .
It is not desirable .
Vodka is a form of alcohol , which is dangerous in unduly high quantities .
If there is to be a definition of vodka , cannot the industry itself come up with it ?
With all due respect to the rapporteur , Mr Schnellhardt , the business of coming up with a definition of vodka should be referred back to the place where most of it is produced and where the manufacturers can sit and produce as many definitions as they like .
We politicians have other things to do .
Mr President , I would like to put aside my prepared text and respond to some of my colleagues who spoke earlier in the debate .
Mrs McAvan tells us that this measure is designed to protect jobs , yet to the extent that it either bans or qualifies the use of the word ' vodka ' for existing brands and existing manufacturers , it seems likely to have exactly the reverse effect .
Mr Maaten asks if we have not been to see a distillery which is a craft industry .
Well , Mr Maaten , yes I have .
I worked in the industry for several years and I can tell you that a malt whisky distillery is indeed a craft industry , but a vodka or grain whisky distillery is an industrial process and the process for producing vodka produces pure alcohol whether you make it from sugar or from potatoes or from anything else .
All this talk about consumer protection is nonsense .
The product is identical and the reason we should not compare vodka with whisky - or brandy , as has been rightly pointed out by my colleague on the other side of the Chamber - is because in those products , the ingredients significantly affect the flavour .
Whisky is only whisky if it is made in the proper way , but vodka is based on pure alcohol .
If I may make a general point , we should not be seeking to change the established meanings of words by legislation .
However , in this case the compromise proposed by the rapporteur seems to be the best outcome on offer so I suppose that we must reluctantly support it .
As happens so often in the European Union , we have to make the best of a bad job .

Mr President , as Mr Helmer has pointed out , and just to clarify for the House , the UK Conservatives are indeed supporting Mr Schnellhardt 's amendment on vodka .
The issue which our Scandinavian and Polish colleagues appear to be banking on now is the old equality-with-whisky argument .
I have heard people in the House this evening saying that that we could possibly have a situation where whisky is going to be made out of grapes .
Well I have to say that these arguments are completely bogus .
We are trying to define these products for the benefit of consumers to ensure that what is in the bottle conforms to their expectations of what a whisky or a vodka should be .
As distillers will tell you , if you distil at a lower alcoholic strength , more taste comes over the still .
Spirits like whisky are distilled at a low strength and derive their taste from the raw materials .
Other spirits like vodka are distilled at a high strength and may then even be filtered through charcoal to remove the taste of the raw materials .
Our Nordic colleagues and their allies are trying to have it both ways .
They are asking us to define a product not by reference to its characteristics or by reference to what the consumers expect , but by reference to the raw materials that their producers currently use .
It is interesting that they have not sought to include sulphite waste , which was the predominant raw material in Sweden in the 1920s , nor apples , nor coal and yellow turnips , which have all been used in Poland in the past .
Parliament should not be in the business of defining products so as to exclude producers and distort competition .
We should be protecting the consumer , and it is for that reason that we support the approach being taken by Dr Schnellhardt , which avoids artificial restrictions on production while ensuring that consumers are adequately informed .

( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Schnellhardt on his outstanding report and to commend all those who helped improve on the Commission 's proposal to update the law on spirit drinks , with a view to making the text clearer , simpler and easier to implement for companies and consumers needing more and better information in order to make informed choices .
The two regulations currently applicable must be brought under one regulation , in order to simplify the law and to adopt a clear policy on spirit drinks . Regulations must be adapted to the new WTO requirements , and criteria for the recognition of the new geographical indications must be defined .
Lastly , I should like to say that the new regulation , with the contributions from Parliament , which I hope will be adopted , will help extend international knowledge of drinks that help reinforce the identity of many European regions . In particular - if I may say so - the regulation will enhance the quality and value of European rum from overseas territories and Madeira , allowing promoters ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , would the French agree to Champagne made from plums ?
Would the British be pleased if they were permitted to make apricot gin and peach whisky ?
Of course they would not .
That would be tantamount to heresy .
Therefore , I am not surprised that the Poles , Lithuanians , Latvians , Estonians , Swedes , Finns and Danes do not want to recognise as vodka some waste products from the manufacture of wine , whisky or gin .
Let us call a spade a spade .
Is the European Parliament to be held hostage by powerful lobby groups representing alcohol manufacturers from southern Europe or the United Kingdom ?
Do we want public opinion in our countries to decide that our Parliament serves as a ' transmission belt ' for economic lobby groups from various countries and sectors ?
If we do not want this to happen , let us not agree to this ridiculous , broad definition of vodka .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to start by thanking Mr Schnellhardt for his excellent work .
I think he has really produced a workable compromise that we should all support tomorrow .
We should bear in mind that this discussion is not about old versus new Member States .
Nor is it about good versus bad alcohol , or about capital versus labour .
It is about our producing a new version of the Regulation on spirit drinks to adapt it to the current state of affairs .
This means we want our consumers to be offered good , correctly labelled products .
If the discussion is now reduced to the vodka issue , we must ask ourselves , firstly , if this is justified and , secondly , what is behind this .
It is very presumptuous , however , to assert that , if alcohol is distilled so much that it loses all taste , the starting point of the raw materials is crucial to the product 's designation .
Therefore , we would do well to simply adapt to the state of affairs prevailing in Europe - that vodka is already being produced everywhere , even if it may have had its origins in Poland - rather than throwing out the baby with the bath water .
We should bear in mind that we have achieved a great deal .
We have improved consumer protection , and we have also , for example , made it possible for traditional products to be labelled more appropriately .
That is why I am convinced that this is a really good compromise .
My thanks once more to Mr Schnellhardt !
We should all support this tomorrow .
( DE ) Mr President , I , too , wish to congratulate the rapporteur .
The compromise ensures that spirit drinks will be less synthetic in future , which means that we shall see higher quality in the various spirit drinks .
The compromise also takes account of national interests : as an Austrian , ' Jagatee ' is of course a particular concern of mine .
No one in this House can escape the discussion on the definition of vodka .
I have yet to grasp why many speakers have been acting as though there had been no definition of vodka up to now , and the term ' vodka ' were now too broad .
The opposite is the case .
The European Union does already have a definition of vodka , and Parliament 's compromise , for which the rapporteur is primarily responsible , is accommodating towards traditional vodka producers - if just a few countries were concerned , which , as we have heard today , is not the case .
The House should bear that in mind when it comes to tomorrow 's vote .
( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since 1989 , when the definition and labelling of alcoholic beverages was introduced , there have been many changes .
Some traditional spirit-producing countries have become members of the European Union .
First there was Sweden and Finland , and now the countries of the second-to-the-last round of expansion - the Baltic countries and Poland .
It is from the North that the name vodka derives from , and the traditional methods for manufacturing this spirit .
Traditionally , vodka has always been manufactured from grain .
In some places it is also made from potatoes and sugar beets .
Now that traditional vodka-producing countries have become EU members , we would like to see that namely alcoholic spirit beverages made from grain , potatoes and sugar beets be called vodka and be labelled as such .
A consumer needs to know what whisky is , and what it is made from .
A consumer has the right to buy a product made according to the original and traditional recipes and from traditional ingredients .
If this is applicable to whisky , then why can it not be applied to vodka ?
I urge my colleagues to vote for a fair compromise : vodka - only from grain , potatoes and sugar beets .
( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as part of the debate on the labelling of alcohol I should like to inform the House of a problem that is overshadowed by the debate over vodka , but that has particular significance for the citizens of the Czech Republic in economic , political and cultural terms .
I refer to slivovice a traditional Moravian alcoholic drink made from fruit , most commonly from plums .
This drink came under threat when the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Feed Safety most unfortunately meddled in its definition , which is enshrined in the Accession Treaty of the Czech Republic .
I feel that this was done by mistake rather than deliberately , but it is an unfortunate example of politicians ' meddling .
Because mistakes must be rectified , I would call on you , ladies and gentlemen , to support the amendment on slivovice , on which I worked with Mr Horst Schnellhardt and which almost all groups have said they will support .
I should like to thank Mr Schnellhardt for his willingness to reach solutions that would return the definition of slivovice to a model that corresponds to its traditions .
In the same way that Scandinavians closely follow the development of vodka , it is a priority for Czech people that slivovice should continue to take the form of a pure fruit spirit so that the characteristic flavour is not distorted by the addition of various ingredients .
Last but not least , there is a political dimension to all of this which should not be overlooked and which arises from the fact that the definition of slivovice became part of the accession negotiations and was enshrined in the Accession Treaty .
The violation of an Accession Treaty would undoubtedly lead to a breakdown of trust between the EU institutions and the Member State concerned , not to mention the fact that a dangerous precedent would be set , which , in some cases , might affect other Member States .
Given that our citizens take a lively interest in the fate of slivovice , our lawmakers should show a similar interest .
Let us therefore take a much-needed step towards protecting slivovice by adopting the amendment in question .
( PL ) Mr President , although the report on the labelling of spirit drinks deals with over 30 different kinds of beverages , I would like to focus on the most controversial issue , namely that of the definition of vodka .
The currently binding definition of vodka was drawn up many years before the main vodka producers joined the European Union .
Thanks to them , the European Union is the third largest vodka producer in the world .
Parliament should therefore adopt a definition of vodka that would secure the reputation and leading market position of this spirit drink .
Maintaining the current definition of vodka and allowing it to be produced from waste material will lower its quality and have a negative impact on its reputation .
The trade name ' vodka ' should be reserved only for vodka that is produced from traditional ingredients , namely grain , potatoes and beet molasses .
This was the definition adopted by the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Vodka made from ingredients other than the ones traditionally used should be given a specific market name , such as ' non-traditional vodka ' , ' vodka-style spirit drink ' or ' non-standard vodka ' , with the name of the raw ingredients used in its production clearly stated on the label .
If this is not done , we will be cheating both ourselves and the consumers .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity to invite you all to today 's food and wine tasting event to promote Polish organic foods , including cold meats , juices and vodka made from grain and potatoes .

( FR ) Mr President , since a lot has been said about whisky and vodka , I shall say something about rum , which is produced in only two places within the European Union , those being the French overseas départements and Madeira .
Since a great deal of it is drunk throughout Europe , it is imported from numerous third countries , primarily from ACP countries which enjoy special treatment under the 2000 Cotonou Agreement .
Rum is one of the overseas départements ' main export products , and the sugar cane rum industry alone accounts for over 40 % of the value of exports from Guadeloupe , Martinique and Réunion , and for 40 000 jobs created there .
Where the Community 's definition of rum is concerned , then , a great deal is at stake ; rum from the French overseas territories needs to be defined in a way that makes it possible for it to be better distinguished from its third-country competitors , specifically by describing it as ' agricultural rum ' derived exclusively from sugar cane juice , something that consumers recognise as a sign of quality .
It is no less important , in the eyes of the ACP countries , that this definition be consistent with the EU 's overall approach to their rum industry if their growth is to be sustained and if the progress made to date by the Caribbean producers is not to be jeopardised .
It was with this in mind that the professional bodies representing producers in the French overseas départements and in the Caribbean countries agreed , in October 2006 , at La Barbade , on a common position on the Community definition of rum , taking as the basis for it a generic definition and going on to draw progressive distinctions between traditional rum , agricultural rum and rum refined from sugar .
I would like to thank Mr Schnellhardt for taking on board my request for an adequate definition of agricultural rum and for finally deciding to include in his report the definition of it already to be found in the Council 's compromise text .
It has been a considerable amount of work , over a long period of time , on the part of the whole industry that has made it possible to promote the production of agricultural rum , so that the denomination , today , is one of the principal guarantors of this French overseas product 's entry onto commercial markets , and it is this that makes it possible to hope that the compromise submitted today for this House 's approval will be adopted at first reading .
( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats support the compromise on the definition of vodka , and for the same reasons that the Swedish centre-right government does so in the Council of Ministers .
We do so because it is the best solution available to Swedish consumers and producers in that it accords an exceptional status to vodka produced in the manner in which we Swedes expect it to be produced , namely from potatoes or grain .
If the compromise disintegrates , there will be no special status accorded to vodka made from potatoes or grain , and consumers will still be unclear as to what they are getting when they buy vodka .
People may be wondering why the EU has to decide on how vodka should be marketed .
We do , of course , have a common internal market in the EU , and we therefore also have common rules governing what may be sold in this market and in which ways .
Democracy should set limits on the market , including on the ways in which different products may be marketed .
However , I deeply regret the fact that not even a majority of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety could support my amendments with regard to putting warning labels on alcohol .
I intend to return to that issue .
Mr President , I have two points and one surprise .
The vodka belt has three arguments .
The first is culture and tradition : we have made vodka out of potatoes and grain for over 500 years .
The second is equal treatment : when we joined the Union in 1995 , we were told that vodka would have a tight definition , just like rum , whisky or grappa , or in line with some of the more traditional geographic definitions , for instance , of champagne and cognac .
We therefore want equal treatment for vodka .
We do not want it to be some kind of alcoholic waste basket .
The third is consumption and production : we know what we are talking about - seven countries produce 70 % of the vodka and consume 70 % of the vodka .

To Mr Stevenson , who told me that we are just driving the industry in our own country , I would point out that Mr Helmer is defending the same position as the Labour Party , so , Mr Stevenson , do not tell me that you are not driving some kind of grape-vodka industry here !

Tomorrow , as a defender of vodka , I will vote for Mr Schnellhardt 's overall compromise , but against his compromise on vodka , and for my own amendment on a tighter definition , or indeed for the Liberal ones .
I hope that all traditionalists will do the same .
Now we come to my surprise .
I must admit that I am not a big fan of Poland 's Kaczyński brothers .
However , they have done a wonderful job in this vodka debate .
They have defended vodka heroically and I hope that this little token of appreciation I am going to send them - a bottle of vodka - will make them soften their position on the Constitution !
Thank you very much .
You have added another element to this multi-faceted , at times technical , and impassioned debate .
I do not feel that I am the most appropriate recipient of this gift , but I thank you nevertheless .
( HU ) The production and consumption of alcohol are probably as old as humanity itself .
Hieroglyphics 4-5 000 years old in Egypt and clay tablets in Mesopotamia prove how active the ancients were in this area too .
Following on from the Greek god Dionysus and the Roman god Bacchus , the tradition of spirit production was given a new boost during the Middle Ages by Christianity .
The technologies used have improved , while the concepts and labelling have become more precise .
In my country , Hungary , pálinka , a 100 % fruit brandy , was already established as part of our gastronomy at the time of the Renaissance .
In fact , those technologies and products , the unchanged combination of which we can still enjoy today , were already established across Europe roughly 2-300 years ago .
However , over the last 50 years , business , advertising and , later on , consumer society itself have completely muddied the clear picture we had up until then .
The chemical and distilling industries nowadays are continually creating new tastes and aromas , offering an amazing selection of drinks .
At present , you can basically make everything from anything .
This has also been accompanied , of course , by traditions being watered down .
There are already fewer and fewer people who know what it is worth drinking , why and when .
Ladies and gentlemen ! I am conservative when it comes to my political views and gastronomic habits too .
I like things to be exactly what they are , and not what adverts want you to believe they are .
This is why I am in favour of a strict definition for every drink , including vodka as well .
Pálinka is made from fruit and vodka from grain , potatoes or sugar beet .
It is all perfectly clear like this .
If we blur the defining lines , we are not just affecting quality , development and our traditions , but we are clouding further the already murky picture .
In that case , we can easily take the approach George Orwell 's hero did in ' 1984 ' , when he cannot say what he is actually drinking .
Like everyone else in the book , he too calls that horrible-tasting , foul-smelling dishwater gin .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission proposal aimed to bring about simplification , to combine the two previous regulations into one : and it has done so .
The second aspect - adapting the regulations to new technical requirements and to the requirements of the WTO and of TRIPS - will also be a success .
The third objective - the continued validity of existing geographical indications , which can continue to be supplemented in future by additional designations - will also be achieved .
With some give and take on the part of the individual Member States , that , too , will provide clarity in future .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Schnellhardt , for the effort he has put into the many difficult negotiations .
In the dispute over ' Jägertee ' or ' Jagertee ' , Germany has compromised and accepted the term ' Hüttentee ' as the German designation .
All parties must be prepared to take a step closer to one other .
A great deal of tradition is involved , but mutual tolerance is required .
By way of explanation , the term ' Champagne ' refers to the designation of origin - that is , the regional origin - and has less to do with the ingredients .
In Germany , we order a ' Klarer ' . By this we mean a spirit made from agricultural produce : fruit , grain or potatoes .
We have taken steps towards ensuring the clear nature of this product , and towards maintaining the economic base of the traditional , often small , distilleries .
I believe that this , too , will succeed .
The addition of sweeteners must be regulated , and must be clearly visible on the label .
For centuries , our distilleries have been producing top-quality spirits without adding flavourings or sugar .
Labelling constitutes consumer information and ensures a level competitive playing field .
This also goes for the raw material .
We made very heavy weather of the definition of ' vodka ' .
The solution - labelling everything that is not produced from potatoes or grain - is a workable compromise and provides clear information , and I ask you to support this compromise .
( PL ) Madam President , first of all , perhaps I can provide you with some information which has not been presented to the House .
Last week , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats rejected the compromise proposed by the rapporteur .
Why was the proposal rejected ?
The reason was that the group did not agree , by a small majority but a majority nevertheless , with the proposed definition of vodka contained in this proposal .
By the same token , there was majority support for acknowledging that vodka is traditionally produced from grain , potatoes or beet molasses .
This was the amendment that I tabled together with my colleague Mr Stubb , and I appeal to you to support it .
Why this talk of tradition ?
I would like remind you that countries , or representatives of countries , which have nothing to do with the tradition of vodka production , cannot behave like the conquistadors who came to South America and stole Mayan gold .
This is our tradition , the tradition of the vodka-producing countries , and it should be acknowledged in the regulation .
We should be aware that the Council has also put unprecedented pressure on the European Parliament .
A high-ranking official sent a letter to the representatives of 24 Member States and not only referred to the position of the influential lobby group the European Vodka Alliance , but also failed to send this letter to the representatives of two of the countries most involved in this dispute , namely Poland and Lithuania .
The opinions of the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Economic and Social Committee were not taken into account .
COPA - COGECA , the European Union farmers ' organisations , and the European Union farmers themselves , all support the traditional definition of vodka .
Why is this the case ?
The reason is that European potatoes and grain , as well as five hundred years of tradition , should define the value of this product .
It should not be changed simply due to pressure from lobby groups .
We demand equal treatment .
Traditionally produced vodka cannot be compared to other similar spirits .
That would be contrary to the basic operating principles of the European Union .
Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
I consider it to be an excellent piece of work .
This report and this debate have , to say the least , provoked a considerable disagreement between many Members , between groups and within groups .
I believe that we should support the compromise that has been reached .
There are other proposals , but they cover what one specific viewpoint holds to the detriment of the other .
The bottom line should be the quality and the standard of the product .
Additives are and must be controlled , but you cannot ban products that have been used for a long time .
We have to be aware of the needs of the spirit industry , as well as of consumer protection .
As some have said , this has turned out to be a complex report , with some very strong and different points of view , but we must have an acceptable agreement .
Compromise agreements sometimes dilute the original intention of the directive , but on this occasion I believe that this is the best we can achieve at the present time .
This is a very important and serious subject and we must get it right .
The debate on what vodka is has removed some of the importance of this directive and that is unfortunate , but that sometimes occurs in politics .
I listened to the different contributions and to my two colleagues from Scotland who protested that they have the longest-standing whisky .
Where I come from in Northern Ireland we have a little product called Bushmills and we would probably have a good debate as to who actually owned the oldest whiskey on the island of Ireland !
I shall conclude on that note .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( DA ) Madam President , Commissioner , I am draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which has been the advisory committee for this proposal .
We were almost unanimous in adopting a clear definition to the effect that vodka should be produced from potatoes and grain .
It was also the intention that there should be extended cooperation on this matter between the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Unfortunately , I have to say that this is not something we have seen much of in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Vodka is a quality product with a very long history , and this is something we should safeguard .
We should safeguard vodka production in exactly the same way as we safeguard the production of whisky , cognac and all other spirits in Europe .
What I fail to detect in this Parliament is any respect for those people and countries possessing a culture that includes vodka production .
It must also be on the basis of short-term interest that vodka is manufactured as an undefined product and as a dumping ground for surplus ingredients .
The notion , current in recent years , that consumers are indifferent to the ingredients from which vodka is produced is misconceived .
Consumers want information , more information and yet more information .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 19 June 2007 .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FI ) The debate on the Regulation on spirits has culminated in an issue which the Commission pooh-poohed in its proposal : the equal treatment of vodka alongside other strong drinks .
It would be more accurate to say , however , this is about the equal treatment of European cultures .
Apart from the fact that the debate on now reminds us of the existence of a European multiculture , it also at the same time shows that there is still much work to be done in the name of unity which respects differences .
The definition of vodka we are wrangling with is in fact a technical amendment to something we already knew about and found to be good : for centuries vodka has been manufactured almost entirely from grain and potatoes .
In the EU 90 % of all vodka has also been produced from these raw materials .
When it comes to defining the ingredients , it is therefore not just a question of the interests of manufacturers and artificial market barriers , but of tradition .
The vodka-producing countries , in which 70 % of vodka is produced and consumed , do actually know what they are talking about .
The compromise by the rapporteur , Mr Schnellhardt , which in practice would permit the manufacture of vodka from any agricultural product , as long as there is a small mention of it on the label at the back , is inadequate .
If we have to end up with a compromise , it should give greater support to the traditional manufacturing method .
The EU 's common identity and the legislation that supports that notion must be built on mutual respect , where historical facts are recognised .
Our current legislation on spirits is from a time when the vodka-producing countries were not members of the EU , and so it needs to be updated .
During the accession negotiations which Finland , Sweden , and countries which joined the Union later on , such as Poland , were involved in , the definition of vodka was passed over and promises were made to put that right in the near future .
Now is that time .
Competition Policy 2005 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs E. Ferreira , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on Competition Policy 2005 .
I have been informed that the rapporteur has had problems with transport and will be arriving late .
I propose , therefore , that we start with the Commission and then continue with the other speakers .
As soon as the rapporteur arrives , she will be given the floor .
Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Ferreira , and the committee for this excellent report .
Once again , this annual report proves the added value Parliament brings to competition policy development , and I am grateful for that .
As you rightly point out in the report , an effective competition policy plays a key role in achieving the Lisbon Strategy goals .
To remain effective , competition policy needs to keep up with the evolving world around it .
I am very pleased that Parliament supports the Commission 's efforts to modernise competition policy , and in particular the work we did in 2005 to pursue a more refined economic approach .
I agree with the report on very many issues , so I shall just mention three points where your comments really struck me .
First , as you note , state aid control is essential to maintain a level playing field in the internal market .
Through our ongoing reform , we are redesigning our rules to make them more simple , more transparent , more user-friendly , more coherent and more predictable .
Our rules focus on the areas where limited amounts of aid can have most added value - competitiveness , the environment , training , regional cohesion , research , development and innovation .
We have made good progress with the reform , but Member States must also do their share , as you say , particularly when it comes to recovering illegal state aid quickly and effectively .
The second point that struck me was that 2005 was the year we launched two major sector inquiries .
I agree with you about the value of these tools for a forward-looking policy .
In the energy sector , you are right to be concerned that the facts show serious barriers to competition .
The Commission will continue to pursue individual competition cases , working in cooperation with our colleagues in the national competition authorities .
Regulation in this sector needs to be improved , with the requirement of ownership unbundling a priority .
Third , you are right that , in today 's globalised world , competition authorities need to cooperate more than ever before .
Europe has a key role to play in encouraging strong competition cultures elsewhere in the world .
At the same time , Europe needs to be able to respond to unfair foreign subsidies .
The common commercial policy - rather than matching aid - is the proper tool to address this .
Subsidy competition would undermine Europe 's cohesion , create damaging subsidy races within our internal market , and bring serious risk of WTO litigation .
I am looking forward to the debate .
Madam President , Commissioner , as you know , this meeting between the European Parliament and the Commission is an important event in terms of competition policy , for it is the time when we evaluate one of the most important policies in the Commission 's hands , whilst defining only the general outline for the others , on the basis of which you will take this or that decision .
While the report that we are putting forward this year is a balanced one , it does need to be completed by an answer to the question as to what is meant by ' fair and undistorted competition ' , as the Treaty itself puts it .
In fact , the situation in the business world , in which there is an increasing and underhand trend towards a way of working in which , no doubt for the sake of flexibility , trainees ' contracts are renewed month after month and , for the sake of providing the trainees with access to professional training , the difference between them and those subject to labour law is accentuated , is a real issue in terms of competition , and one that you need to consider closely .
We in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs are also concerned about the conclusions that are going to be drawn from the sectoral surveys that you have been carrying out , and specifically in connection with the potential impact on the structure of this or that segment of the market .
I am thinking , for example , of the situation of local banks , or of mutual banks in relation to the retail banking sector , but we would also like you to consider other sectors , which may well be more difficult to tackle .
Three sectors about which we are particularly concerned are investment banks , rating agencies and auditors ' firms .
We think that , if competition is to be required to be free and undistorted , one must also be bold enough to take a look at these sectors in the same way as the Commission has sometimes done with actors of equally considerable weight .
If this takes place , you can count on our support , although you must never forget that competition policy can never be an end in itself , but is in the service of a strategy of the European Union which is , today , defined not only by the Lisbon Strategy , but also by the objectives set out on 8 March 2007 , those being the fight against the effects of climate change and the will to endow the European Union with the capacity for shaping its own independent energy policy .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , first of all , I should like to pay tribute to the absent rapporteur who has , as I see it , compiled an excellent document which meets with broad support in our committee .
I should also like to give Mrs Kroes credit for what she has done , because , as Mrs Berès said a moment ago with very good reason , competition policy is not an end in itself , and I think that the European Commission , precisely under the guidance of Mrs Kroes , has launched a new pragmatic approach , something which we greatly appreciate .
Sometimes , people overlook the fact that competition rules are not there to bully businesses or thwart national governments .
Competition rules are designed to ensure that the same rules and equal opportunities apply to everyone who operates in the internal market .
These competition rules are therefore there to ensure that Europe can adopt a strong position in the world , in the face of global competition .
As such , we should not compete with each other , but instead ensure that we create an internal market that functions well .
I too am a staunch supporter of the sector inquiries , and where energy policy is concerned , you can count on this Parliament 's support .
I should nevertheless like to make one observation .
At the moment , everyone in the Member States is busy preparing for the summit that is coming up this weekend , where once again , energy policy will feature as one of the new key areas on the agenda .
One of the few positive points in the whole discussion .
At the same time , I have noticed that , whilst the leaders of the national governments are saying that we should have a common energy policy , they are not prepared to stop protecting their national favourites .
Perhaps they should practise what they preach .
With regard to state aid , as rapporteur for state aid for public services and for innovation , I can say that we have discussed this subject before .
Actually , I cannot wait to see if there is a first assessment of the impact of these exemption regulations and if , more generally , an assessment is being made of whether state aid is suitable or not .
Finally , as for the matching clause , this too has been the subject of previous discussions .
It is , of course , a problem if generous levels of state aid are made available outside of the European Union .
At the same time , I would prefer to reinforce Europe 's competitiveness by other means .
It is highly improper , to my mind , to start giving out generous levels of state aid and subsidies , whilst we have not yet sorted out other measures , including patents , making the labour market more flexible , opening up the market for services and many other measures of this kind ; mistakes like this cannot be put right with state aid .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , it has always been my contention that , far from encouraging competition , the EU in its drive for the mythical ' level playing field ' wants to stamp it out altogether .
This report does little to change that perception .
Paragraph 13 supports a common consolidated corporate tax base , which is another step towards a compulsory EU-wide corporation tax , which is fundamentally anti-competitive .
This idea is enthusiastically supported by France and Germany , two countries with higher corporate tax rates , which must be salivating at the idea of getting everybody else 's rates up to their level .
One of the most stupid pieces of EU jargon that I have ever heard is ' unfair tax competition ' , which is what this clause is all about .
There is nothing unfair about some Member States having more business-friendly taxation regimes than others .
This encourages competition .
State aid gets a bashing in this report , as you would expect , but the report makes the false assumption that all state aid is bad .
In Britain , because of EU state aid restrictions , we are rapidly losing the Royal Mail postal service , to the detriment of consumers , particularly in remote areas .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , in my speech I plan to use the so-called case method , that is to say , I am going to try to draw conclusions from a single specific event that may be applicable in a general sense .
As the honourable Member knows , on several occasions I have concerned myself with the issue of the takeover bids that have taken place in Spain against the Endesa electricity company .
My fellow Member from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has referred to national champions and I believe that this case fits perfectly within that context .
As you know , the current Spanish Government did everything it could to prevent a German company , E.ON , from acquiring a stake in Endesa , and that conduct has already led the Commission to open up two procedures .
One against the general decision empowering a particular committee to lay down specific conditions , and the other relating to those specific conditions .
The Commissioner is perfectly aware of what I am talking about .
Then a stake in Endesa was acquired by an Italian company , which is partly public , incidentally .
I put a question to the Commissioner and received a reply today in which she says that the restrictions to the right to vote laid down by the Spanish Government are being investigated .
The third chapter in this case is that the person responsible , the President of the National Energy Commission , the Spanish regulatory body , appointed by the Socialist Government , has handed in his resignation to that same Socialist Government , in protest against what he considers to be violations of his independence .
That is what he explained to the Spanish Parliament .
Unfortunately , we have not been able to get him to explain it in this Parliament , although I have not given up hope that there will be full and open transparency here as well .
I would like to know whether the Commissioner , the Commission , is worried about this issue that affects the proper operation of the entire European market , and is an issue for the whole of Europe , and which , if you will allow me , also affects legal security , the good name and good credit in the international markets of my country , and please believe me , Commissioner , that is what is of most concern to me .
I would like the Commissioner to tell me whether she has carried out any investigations , whether she intends to do so , whether she intends to address this problem with the Socialist government and whether she intends to carry out reforms with a view to combating it .


Thank you , Madam President , I have exceeded my speaking time somewhat because my spokesman , Mr Evans , has not been here and I felt that I could make use of his time ; in any event I would like to thank you .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , I am as impressed with the report as everyone who has already spoken .
I greatly appreciate the report itself , but I appreciate even more the annual debates , particularly with the honourable Members present at this sitting .
The report itself makes a vital contribution to the further development of this policy .
I would like to assure you that I am not only listening to you , but am taking many of your remarks - which make a lot of sense - into account .
Indeed , if competition policy is to really deliver in creating growth and jobs in Europe , we need to continue working together .
That means involving all the stakeholders - Parliament as well as the outside world - and taking into account the point touched upon by Sophia in ' t Veld .
It is not a matter of making fun of anyone but rather to set a level playing field in which everyone , both the consumer and the business world , may finally share the advantages .
I would like to respond to a few specific issues raised in our debate this evening .
Mrs Berès had some interesting ideas for new sector inquiries and I will indeed consider the subjects she touched upon : rating agencies , auditing firms and large investment banks .
We have not yet made up our minds and are still discussing the matter , so I will put this on the list .
It is more a matter of resources than a lack of sectors in which it might make sense to start a sector inquiry .
At present the Commission has no grounds for a wide-ranging review of competition in these particular sectors , but this does not mean that we cannot take a couple of thoughts out of it .
I would welcome further discussion with Parliament on these issues .
Of course , the Commission is always ready to look carefully at any evidence of anti-competitive behaviour which is brought to our attention in individual situations .
Mrs Berès also spoke about competition on non-traditional grounds , for example salaries .
The report also mentions tax .
I note that many of you are concerned by so-called tax competition among the Member States .
It is correct that the Commission has powers to assess tax measures affecting competition .
However , and I would like to make this quite clear , that is the case only when these measures are considered to be state aid and essentially when they are selective in nature , meaning that they do not constitute general measures .
I now come to the point that Sophia in ' t Veld touched upon .
For the last 10 years the Commission has been reviewing potentially harmful tax schemes .
We have challenged a series of national measures targeting , amongst others , offshore intragroup activities .
As regards salary competition , my answer is quite clear : if measures relating to salaries can be considered as state aid , the Commission will use its powers .
Turning to state aid issues , in particular in reply to Sophia in ' t Veld , state aid is in principle , as we are all aware , banned by the Treaty to avoid distortions of competition in our single market .
State aid can indeed be a legitimate tool to deliver outcomes which are in the general interest , for example regional cohesion , research and development , as well as innovation and high-quality public services which markets themselves will not deliver .
That is why our approach is to design a new set of state aid rules , which we did with the review .
It uses a more economic approach to assess where market failures exist and to target appropriate aid measures on them .
That is a balanced and a realistic view .
It reflects the need to help Member States get the best out of taxpayers ' money - state aid is , at the end of the day , taxpayers ' money .
The Commission publishes its state aid scoreboards twice a year .
As you are aware , this presents data and analyses of Member States ' expenditure on state aid measures .
It includes a focus on Member States ' progress towards the Lisbon goals of less and better aid .
The next edition will pay close attention to the question of recovery .
In addition , a series of indicators and statistical tables on our Europa website gives scope for further discussion .
But Sophia in ' t Veld is right : we need to do more to evaluate the effects of state aid , whether it makes sense and how .
That is how the new more economic approach could help us .
I can be brief in response to Mr García-Margallo y Marfil : we have discussed this before and we know exactly what the dossier is about .
We have taken the Member State concerned to Court for not respecting our two Article 21 decisions under the Merger Regulation .
My colleague , Charlie McCreevy , is taking parallel action under the internal market rules .
I am always open to your suggestions for further improving the way in which competition policy makes markets function better .
I badly need your ideas and your creativity .
We are doing our utmost to complete this process , and I am grateful for your continued support and valuable contribution .
We are not there yet but are on the right track .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 19 June 2007 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in Parliament 's report on Competition Policy 2005 , we acknowledge the efforts made by the Commission to modernise competition policy .
I should like to highlight the main recommendations of the report .
In the crucial area of energy , we support the Commission 's action on ownership unbundling .
We reiterate the call on the Commission to clarify at Community level the public service obligations to which operators of services of general economic interest should be bound , with regard to strategic security and universal coverage .
We also believe it is important to ensure that the EU 's external dimension is consistent with competition policy when it comes to negotiating bilateral trade agreements .
In spite of the Commission 's efforts at harmonising practices and guaranteeing transparency , it is a fact that there is competition in terms of incentives between EU regions and Member States , which , along with the absence of tax harmonisation , foments the artificial relocation of companies .
These and other challenges illustrate the need to strengthen the EU 's ability to deliver effective competition rules and to improve flexibility of response to new challenges .
Hence the importance of continuing to give the European Competition Authority the resources it needs .
Cat and dog fur ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Svensson , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council banning the placing on the market and the import of , or export from , the Community of cat and dog fur and products containing such fur - C6-0428 / 2006 - .
Madam President , we have had the opportunity in the past to discuss this proposal in committees and intergroups .
I am sure you will understand that I am very happy to be having this debate with you tonight .
First of all , I would like to express my sincere thanks for the work of all Members of the European Parliament , especially that of the rapporteur , who has done a very good job .
I would also like to thank the draftswoman and draftsman of the other committees , Mrs Lucas and Mr Stevenson .
It was a real challenge for me when I was first confronted with this issue after taking up my post .
For me , the most frustrating part was that we had an issue which was very close to the heart of European citizens and which had the support of the Council and , clearly , of the European Parliament but also of the Commission , yet we still had problems in proceeding with this proposal .
The problems were , of course , legal and not the result of a lack of political will .
I am happy that we have now reached a point where , using some imaginative and constructive approaches , we have managed to find solutions , and that we are now able to have a first reading agreement , which is very important to me .
We are all familiar with the issue and know that the disturbing evidence of barbaric treatment of cats and dogs , which are bred and killed mainly for their fur , especially in Asia , has provoked a strong call for the Commission to take action .
As I have said , we had to find ways not only to express tangibly the political will of all the institutions involved and the citizens , but also to do so in a legally sound way that would ensure that this will could face and withstand any challenges arising in the future .
I am very happy that , through the proposal and , in particular , the various trialogues , we have managed to reach a compromise .
This compromise is legally sound and will ensure that the ban will be effective in practice .
For us , it is important to have results , not just to issue a political statement or express political will , which would eventually become ineffective .
It would be correct politically , but it would not produce the results that we want : the protection of cats and dogs and , even more importantly , of European consumers who do not want to be offered the fur of cats and dogs , which they consider their pets .
I would like to mention two of my colleagues by name , Mr Mandelson and Mr McCreevy .
Both were very supportive of our work in this area .
As you know , the legal basis we have been using relates to the internal market and trade .
This was necessary , because , unfortunately , there is no legal basis in the Treaty that would allow the EU to adopt a legislative initiative to ban a particular trade based on animal welfare or ethical concerns .
Furthermore , there is no legal basis for animal protection as such in the Treaty , so we had to use these two legal bases , and my colleagues have been very supportive of this work .
We also had another legal challenge : the issue of proportionality .
For reasons of proportionality it was necessary to consider including a provision that would allow for possible derogations to the ban .
None of us was happy with this idea and , as I said , the only reason was to make this proposal more legally sound .
I believe that we have managed to reach a proper compromise .
As you know , this approach was also clearly supported by the legal services of all three institutions , the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
But the compromise we have today is the right one .
It contains the possibility - and I emphasise the word ' possibility ' - to derogate exceptionally from the trade ban for taxidermy or educational purposes .
We have used the legal bases described and we know that this approach will benefit not only European consumers but also animal welfare , especially since we cannot introduce our animal welfare rules outside the European Union .
We cannot promote them internationally , but , by closing the market to the unscrupulous people who practise this trade , we are not only sending a clear message but also helping to stop this practice .
Finally , Parliament , the Council and Commission have worked very hard to get the legislative proposal to the present stage and to reach an acceptable compromise .
I very much hope that the vote tomorrow will reflect this positive and constructive attitude , so we can put this legislation in place as soon as possible .

rapporteur . - ( SV ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow when we vote on this report , we shall have the opportunity to make great efforts to put a stop to the dreadful cruelty sometimes suffered by dogs and cats - animals of which we often make pets .
As the rapporteur responsible for this matter , I am both pleased and satisfied with the report on which we - Parliament , the Council and the Commission - have now agreed .
I wish to thank the Commission and the Council for their constructive cooperation .
I also wish to thank the Chairwoman of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , Mrs McCarthy , together with my fellow Members .
I wish to thank Mr Stevenson who , I know , has worked for many years in order to achieve progress on this matter .
Everyone has shown a lot of commitment and a desire to obtain an outcome that is good for dogs and cats .
The work has been extremely interesting , particularly in view of the interest shown by the public in this issue .
I am completely convinced that the opinions widely held among the public and among animal rights organisations have contributed very significantly to our reaching this agreement .
I want to say a big thank you to all those committed people who have added names to petitions and participated in a variety of campaigns .
They have shown that we no longer accept such cruelty to animals .
Thank you , everyone . Your protests have borne fruit .
Many of us have seen documentaries , films and pictures showing dogs and cats having their fur removed even when they were still alive .
It is enough to see just one picture or documentary showing such cruelty to animals to realise that everything must be done to put a stop to it .
The Humane Society estimates that more than two million cats and dogs are kept prisoner under disgusting conditions before being killed for the sake of their fur .
The fur and skins are then sold under false designations such as ' China wolf ' or ' Asian wolf ' and used , for example , for cuddly toys for children , decorative objects , clothes and handbags .
We must now put a stop to this trade , above all because of the extreme cruelty involved in fur production .
That reason is enough , but nor - I might add - is there any need for cat or dog fur in any product at all , because synthetic materials can be substituted for it .
False descriptions extensively deceive consumers .
Unsuspecting consumers can buy toys for their children in good faith and without having the slightest idea that a cat may have been skinned alive in order to be used for that very toy .
It has been maintained in the debate that we need the skins in question in order , for example , to relieve joint pain , in other words for medical reasons .
My answer to that is that , in 2007 , no patient is prescribed cat skin to combat rheumatic pain when he or she visits the doctor .
We have progressed beyond that .
I , as rapporteur , together with everyone committed to this cause , had great hopes , then , when the Commission 's proposal was accepted .
We believed that we needed a total ban , but the Commission 's original proposal made certain exemptions possible , for example when the label stated that the fur came from cats or dogs that had not been bred or slaughtered for manufacturing purposes or when the skins concerned were personal belongings or household objects .
My view throughout has been that the regulation would be an empty gesture if scope were allowed for such exemptions , as the situation would be quite impossible to monitor and the exemptions would pave the way for continued trade and for the dreadful practices described .
It was not a regulation of that kind that people were requesting or demanding of the EU .
I am therefore now pleased to be able to say that we have a proposal for a total ban following discussions with the Commission and the Council .
I hope that Parliament will support the proposal tomorrow by voting in favour of the amendments to which the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection has unanimously agreed .
We also have proposals concerning the way in which the rules would be applied in the Member States , and we propose that the Member States should also have to report to the Commission on the way in which compliance with the rules is monitored .
I am convinced that the public will be watching us carefully when we vote tomorrow , as there is a real demand for measures to be taken on this issue .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - Madam President , I should like to really warmly welcome Mrs Svensson 's report and to congratulate her on her excellent work .
She has been a brilliant rapporteur and we have got a very positive result .
It is very clear that Parliament is united in saying that there should be no derogations that would compromise the integrity and the effectiveness of a ban .
However , I must say that , in terms of this legislation being forthcoming from the Commission , we have had to wait quite a long time .
I remember writing to Commissioner Byrne back in 2002 calling for a ban on cat and dog fur .
We were told simply that it was a very complex issue and the Commission was reflecting .
What worries me about that is that in a sense this slowness is being repeated on another issue that I want to turn your minds to , which is the issue of banning imports of seal products .
Again , Parliament is being told that it is a complex issue .
Exactly the same language is being used again now , when it comes to seal products , as was used back in 2002 about cat and dog fur .
As the draftsperson in the Committee on International Trade , I tabled amendments to the cat and dog proposal , not suggesting that we try to include seals - that would be too much - but at least asking the Commission to bring forward similar legislation to deal with imports of seal products .
This was agreed by the Committee on International Trade .
The Commissioner said earlier that there was no lack of political will when it came to dealing with the cat and dog issue , what was lacking was an imaginative legal base .
I urge the Commissioner and his services to be extraordinarily imaginative and to recognise that Europe 's citizens feel the same revulsion about cat and dog fur as they feel about imports of seal products .
We must have legislation coming forward very urgently on that issue as well .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - Madam President , I wish to begin by expressing my very warm thanks to Mrs Svensson for a brilliant piece of work and a brilliant report .
I also wish to thank Mrs McCarthy for her dedication and commitment to steering this very important report through Parliament .
However , most of all , I am grateful for the great courage of Commissioner Kyprianou , because , as Mrs Lucas has just said , the previous Commissioner told us that it was impossible and there would never be a legal basis .
I remember Commissioner Kyprianou saying to me , ' As a lawyer , if I went round telling clients that things were impossible , I would never make a living ! ' .
He has fulfilled his pledge .
It is music to my ears to hear this debate this evening , because it has taken eight years to get this far , with the help of Humane Society International .
Betsy Dribben , who used to work for Humane Society International , has flown over from Washington and is in the public gallery tonight , and many thanks are due to her for her dogged campaigning .
Humane Society International estimates that , every year , about two million cats and dogs are killed in China alone to supply the fashion market in Europe with items like this little toy , which the rapporteur mentioned - little cats , which mums and dads buy for their kids because they are cat and dog lovers , not realising that they have been made out of real cat and dog skin from animals that have been brutally killed .
The trade buys these cat skins to make collars for trim for parka hoods and ski boot and ski glove linings and all sorts of fashion items .
This has been a fraud perpetrated on the public .
The public are never told that they are buying items made of real cat and dog fur .
Sometimes it is even dyed to look like fake fur and given false labels to fool the public .
I am glad that , at long last , there will very soon be a regulation on the statute books in all 27 Member States banning this evil trade .
I thank the Commissioner and everyone else who has been involved in achieving that .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , banning the trade in cat and dog fur in the EU is important for a number of reasons .
The first is the completely unacceptable so-called cat industry in Asia supplying Europe with a reported 2 million cats a year .
It is outrageous that animals are skinned alive for their fur .
This is the cheapest and most appalling method .
I am aware that an EU regulation cannot bring about a change of behaviour among industrial breeders in third countries , but it can substantially reduce the volume of animals traded .
The second reason is that European consumers do not know that they are buying these products .
If they knew they would not buy them .
Cats and dogs are thought of as domestic pets in Europe .
Most Europeans have no idea that cat and dog fur contributes not only to the more expensive furs of other animals but also to artificial fur .
These products are not properly labelled .
This is not an ethical problem , as opponents of this regulation would have it ; rather , it is a matter of misleading the consumer , either intentionally or otherwise .
The Union has a major obligation to prevent this .
It is of course necessary for customs services in the Member States to employ effective means of determining , definitively and at reasonable expense , whether imported goods contain cat or dog fur .
The main reason , however , for adopting this regulation is the fragmentation of the market .
Almost half the Member States have laws regulating or banning the trade in cat and dog fur whereas the rest do not .
These regulations , with their lack of harmony , are exploited by traders on the European market , who transport goods made of cat and dog fur to the European countries where these goods are not yet banned .
This regulation will substantially improve the enforcement of this law .
Parliament has amended the Commission 's text so that the only exception would be the use of fur for non-commercial purposes .
This is because we do not want to bring about a nonsensical criminalisation of ordinary citizens .
I call on all of you who believe that the Union has no power to intervene in these matters to see that this is simply not the case .
Article 95 authorises the EU to take action in such matters because we have a common interest in the functioning of a European market with legitimate commodities .
I am grateful to the Commission and applaud the rapporteurs for their work .


on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , in fact Mr Stevenson is right : eight years ago Labour MEPs were calling for an end to the cruel trade in cat and dog fur .
Commissioner , you will probably remember that the late Phillip Whitehead , the former chairman of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , asked you as a Commission to take action .
On 30 December last year , I received a petition on behalf of concerned citizens signed by over a quarter of a million people calling for us to bring in that ban .
We have acted , but I believe that it is the citizens , in their determination , and animal welfare campaigners who should take the credit for this new law and for helping us to persuade you , Commissioner , to give us the legal power to ban it .
There is plenty of evidence of the inhuman treatment of cats and dogs bred for fur .
Animal welfare organisations have been contacting my office and welcoming the law .
Their only criticism is that it has taken us too long .
But this law is also about protecting consumers who have unwittingly been deceived into buying clothes , toys and household products made from cat and dog fur .
I would say that people power can win the day over bureaucracy and legal barriers .
I want to stress to the Commission and to the Member States that the committee 's negotiating team wanted the EU to adopt the highest international standards and best practices in ensuring we ban this obscene trade and that cat and dog fur products do not end up in the shops by the back door .
So can I just be very clear : we insist no loopholes are created by not possible derogations , exceptional derogations .
That is the language of the agreement we made with the Commission and the Member States .
We insist on a report back on how the ban is being implemented and action if it is not working .
We expect Member States to take their responsibilities seriously in both implementing and enforcing the ban .
There must be tough and dissuasive penalties to deter the cat and dog fur traders .
In short , a ban must mean a ban in principle and in practice - not a restriction enabling continuation of the trade by the back door .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I should like to thank Mrs Svensson for her commitment and the work she has done .
We , as the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , support this compromise .
It has surprised me enormously why it has taken so long before we managed to strike this compromise with the Council and Commission , because we in this House had to do a huge amount of work to reach this compromise .
I am pleased with the outcome , particularly the fact that we are assuming an exemption position that is compatible with that of the United States and Australia .
This is how we , as the western civilised world , can stand united against the nasty way certain countries deal with their pets .
I should like to endorse what Mrs Lucas said .
When will there be a ban on seal fur ?
I should like to take this one step further still , as I believe that there are many more things the civilised world should take to heart where animals are concerned .
I do not want to enter into detail about it at the moment , but I think there is much to say on this subject , and the Commissioner may already have ideas on this for future proposals .
Even though this ban may be at the expense of a number of Dutch expressions , such as de hond in de pot vinden [ find your dinner in the dog ] or de kat in de zak kopen [ buy a cat in a sack ] , this does mean that we are keen to protect the animals that are dear to us , and it is unacceptable for our children to be faced with parts of their pets incorporated in their toys .
Finally , I should like to stress that the ALDE Group supports the compromise proposal as a whole ; we do not have any problems with it .
I should like to mention the other side of the coin , though .
In China , dogs are served up for dinner on a regular basis .
To the Chinese , their fur is a residual product with economic value ; this ban will have the effect that the economic value of the fur will take a significant nosedive .
Taking this one step further , this means that if pork and beef are part of our staple diet , it should no longer be possible to use their skins / hides either .
We may have to give this matter some more thought , to see what we can do about this in future .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I fully support the ban on imports of cat and dog fur .
At the moment , it is the least that we can do to combat cruelty to animals .
Dogs and cats have a particularly close bond to humans .
They serve us and are devoted to us .
Cruelty to these animals is particularly hurtful .
We know that killing dogs and cats for fur is cruel and European Union Member States should not be indifferent to this practice .
We cannot influence how animals are treated in other cultures , but we can at least say ' no ' to goods bought at the price of unimaginable suffering caused to animals .
We should say ' no ' to any kind of cruelty , irrespective of the victim involved .
Sensitivity is universal .
A sensitive person would never condone the suffering of another being , whether it is another human or an animal .
The Union will have a purpose when it becomes a community of people who are sensitive to all pain , to all suffering .
I wholeheartedly support the rapporteur 's position .
At the same time , I would like to express my appreciation for her report and the work of the rapporteurs from the expert committees , Mr Stevenson and Mrs Lucas .
Parliament is taking a significant step towards changing the way in which we treat animals .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Kyprianou , ladies and gentlemen .
I , too , should like to thank the rapporteur .
It is thanks to Mrs Svensson 's persistence that Parliament will be able to adopt , as early as tomorrow , at first reading , a Regulation banning the trade in and processing of dog and cat fur .
In the trialogue with the Council and the Commission , Mrs Svensson successfully fought for a complete ban on the trade in and processing of this fur and thus said a clear ' no ' to the derogations originally proposed by the Commission .
We must now ensure that the Member States implement this Regulation properly .
This represents a great success for animal protection .
This Regulation will eliminate once and for all the situation in which millions of cats and dogs have been kept and killed , sometimes in atrocious conditions , so that their fur can be processed and exported to Europe .
This is also a triumph for democracy in Europe , as numerous citizens have called for this ban in the form of signature campaigns and petitions .
This Regulation is also in the interests of consumers , as many citizens were completely unaware when purchasing products such as soft toys , clothing or keyrings that these contained dog or cat fur .
All too often , traders have circumvented the existing voluntary code of conduct and placed dog or cat fur on the market mislabelled or with no labelling .
It is high time Europe took this important step for international animal protection , and thus followed the example of other countries , such as the USA and Australia , who introduced a similar ban years ago .
Now , by means of tighter customs controls , new methods of analysis and criminal measures , we must ensure that the provisions adopted today are enforced effectively throughout Europe and all legal loopholes eliminated .

on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the choice has been put before us of whether to ban outright or restrict the trade in the furs of cats and dogs in the EU , and I congratulate and want to thank not only the rapporteur , Mrs Svensson , but also the Committee on Legal Affairs , which , having been asked for its opinion on this matter , has plumped for the first solution .
It was in fact high time that the Member States were reminded that dogs and cats are companion animals and that the trade in their furs and in products derived from them must not be accepted or even tolerated .
Imposing , by law , such a ban in Europe , and making provision for effective and deterrent sanctions in the event of its being infringed , is the very least one can do today .
There is no end to the fraudulent and deceitful practices that one finds going on , particularly in Asia , with the labels of most clothes made there - be they coats , hats , handbags , gloves , and shoes , not to mention toys , decorations and small leather goods - bearing the deceptive description of ' leather ' or ' real fur ' .
If a stop is to be put to this ignoble trade , each and every European citizen must adopt a responsible and ethical attitude by demanding , specifically , the labelling of all leather , skin and fur goods and of all food and pharmaceutical products whose origins might be a matter of doubt .
Let us unite in refusing to encourage those countries in which human rights and dignity are disregarded and which , moreover , have no sense of having a duty of care for animals .
( SK ) I would like to begin by observing that the fur industry has always been important in Slovakia , but it did not really start to expand until after 1990 .
Following Slovakia 's EU accession , Slovak furriers have been exclusively importing fur materials from buyers in EU Member States .
Being direct importers , these buyers can ensure the full legality and legitimacy of the imports , including the relevant certificates .
I understand the rapporteur , Mrs Svensson , and share her opinion that the large number of petitions and concerns expressed by consumers and citizens throughout the EU means that the Commission cannot remain inactive over the matter of banning the trade in cat and dog fur .
It is indeed necessary to clarify existing legal requirements in all Member States .
We must respond to the ethical concerns expressed by citizens over the possible presence of cat and dog fur in the Community , particularly in view of the indications that these animals may be being raised and killed in an inhumane manner .
Consumers are concerned that cat and dog fur cannot be readily distinguished from other furs or synthetic materials imitating fur , and this may give rise to unfair and fraudulent practices involving fur products , including fraudulent or misleading designations .
There is no tradition in the Community of breeding cats and dogs for the purpose of manufacturing fur , and in fact the vast majority of products from cat and dog fur present in the Community come from third countries .
In order to protect the internal market , customs supervision over the movement of goods from third countries to the European Union should be tightened .
Illegal imports could be addressed by stricter penalties against perpetrators , including heavy fines or the withdrawal of licences .
I firmly believe that it is necessary to adopt European legislation that would unify market rules in the EU Member States At the same time , however , EU initiatives must not become a brake and cause the fur industry problems by disrupting legitimate fur trading .
We must avoid putting up obstacles to the functioning of the internal market and ensure the free movement of legally traded fur and fur products in general .
( DA ) Madam President , like my fellow Members , I wish to begin by sincerely thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Svensson , for an outstanding piece of work and for her excellent cooperation on this matter .
The regulation we are debating today is a good , important and very necessary piece of legislation .
It is good legislation because it enables us to send a clear signal to the many EU citizens who have asked us to do something to prevent dogs and cats from being used for fur production .
In this way , we are showing them that we are in actual fact listening to their concerns and making an active attempt to put a stop to cruelty to animals .
It is also an important piece of legislation because it has emerged that we cannot stop the sale of dog and cat fur solely by means of bans in the individual Member States .
During the committee reading of the regulation , Mr Stevenson of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection showed us many dog and cat skins bought in Europe , including a skin made from four golden retrievers and bought in my own home city of Copenhagen .
In Denmark we already have a ban , but it is clearly not good enough .
We therefore need an effective ban at EU level .
The proposed legislation is also necessary because huge numbers of dogs and cats lead wretched lives that end in the most terrible suffering imaginable , and all because they have to provide fur for clothes and toys .
By devising a common EU ban , we reduce the market for the sale of dog and cat fur and , at the same time , send a powerful signal concerning the repugnance we feel towards cruelty to animals .
I am therefore delighted that we have managed to devise as strict and sound a ban as this .
The exemptions provided for will be so rare that they will each have to be justified and approved individually .
We are as close to a total ban as is legally possible at the present time , and that is to be welcomed .
However , the legislative text is not enough in itself .
It is crucial that we continue to work on developing methods to enable us more effectively to identify where fur originates and to stop the traffic in illegal fur , which shady and unscrupulous characters will otherwise not hesitate to sell .
( SL ) None of the assertions usually made as a justification for cruelty to animals can be made in the case of the trade in dog and cat fur .
They are not being killed for clothing or food , and not even for the purposes of hunting .
The incentive for this slaughter has been provided by the global market ; in other words the demand of certain industries for raw materials that are cheaper than synthetic ones , since people living in extreme poverty on other continents receive very little for the sale of such items .
The European market is now generating world supply through its demand .
And it is time now for us to put an end to this , both for ethical reasons and also so that we can put an end to the deception of consumers , who do not realise that they are buying garments or toys made from dog or cat fur .
It would be better if there were no exceptions to the ban on imports .
Yet if we remain focused on the main goal , then a compromise also makes sense .
Effective implementation of the regulation will be extremely important .
Here we expect great things from the Commission and especially from Mr. Kyprianou , whom I thank , as I do the rapporteur Mrs Svensson , for their efforts .

( SV ) Madam President , thank you , Mr Kyprianou and my dear Mrs Svensson , for doing such a fantastic job .
Most cats and dogs growing up in Europe can count on being stroked , fed , exercised and well cared for .
However , those people who buy cuddly toys or fashionable handbags made of cat or dog fur contribute to a trade that causes animals to be tortured , beaten and flayed alive .
This legislative proposal is unusual .
Firstly , the EU has finally listened to the voice of the people , who wish to ban this repulsive trade .
Secondly , the internal market was considered to operate best if we banned the trade .
For once , animal protection has taken precedence over the internal market .
I wish to emphasise the importance of not allowing the exemptions to undermine the ban .
Finally , we have a precedent that points the way to trade based on values other than market fundamentalism .
I hope and demand that , once we have brought this matter to a conclusion , the next topic will be a ban on the import of seal skins .
Hundreds and thousands of seals are still tortured to death on the ice in Canada and Norway .
( FR ) Madam President , our further discussion of the importation of the skins of two million slaughtered Chinese dogs and cats is comparable to that which we had in the 1990s , when we returned on three occasions to discussing the importation from the Arctic regions of the furs of animals killed in leghold traps .
On each occasion , whether we were talking about seals , dogs , cats or foxes , I am sorry to have to say that the Commission played for time and allowed the trade to continue to the greater glory of the Market Almighty .
Let us never forget that , in March 1996 , despite proof that mad cow disease was capable of being transmitted to humans , the Commission threatened four German Länder with sanctions for their refusal to allow the importation of suspect cattle .
The lesson one can learn from all that is that the logic of the market demands that everything be capable of being bought or sold or used as a means to making a profit , whether it be dogs , cats , kidneys , eyes , women , children , slaves , or workers .
That is why the economy must be subject to political constraints , in order that those great values that are beyond price may be re-established .
Madam President , over one million Europeans have lobbied in favour of banning the import of cat and dog fur into the EU .
The Commission listened to the European Parliament and reacted by taking legislative action to ban the import of cat and dog fur .
I welcome this and hope that we will see an end to the barbaric trade which accounts for the slaughter of over two million cats and dogs each year .
However , we do not just want warm words .
Some constituents have raised concerns that loopholes in the Commission 's proposal may allow imports via the back door .
I recently tabled a written question asking the Commission about derogations that might allow the trade to continue .
The reply that I received gave information on two derogations , one relating to fur that was part of personal or household effects being brought into the EU , and the other relating to fur or products containing fur that have not been bred or killed for fur production .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament report deletes these derogations and I urge colleagues to fully support this report .
We want to be sure that cat and dog fur will not be imported into the EU .
Madam President , I welcome the fact that several EU countries - France , Italy , Denmark , Greece and Belgium - moved unilaterally to ban the trade .
However , there are differences in the approaches of other Member States , ranging from bans on rearing and slaughter to labelling requirements .
These differences can cause problems for consumers , retailers and traders alike .
That is why , as we all know , an EU-wide ban is so important if we want an end to this vile trade .
We have already heard that 2 million dogs and cats are slaughtered each year for their fur and that it takes at least 10 dogs and up to 24 cats to make a single coat .
These animals live in horrific conditions and many are skinned alive .
Since the US brought in a ban , more cat and dog fur is coming into the EU .
The problem is that many customers do not know what they are buying , as cat and dog fur is quite often labelled as fake fur .
It is also included in a variety of products other than clothing , such as some homeopathic medicines , children 's toys and accessories .
I welcome the debate tonight and the vote tomorrow and I congratulate the Commissioner on his commitment .
Madam President , before making a few points , I should first like to briefly mention two practical issues .
Firstly , I appreciate the need for monitoring and reporting , and that is why we are in agreement with Parliament on this .
Effective and analytical methods are in place , which will be very helpful in implementing this legislation .
Secondly , on labelling , it was always debatable whether labelling would be enough .
We decided - and I think Parliament was in agreement - that labelling was not enough and therefore we proposed legislation .
However , on the general issue of labelling , we are following very closely voluntary initiatives , programmes and schemes that already exist to cover other fur products and ensure that consumers are properly informed .
On the issue of seals , I have to say at the outset that it is not my responsibility .
My colleague , Mr Dimas , has already made a statement to Parliament on this issue .
I was expecting this question , so I can tell you that EFSA has already been asked by the European Commission to provide a full objective assessment on the animal welfare aspects of the killing and skinning of seals , which was what Commissioner Dimas promised you .
We expect to have this report in November , and based on that the Commission will assess in the shortest possible time the options to respond to this issue .
I am sure my colleague will be very happy to discuss this issue with you once he has received the EFSA report .
Allow me to make two or three points .
I understand the frustration of many of you who were here before I was .
You have talked about ' a long time ' .
I have been in office for only two and a half years and I have already produced a proposal .
I do not know what happened in the past , but I think we would all appreciate that this Commission would not only make a commitment but also deliver this proposal within a reasonable time .
I would just like to mention that .
Secondly , I appreciate that the support of the European citizens has made a great impact ; it was a great issue for us and it helped me convince those who needed convincing .
However , you have all had a chance to talk with me privately on this issue and you know that I personally did not need to be persuaded or convinced about this .
As soon as I was informed about this practice , I immediately gave instructions for my departments to start working on it .
Therefore , credit me with the fact that I did not need any convincing as soon as I saw the films and knew what the practice was .
Thirdly , let me mention the derogations .
I know your views .
From the very beginning I said that I was not happy with them either .
However , you must realise that we started with a completely negative approach and then we managed to present a proposal .
If the Commission wanted to allow loopholes , we would never have brought the proposal in the first place .
We are just trying to find the best possible way to make it legally sound to be able to withstand any challenges before the court .
That was our approach .
We proposed several derogations ; these were not agreed upon .
We have found a very positive outcome with a compromise .
Trust me , we never intended to allow any loopholes .
What we were trying to do , based on legal advice , was to make this as effective and as solid as possible .
The principle was upheld by the other two legal services .
Therefore , I am very happy that we are having this debate and that we are competing with each other as regards who wants more - what more could one ask ?
This is the right approach and your support gave me enough strength to convince whoever needed convincing .
Therefore , I am looking forward to working with you on many other issues that touch upon animal welfare .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 19 June 2007 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FI ) First of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Eva-Britt Svensson , for having done a splendid job , and for having added certain elements to the Commission initiative , in particular that violation of the ban will result in prosecution and that derogations to the ban are unacceptable .
She has been able to see through the entire process diplomatically , so that now we only need to adopt the long-awaited ban in plenary without further ado .
The whole process has also been an exemplary indication of how decisions and legislation at EU level can be influenced by citizen action .
There would hardly have been an initiative for legislation on the matter but for the petitions by citizens and active lobbying .
I do hope that this example will encourage the citizens of the Union to take a more active part in EU decision-making .
I welcome the Union 's proposal on a complete ban on the trade in cat and dog fur because I believe that it is unacceptable that around two million dogs and cats are butchered every year for this purpose .
12-15 dogs need to be killed to produce one dog fur coat and 24 cats for one cat fur coat .
The vast majority of European consumers condemn the barbaric slaughter of our favourite domestic animals and do not wish to buy these products .
This is why importers often give cat fur products various invented names to mislead the well-meaning customer .
We need to have a comprehensive EU ban and put an end to this barbaric practice permanently .
As so often happens , company self-regulation has proved to be ineffective in this case too .
Retailers do not even label which animal the furs originate from .
At the moment , fifteen Member States ban the trade in dog and cat fur , but there has been no general ban in the other countries until now .
A comprehensive ban is an important step towards a more humane , animal-friendly society in Europe .
Multiple sclerosis ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question by Marcin Libicki , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , to the Commission , on the Multiple Sclerosis Code of Best Practice - B6-0124 / 2007 ) .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , the European Parliament has dealt with health issues on a number of occasions .
However , the view is often expressed that Parliament should focus on general health issues , such as medical treatment , insurance and appropriate care for those both ill and healthy .
People sometimes say that it should not concern itself with specific diseases .
However , I think that the disease being discussed today , namely multiple sclerosis , is a problem on such a dramatic scale that Parliament 's involvement is justified .
Neither is it the first time that the European Parliament is taking action in this field .
A few weeks ago , on 29 May of this year , a conference was organised in Brussels by the European MS Platform .
This conference was held under the auspices of the President of the European Parliament , Mr Hans-Gert Pöttering , for which we thank him , and was organised by Mrs Uma Aaltonen .
I would like to remind you that Mrs Uma Aaltonen was once one of our colleagues .
She was a Member of the European Parliament and a member of the Committee on Petitions , of which I am the chairman .
Mrs Uma Aaltonen suffers from multiple sclerosis herself .
She is a writer , a journalist and a teacher , and particularly supports this cause .
I would like to remind you that the Committee on Petitions dealt with the issue of multiple sclerosis in petition 842 / 2001 .
As a result of this petition , the Committee on Petitions produced a report which was discussed in Parliament during the December plenary session in 2003 .
Thanks to our cooperation with multiple sclerosis associations in all the Member States and the European Multiple Sclerosis Platform , a code of best practice was drawn up on the basis of this report and the resolution which accompanied it .
The matter is really extremely important as the tragic situation facing multiple sclerosis sufferers is not reflected in statistics .
As the participants at this conference pointed out , and as we heard during our previous debate on the subject , mortality statistics often state as the cause of death the failure of the pulmonary or the cardiovascular system , but do not mention that the primary cause of the pulmonary failure was simply muscular paralysis and that the patient suffocated , or that the cause of the cardiovascular failure was multiple sclerosis .
Therefore , the statistics often do not provide us with the relevant information about how many people are seriously ill , how many suffer and how many die as a result of this illness .
Multiple sclerosis sufferers are ill for many years .
In the end , the cause of their death , statistically speaking , it pains me to say , is an entirely different disease .
The Committee on Petitions met multiple sclerosis sufferers , we participated in these conferences and , during our mission to Berlin , we met the Minister of State of the German Government , Günter Gloser , with whom we discussed the matter , as the petitions committee of the German parliament is also dealing with the issue .
Today , I would like to put a question to the Commission and to ask it to state the means , methods and efforts that it has undertaken to implement the European Parliament 's resolution and the code of good practice that was drawn up on the basis of the resolution .
I would be very grateful if the Commissioner could answer this question .
Madam President , I would like to begin by saying that we acknowledge , understand and appreciate the seriousness of this disease .
Not only is it a serious disease , but it also affects young men and women in Europe and all over the world in the most productive period of their lives ; people who have usually already formed their own families , have young children , have all their life ahead of them and then have to go through these difficulties .
Also , we appreciate the importance not only of the European Parliament 's resolution but also of the code of best practice , which was drafted by the Platform .
As I have already said , the Commission also participated in the first European conference on multiple sclerosis last month , and that conference was organised in the context of our public health programme .
It was a project funded by the programme ' Multiple Sclerosis - the Information Dividend ' and led by the European Multiple Sclerosis Platform .
Of course , many of the aspects relating to this disease have to be dealt with by the Member States , so it is a gradual process that will take some time , but the Commission is there to help , support and encourage .
At the conference , many essential points were presented concerning the follow-up to Parliament 's resolution of 2003 , especially regarding the discriminatory treatment afforded to people with multiple sclerosis .
The Commission is taking action in the main fields covered by the proposal regarding a code of good practice on the right of people affected by multiple sclerosis to quality of life .
Some actions target multiple sclerosis directly ; others are of a more general or , let us say , horizontal or generic nature but , again , they are of benefit to the issue of multiple sclerosis as well , for example , the issue of equal rights and access to treatment and therapies for multiple sclerosis .
The Commission , within its more general framework of safe , high-quality and efficient health services , is reinforcing cooperation between Member States .
It is helping create reference networks for diseases , exchange of best practice and centres of reference , and the objective of these will be to ensure equal rights to patients and equal level of treatment all over the European Union .
So , once these networks are established , they can cover multiple sclerosis as well , especially with centres of reference and exchange of best practices .
On research , on the other hand , we have a more directly targeted agenda and initiatives .
The seventh Framework Programme includes collaborative activities on research into brain-related diseases , human development and ageing , with particular emphasis on how to turn basic discoveries into clinical applications .
One first call proposal for this topic was neuro-glia interaction in health and disease , which is of direct interest to the multiple sclerosis research community .
Also , under the preceding programmes ( the fifth and the sixth ) , the Commission funded 18 projects on multiple sclerosis , the largest of which , in the sixth programme , totalled EUR 11.4 million and related to neuro-protective strategies for multiple sclerosis .
On the issue of employment and discrimination , which is important for us , Directive 2000 / 78 / EC already prohibits discrimination based on disability in employment , occupation and vocational training , and requires employers to put in place reasonable accommodation tailored to the individual case to enable a person with a disability to work or undertake training .
The Commission is committed to encouraging actions and promoting strategies for the adaptation , and reintegration into working life , of affected persons .
On the issue of participation and empowerment , the project I mentioned earlier , ' Mutliple Sclerosis - the Information Dividend ' , will facilitate consensus on agreed European quality standards on information about multiple sclerosis , which has to be accessible , delivered in a timely manner by appropriately skilled and experienced professionals and provided in an equitable and efficient way .
Finally , I would like to inform Parliament that the Commission intends to discuss with Member States a proposal for a large European consensus conference on neuro-degenerative diseases , including multiple sclerosis , to be held in 2009 or 2010 , and the Commission will be able ( on the basis of conclusions endorsed both by public and private stakeholders at that conference ) to propose a communication or other relevant policy initiative , including specific actions in all the fields of disease prevention , research and management of this group of diseases .
We will , of course , keep Parliament informed of all the next steps .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is indeed three and a half years ago that Parliament , in a resolution to both the Council and the Commission , asked for important measures to support European citizens suffering from MS. As the Commissioner already pointed out , much progress has indeed been made .
Whilst on behalf of Parliament , I expressed our support at this conference on 29 May , I would still like to put three specific questions to the Commission .
The code of good practice should indeed be circulated and adopted in all Member States as quickly as possible .
Is the Commission prepared to make information on MS available in a similar form on the EU 's health portal for all patients ?
My second question is about the MS concept project that was launched recently within the framework of the health programme and funded by the Commission .
This project must lead to an MS register that can be used by everybody .
Will the Commission be supporting this financially ?
Finally , I should like to ask you whether the Commission will be taking any further initiatives in terms of framework legislation , in which priority is given to safeguarding MS patients ' jobs ?

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Libicki for taking the initiative of bringing this matter before the House tonight .
I welcome also my own opportunity to make a contribution to this debate .
As regards the treatment of people with multiple sclerosis , and indeed the prevention of their marginalisation from society , there is a huge disparity in the way in which people affected by multiple sclerosis are treated across the European Union .
Consequently , many thousands of people and their families suffer unnecessarily a poor quality of life .
Access to essential drugs , therapies and services , are too often not driven by need , but by where a person happens to reside and whether their government invests sufficiently in those needs .
It is a sad fact that it is not always the case of Member States not having the resources to provide such care and services .
My own country , Ireland , is a prime example .
We have had 10 years of enormous economic growth and wealth , and yet we still have one of the lowest ratios of neurologists to patients among the EU 's wealthy nations .
We need more research to advance our understanding of the illness and how best to treat it .
Regrettably , in this House we constantly face opposition to such research , particularly embryo stem cell research , which offers the best hope for making advances .
Finally , it is not appropriate to allow a situation to continue in which citizens of the European Union are treated unequally .
While I acknowledge that it is primarily a responsibility of the Member States to deliver health care , it is also a responsibility of the European Commission to ensure that equality is applied across the board .
I would like to see them sponsoring a ' race to the top ' in terms of services for people with disabilities generally , but certainly people with multiple sclerosis .
I believe publication of the progress being made by Member States signing up to this code of conduct would help drive that race to the top .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , there are approximately 400 000 people with multiple sclerosis within the EU .
Louise McVay 's petition brought our attention to MS in 2003 and it is only right that , three and a half years on , the Commission reports on the progress it has made in ensuring that the code of best practice , in particular , is implemented .
The 2003 resolution called for equal access to health care for people with MS , but some drugs , like beta interferon , are still not uniformly available .
In the UK we have a postcode lottery for this drug , with availability depending on where someone lives .
In Poland only 1 % of people with MS are treated with disease-modifying drugs , compared to 50 % in Sweden .
People with MS should be cared for in the best way possible , as called for by the code of best practice .
It also calls for people with MS to be able to retain their jobs and obtain sufficient help and support to remain in mainstream society .
That is why , as the Commissioner said , it is so important for the Employment Directive 2000 to be implemented equally across the EU .
This year is the Year of Equal Opportunities for All .
Let us hope that it is also the year that we get a firm timetable for specific directives to outlaw discrimination in access to goods and services as well .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) This debate on measures to assist EU citizens with multiple sclerosis is of the highest importance .
It is important to point out that measures have been taken on the basis of the December 2003 resolution aimed at giving greater visibility to the disease and at preventing discrimination against the 400 000-plus sufferers in the Community alone .
It is vital that the Commission attach major importance to research aimed at speeding up the development of more effective treatment of all forms of multiple sclerosis and that it take into account the code of best practice on this matter drawn up by multiple sclerosis societies in the Member States and the European Multiple Sclerosis Platform .
I should therefore like to ask the Commissioner what he intends to do to ensure equal opportunities for multiple sclerosis sufferers and to raise awareness among the Member States so that they pay greater attention to the problem .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , people who live with MS came to us in the Committee on Petitions to alert us to the discrepancies in treatment and opportunities for people with MS across the EU .
Geography should not determine whether your disease goes into remission or progresses .
In my own country of Ireland , we have one of the lowest ratios of neurologists to patients : 17 , where we should have a minimum of 39 , a fact that negatively affects the outcome for Irish patients .

I would like to correct Mr De Rossa : stem cells obtained from the destruction of embryos have , to date , produced no treatments , whereas stem cells from cord blood have produced over 70 treatments , and it is to be hoped that , some day , there will be a treatment for MS.
Finally , I would like to point out that , in spite of modern medicine and the abundance of food and water , the burden of disease in the EU is increasing .
Why ?
Because instances of MS and every other autoimmune condition , of which there are many , are on the increase .
There is a widespread breakdown in the functioning of the human immune system .
This is a crisis that we should not ignore .
It is time to take an honest look at the unnatural and constant way in which modern life bombards the human immune system from its earliest stages , resulting in problems like poor immune development and immune collapse ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Madam President , in 2003 , the European Parliament adopted , by a decisive majority , a resolution on the unequal treatment of multiple sclerosis sufferers in the European Union .
At the time , the blatant discrimination affecting many multiple sclerosis sufferers in Europe resulted in Parliament asking the Commission to draw up a code of best practice to which all Member States should adhere .
Four years have passed and the problem of MS has returned with double the impact as a result of the appalling situation facing sufferers in the new Member States .
In terms of the number of MS sufferers living there , Poland ranks third in Europe .
However , in contrast to the first and second place countries where 30 % of sufferers have access to standard treatment only 2 % of MS suffers in Poland have access to standard care .
The situation is similar in Romania , Bulgaria , Slovakia and Hungary .
If we also consider the fact that MS is an illness that affects young people and is the second most frequent cause of disability in Europe , the conclusions are obvious .
I would therefore like to ask you to compare Parliament 's common position on MS with the results of the Commission 's work , particularly taking into account the situation faced by MS sufferers in the twelve new Member States .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , multiple sclerosis should - and must - be recognised through better support for sufferers and by finding practical solutions .
This can be achieved through equitable access for citizens to health services and through the equitable provision of all effective means .
There are broad differences between the Member States in the quality of care .
The adoption of the Code of Best Practice proposed by the European Parliament is an expression of our political will to determine uniform methods of care and rehabilitation activities .
This will support the right to an independent life , which depends on the provision of prompt and suitable health and social care for dignity and independence .
At the same time , the aim is to have more , better coordinated research .
The McBay case illustrated how even one citizen fighting alone is enough to turn the attention of the decision-makers to cases which may be unheard of sometimes or overlooked .
The emphasis must be on joint efforts by the Member States and their experts to remove the obstacles , Commissioner .
What role will the Commission play ?
Madam President , almost everybody knows that true equality in the 27 Member States is but an elusive dream .
This is particularly so in the field of health care , and it is most obvious when dealing with complex neurodegenerative disorders such as MS , which require highly specialised diagnosis and treatment centres .
Yet , in this most important area for citizens ' wellbeing , namely their health , our Treaties let us down disappointingly , as they place this area under the sole competence of Member States .
Strangely enough , those responsible for making and maintaining the EU Treaties seem to care more about equality in business and marketing matters than about our health .
Perhaps this debate on MS will lead to some wiser thinking and be the catalyst for changing this unsatisfactory and , in many respects , shameful state of affairs for the benefit of our citizens .
( PL ) Madam President , there are around 60 000 MS sufferers in Poland , which ranks Poland in third place after Germany and the United Kingdom .
However , in those countries , around 30 % of sufferers have access to immunomodulating therapy , whereas in Poland barely over 2 % of patients can obtain this treatment .
This is mainly due to a lack of funding and it is a problem that also affects the treatment of many other diseases , including cancer .
MS is currently an incurable disease , resulting from an impaired immune system , which leads to damage of the myelin sheath .
Immunomodulating treatment is expensive , as is physiotherapy .
In Poland , any resolutions passed are not implemented mainly due to economic reasons and the crisis in the health service , the transformation of which has resulted in poor organisation and privatisation .
The costs of medicines produced by Western companies are also prohibitively high .
In my opinion , the European Parliament could try to influence these companies to prevent them from exploiting poorer patients and taking away their basic human right , namely the right to protect their health and to have access to medical treatment .
Madam President , I would like very briefly to thank the Members for this interesting and very useful debate .
It will give us ideas and inspirations on how we can proceed with this important issue in the future .
I should like to give some information on the questions that have been posed .
First of all , creating the link to the health portal is already under way ; as we speak , it may have been done already .
So , access to this information through the health portal will be made available to all citizens very soon , if it is not already available .
The Commission will support the creation of a European register on multiple sclerosis , which will mostly be based on the existing registers in some Member States and expanded to include the other Member States .
More importantly - because we have to be practical as well -funds to support this initiative will be provided under the seventh Framework Programme .
On other issues , of course , many pieces of legislation are already in place , such as the issue of discrimination and access to work .
However , based on the outcome of the conference which will take place in the future , which I mentioned in my opening speech , and on the discussion with the stakeholders , we will see if there is also a need for new legislative initiatives and consider what steps have to be taken .
We will then , of course , be ready to proceed with new initiatives .
Overall , as you know , we are dealing with inequality ; it is a difficult issue .
It was a priority of the UK Presidency and has been taken over by the Commission and the other Presidencies as well .
But we have to live within the realities - the existing legal and Treaty realities of the European Union , the issue of competences , how much the Commission can oblige Member States in certain areas of health .
Most is done through guidelines and recommendations .
Even under the proposed Constitution as it stands , provision of health care remains the sole competence of the Member States .
So , we try to encourage , coordinate with and support the Member States , and we will raise this issue with them whenever possible but , at the end of the day , this specific area of health care provision is the responsibility of the Member States .
That does not mean that we will not continue encouraging them to proceed , to follow the code that has been mentioned and to take other steps , but I believe that , through our health service initiatives ( we will be presenting a proposal before the end of the year ) , we will be able to tackle some of these aspects and , of course , I will be happy to continue discussing these with you .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
It is not easy to take part in a debate on a disease that affects over 400 000 people in Europe , with a new case every four hours .
It is not easy because multiple sclerosis , the causes of which remain largely unknown , affects young people in particular , people of my own age who see their ambitions and dreams for the future crushed without warning , not to mention the impact on their daily lives .
Today , however , there is tangible , genuine hope thanks to the important and encouraging progress made through scientific research , with determined work day after day taking new steps towards identifying causes , mechanisms and cures for the neurological collapse brought on by multiple sclerosis .
At this stage our chief duty is to promote , support and encourage this research , including financially ; it must be free from conditions and from limitations and fears , which are often bigoted and promote other agendas .
At the same time , all the commitments made by the European Commission in its 2003 resolution must be honoured , in particular with regard to drawing up a code of best practice .
I also believe that it is the specific duty of the Community institutions to promote and support the work of all associations , such as the AISM [ Italian Multiple Sclerosis Association ] in my country , which , with dedication and professionalism , do commendable work and provide targeted help for those affected by multiple sclerosis and their families .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
The situation in Palestine ( debate )

Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have all been deeply moved and disturbed by the terrible events and tragic occurrences in the Gaza Strip over the last few days .
As you know , I chose to make the Middle East the destination for my first official trip outside the European Union and visited the region .
My meeting with Mr Abbas , the President of the Palestinian Authority , was originally scheduled to take place in Ramallah , but , because of increasing hostilities between Fatah and Hamas , he asked me to visit him at his official residence in Gaza , where he was trying to mediate between the opposing factions , and that is what I did .
It was exactly three weeks ago that I was having talks with President Abbas in Gaza , when I was impressed by the calm determination with which he explained his convictions to me , yet , once outside his official apartments , I could feel the tension in the air .
My recommendation to you , Members of this House , is that you condemn the Hamas militias ' violent attacks on the legitimate security forces and the institutions of the Palestinian Authority in the strongest terms , and it is out of the deepest conviction that I recommend that you express our support for President Abbas and our solidarity with him .
We support the Palestinian President 's decision to announce a state of emergency and appoint an emergency government in order to be able to resolve as soon as possible the political crisis in the Palestinian territories .
The new prime minister , Mr Salam Fayyad , recently visited me in Brussels ; we have great confidence in him and in his leadership qualities , and , should you mandate me to do so , I shall say so to him today .
The new government has a difficult task ; it will need active assistance from the European Union and from the international community , and I should like to say , following on from the conclusions adopted at yesterday 's Council of Foreign Ministers in Luxembourg , that we in this House should act on our deepest convictions in supporting , in word and in deed , those who seek peace in the Middle East and are continuing to work for it .
Yesterday , at the opening of our plenary session , this House decided to defer voting on a resolution on the European Union 's Middle East policy until the July plenary sitting , and , given the continuing instability and the constantly changing situation in the region , I do believe that was the right decision to take .
That does not mean , however , that we have any intention of being passive observers of what is happening .
The European Union - and that means this House too - must be in the advance guard of those working for a renewed relationship with the Palestinian people and those responsible for representing it .

We must shoulder our responsibility and act accordingly , doing everything in our power to get conditions throughout the Palestinian territories restored to those worthy of human beings ; while we must support those who live there in meeting their most pressing human needs , we must also help to give them a real and long-term political perspective .
Yesterday 's Council of Foreign Ministers resolved to restore normal relations with the Palestinian Authority , and this is something we should welcome , together with the related decision to create the conditions needed in order to facilitate the resumption of efficient and transparent direct financial assistance and help with the development of functioning institutions .
The mission under the Common Foreign and Security Policy , together with the police cooperation mission , are remaining in place , and , as a decision-making part of the EU 's budgetary authority , this House should firmly support that decision .
As well as taking these steps , though , we in this House should call on the Palestinians to return to the path of dialogue in order to achieve the reconciliation that is needed before there can be a Palestinian state covering the Palestinian territories as a whole .
It cannot be in anyone 's interest that the civil war should become more widespread or go on for any longer .
It has to be said , though , that there can be no peace without Israel , which bears a great responsibility .
When I paid a visit there - and especially when I addressed the Knesset - I made it quite clear that the European Parliament was and is calling on those in positions of political power in Israel to express their firm support for President Abbas .
With that in mind , I would like , now , to reiterate my call for Israel to release to President Abbas the Palestinian customs duties and taxes - amounting to some USD 800 million - that it has been withholding for several months now .
The Israeli Government has declared itself willing to do that , and should now actually do so with the minimum possible delay .
The European Union must be an honest broker , and I see the European Parliament 's role as being to play a responsible part in this .
The peoples of Israel and Palestine are equal in dignity ; they are entitled to live within secure borders .
May the day come when Palestinians can live at peace with Palestinians and Palestinians with Israelis ; a policy of reconciliation and mutual understanding along these lines may , today , appear to be a long way in the distance , but we in this House , being the representatives of the people of Europe , must support it as a matter of conviction and out of a sense of our own responsibility .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that our Parliament was right to alter the agenda in order to deal with the Middle East situation .
Unfortunately , I am very doubtful as to whether our debate will help in the quest for a solution to the conflict , but we clearly had to hold it all the same .
Just a few days ago in Brussels we held a debate on the situation in the Middle East with the High representative and Commissioner Ferrero in which we recognised the fortieth anniversary of the Six Day War , during which Israel invaded Gaza , the West Bank and the Golan Heights .
Today , 40 years later , we must accept that the situation is still in deadlock - as the French press reminded us yesterday - that it has not been possible to create a Palestinian State and that , unfortunately , there are effectively two governments in conflict with each other . Furthermore , there is an extremely serious political , economic , social and humanitarian crisis .
You were asking , Mr President , what the international community in general , and the European Union in particular , can do , and what we clearly have to do , firstly , is support Mahmoud Abbas and the moderate government of Salam Fayas , the destiny of which is not just to be the government of the West Bank , but also of Gaza .
We must also lift the international blockade - as you also pointed out , Mr President - imposed on Palestine since Hamas won the elections .
We must therefore welcome the decision taken yesterday by the General Affairs Council to restore direct aid to the Palestinian National Authority , and we hope that the meeting that is to be held today in Washington between the President of the United States and the Israeli Prime Minister will take us in the same direction .
It is also time , Mr President , for Israel to transfer the sums owed to Palestine in customs duties .
While these are all necessary conditions , however , Mr President , they are clearly not sufficient , since we all know that the situation in Gaza is still one of violence and that , in reality , in the difficult equation of war and peace , progress can only be made in the Middle East through the renunciation of violence as a means of political action , through the recognition of the State of Israel and through any actions , such as the release of the British journalist Alan Johnston , that may contribute to the objective of peace .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are all political men and women in this House , and we are perfectly aware that the highest of the political values is unity and that , without unity , it will not be possible to realise the dream of a viable Palestinian State living in peace with its neighbours .
Mr President , as you have pointed out quite rightly , it is time for the guns to fall silent so that dialogue can prevail and peace can be consolidated , and it falls to the European Union , together with other players such as the United Nations or the Arab League or other members of the Quartet , to mobilise all of its efforts in order to contribute , intelligently and generously , in a manner that is consistent with its tradition and it values and , from the point of view of humanitarian aid , naturally , to a fair and lasting peace in the Middle East .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although we have to regard the events of the past few days as representing a nadir in the development of the region , I would see it also as representing a nadir in our own - the European Union 's - role in its dealings with the Middle East .
Yesterday , the Council of Foreign Ministers decided to resume sending aid .
Why , though , did they wait to do that until after civil order had broken down ?
( Applause )
You , Mr President , have just called for the payment of direct aid to Mahmud Abbas .
I would ask whether it might be the case that it is too late for that .
Is it not perhaps possible that the disintegration of civil order in the Gaza Strip - which is what is happening now - might have been prevented if the aid had been sent earlier on , and if we had not imposed on ourselves , as a matter of strategy , the rule that there were to be no talks with Hamas ?
( Applause )
I do not myself know the answer to that question , and we are certainly not in a position to say that things would have worked out better if we had acted differently , but it is a question that we must at least be allowed to ask .

Is it not also the case that we - that is to say , the European Union and the community of Western states - are now , once again , seeing that there is a process at work , whereby a people elects a government that we do not like the look of ; we are happy with the elections - which our electoral observers confirm were unobjectionably conducted - but not with the result that emerged from them , and so we come to the conclusion that what is needed is a blockade , and a complete one at that .
Why was it that we did not actually talk to those members of the government of national unity who are not members of Hamas ?
There were many members of the government who were not members of Hamas , or of Fatah either .
The forces with whom we find ourselves talking may not , for the moment , be to our liking , but dialogue is nevertheless the only way to reach peaceful solutions .
I can remember - as you all can - how , when I was a young man , Yasser Arafat was seen as the world 's number one terrorist ; the man was later awarded the Nobel Peace Prize .
I was in favour of engaging in dialogue with him .
History has shown that it was dialogue that provided a way out of violence .
Today , Fatah is regarded as one of our partners ; it was once seen as the terrorist organisation par excellence .
That is why we have to learn from our own mistakes .
If we consider things as they actually stand , then there is only one way we can go - that is what I still believe , that is what my group still believes , that is what the social democratic family of parties still believes - and it is that we have to try to get all the stakeholding forces and all the interested parties around one table .
Anyone who talks to Syria is treated as an outcast , yet we ourselves know that the time will come and is not far off when there will be negotiations between it and Israel .
Preparations for them are already in hand .
We know that the Israeli Government , over the past year , has tried to establish contact with Syria .
Let us be a bit more honest and say , yes , it goes without saying that Syria should have a place at the conference table , particularly if you want to have some influence over Hamas .
There is surely no point in only looking back at the past .
We have to provide whatever direct aid we now can .
I do not know whether there is any chance of exerting some influence in the Gaza Strip , but , if there is , what this aid needs to be used for above all else is the creation of a state infrastructure , with support for the security forces who are actually making things safe rather than bringing insecurity , but most of all - and this is something about which not enough has been said in the debates over recent days - we in the European Union have to ensure that humanitarian aid is provided , for what we are now seeing happening is , among other things , a people who are already in need having - and not for the first time - yet more misery inflicted on them by radicalised armed forces on the fringes of society .
The people who really suffer are the ordinary people who have no water supply , no electricity , no medical care , and cannot send their children to school , and it is only as and when we are able to deal with those things that we will get people to want Israel to have the security that it needs in order to be able to live in peace , for one thing that is plain to see is that it will not be able to live in greater security if people become even more radicalised and civil war breaks out .
That will make only for even more instability .
The fundamental precondition for social security is always that we can extend it and thereby create in a given region greater willingness to make peace .
That is what the European Union 's main task must be , rather than the sending of European troops , which is what I have heard advocated by not a few representatives of this Union of ours over the past few days .
It is not conceivable that , for political reasons , there should be no money available to send humanitarian aid , but that the funds are there when it comes to sending troops .
That it is , in any case , not our way of doing things .
I hope that it will prove possible to resume the dialogue in the Middle East .
( Applause from the left )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , as Mr Schulz said , there can be no justification for the actions of Hamas militants , however badly the Palestinians have been treated .
And yet , if one year ago the international community had not reneged on its commitment to democracy in Palestine , if we had not refused dialogue with Hamas moderates and suspended direct aid payments to a freely elected government , the situation would not be as bad as it is today .
Financial sanctions designed to force recognition of Israel or to push Hamas out of power altogether have simply made the Palestinians more desperate and prospects for peace more precarious .
A two-state Palestine is emerging , riddled by violence , sectarianism and fear , while a two-state solution to the conflict is moving further away .
Liberals and Democrats are disappointed - though not surprised - by what has come to pass .
A year ago , we warned that Palestinian suffering would lead to greater extremism , particularly in Gaza 's prison conditions , where 1.4 million citizens have been systematically sealed-off and starved of their basic necessities .
Last week 's violent takeover of Gaza bespoke a lack of respect for the rule of law , which is a de minimis requirement for any legitimate government .
If Hamas is not careful , it will have betrayed its cause and , in the words of Saudi Arabia 's Foreign Minister , ' put the last nail in the coffin ' of the dream of a Palestinian state .
Unless we want civil war to triumph over unity , all sides must face the facts : their refusal of dialogue has got them nowhere .
A heavy dose of pragmatism is now required - not condemnation , not sanctions , and certainly not a refusal to negotiate .
That is the coward 's option and one which will backfire .
To that end , my Group welcomes Prime Minister Salam Fayyad 's determination to restore security and President Abbas 's commitment to dialogue .
We welcome resumption of direct aid to the Palestinian Authority and the prospective release of up to USD 800 million in Palestinian tax revenues by the Israeli Administration .
However , we caution against supporting the West Bank administration at the expense of Gaza .
If you consider the strip a ' terrorist entity ' - as Israeli officials have called it - you will not bring the region any closer to peace , you simply create more insecurity as a desperate people , deprived of food and other essentials , decides it has nothing left to lose .
Hamas control of Gaza was the nightmare that became reality .
However , the European Union must not be prepared to take a back seat and watch as Iran becomes a player in the contest .
If this year has taught us nothing else , it is that politics - and politics alone - can create prospects for peace in the Middle East .
While Parliament , at least , kept talking , the Council and the Member States took to the sidelines .
It is now up to the Council and our Member States to put democracy , human dignity and the rule of law back at the centre of proceedings and work to foster peace in the region .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , the most important thing we have to remember here today is the people 's lives that are affected by the new wave of violence in the Palestinian Territories .
In particular , we must think of the women and children , whose suffering is not something that has occurred just because of the Hamas takeover in Gaza , or just because of a lack of negotiation between the Palestinian and the Israeli authorities , or just because of the cancellation of aid from the European Union and the US ; their suffering goes back 30 years .
Anybody you speak to from the Palestinian area will tell you that it has always been the women and the children who have suffered most , but they have also been the most resilient in trying to find a way forward to challenge the failure to negotiate , the failure to respect and the failure to find a solution ; indeed , the failure of both Israel and Palestine to live up to their commitments , to agreements that they voluntarily signed up to , the failure of the United States of America and the European Union to live up to their commitments with regard to clear and open negotiations , the failure of other states bordering Israel and Palestine to take a more proactive and positive role with regard to , ultimately , achieving a two-state solution , which must be based on viability and equality .
Colleagues will remember that , some weeks ago in the European Parliament building in Brussels , the President of Parliament invited a number of Nobel Prize winners to speak on the future of Europe and on areas and issues that they are concerned with .
It is quite ironic that , when you read through the speeches of the people who were there that day , who won the Nobel Peace Prize , all of them said that the peace efforts they were involved in only came about through dialogue , respect for diversity , tolerance and equality .
What we have seen in Palestine over the last 30 years has been a failure to meet any one of those four criteria .
When Yasser Arafat was the leader of the Palestinian people , Israel said it could not deal with him , it could not negotiate with him .
When a new President was brought in , Israel said it could not deal with him , it could not negotiate with him and they were backed up all the time by the Americans and by certain Member States of the European Union .
To think that what happened in Gaza with Hamas was an accident is to misread , even with the gift of hindsight , our own failures in the European Union and in the US to deal properly with the solutions that may be required .
Now we have been given a new opportunity to do something .
Now we have been given a new opportunity to show courage in the face of death and disaster , to show humanity in the face of oppression and injustice , and to stand up and say what is right and what is correct : that we should give aid to the Palestinian people , we should insist that Israel negotiate with the democratically-elected representatives of the Palestinian people and we should back up the Palestinian Authorities to ensure that the rule of law applies throughout the Palestinian Territories .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we can all agree that what we have heard today is an analysis .
Mistakes have , without a doubt , been made by interested parties on every side , and when I say that we are paying bitterly for them now , by ' we ' I mean above all else the Palestinians , but also - or so I believe - the Israelis and all those with an interest in this region having , for once , something to look forward to - not just a peaceful future , but any kind of future at all .
What can be done ?
That is the question I would like to focus on .
For a start , the European Union must at last wake up and do something about the mistakes that have been made here , and the reason why it is the European Union that must act is that it is the only political entity in a position to act as a mediator ; the Americans cannot do it - the war in Iraq makes that impossible - and nor can the Russians or any of the others .
Someone has to take the initiative in saying ' yes ' - ' yes ' to direct aid payments , ' yes ' of course to support , ' yes ' to contacts with Gaza and with Hamas in order to address the humanitarian problems in the Gaza Strip .
That means not waiting for a declaration , but rather taking action and then getting a declaration - that is what is called for ; it means going straight to the heart of the nation in the name of the European Union and carrying on straightaway with a European quintet - which is , in essence , what is being attempted even if it is not being called that - with a great big conference held in the region .
Mr Schulz is right to say that we have to talk to Syria and with everyone we want to - and , in any case , must - negotiate with about the Golan Heights and the borders of Lebanon , and that has to be done now .
Why ? Because that is the only chance that the region will have of renewed hope .
It is renewed hope that makes political dialogue possible and not the other way round .
We are always being warned against giving any one side preferential treatment ; nobody in this region is going to be given any .
That is what we have to learn from all this .
That means without a doubt that humanitarian aid for Gaza must be forthcoming ; it is in nobody 's interest that the only humanitarian aid it gets should come from Iran , and if that happens , we will again shed tears and say that we did not want that .
Well , if that is not what we want , let us prevent it , and if we want to prevent that from happening , we have to take action ; that is what is needed , and right now .

What Israel has to come to understand is that a policy of occupation founded upon a wall that is perceived as an injustice will not bring peace , and it will not bring hope either ; they have to get that into their heads once and for all .
For them , getting out of a worst-case scenario must mean doing what they have not done before , that is to say negotiating with the new government in Palestine the demolition of the wall and the establishment of a secure boundary on the other side of it .
That means that financial assistance , humanitarian aid and political initiative are called for , and if those things are not forthcoming , then , month after month , there will be weepings and lamentations when we meet here .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , in the face of the tragedy that is unfolding in the Palestinian territories , appeals for the violence to cease are completely ineffective if we refuse to see how this predictable catastrophe came into being .
This unprecedented explosion of violence is , firstly and above all , the product of those other acts of violence arising from 40 years of military occupation .
It is the fruit of the impunity granted by the entire international community to the Israeli leaders , whoever they are and whatever they do , in utter disregard of international law .
This violence is the price to be paid for the loss of all hope of a Palestinian State worthy of the name .
What a heavy responsibility that is , then , for European leaders !
Europe , it is said , is the chief donor .
All very well , but what is the point of giving aid if we allow the deadly poison of permanent humiliation to spread ?
The situation in Gaza grotesquely illustrates this , and the continuing isolation of Gaza could only push it to the extreme .
What a responsibility to have ruined historic opportunities such as the Arab League peace plan since 2002 , the success of the first democratic process in Palestine in 2006 or , more recently , the establishment of a last-chance national unity government , all by aligning ourselves with the deadly strategy of the White House !
There are a certain number of us here , who raised cries of alarm time after time .
The most recent being an appeal by more than 100 Members of the European Parliament to put an end to a policy that , through government boycotts and the withdrawal of direct aid , nurtures the despair of a nation on the point of imploding .
We were answered with reassuring words about the intentions of the Quartet , that illusion manipulated by the Bush administration to cover up its non-intervention .
Here , however , we have the UN special envoy to the Middle East delivering , in person , a clear indictment of all those , Europeans included , who practise what he calls ' self-censorship ' with regard to the occupier and whose recent decisions to boycott and to freeze aid have had , he insists , devastating consequences .
This historic failure and this repudiation on the part of the chief UN representative in the region call for a special debate at the highest level .
From now on , if we no longer wish to make ourselves party to a new Iraq , we must demand , as a matter of utmost urgency , fundamental strategic revisions underpinned by the international law that should have been imposed on everyone for the last 40 years .
History will be our judge .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , last week , the so-called Palestinian Fatah-Hamas unity government came to a violent end .
As a result , this House is facing two Palestinian cabinets that deny each other 's right to exist .
Meanwhile , the Council and Commission have clearly opted in favour of the Salam Fayyad crisis cabinet on the West Bank .
I should like to back this position all the way , because unlike the Fatah movement under the aegis of Mahmoud Abbas , the Hamas leaders persist in the denial of Israel 's right to exist within and outside the Gaza Strip .
On purely religious grounds , Hamas has turned against a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
This is an issue , the religious foundations of Hamas , which Mr Schulz ought to read up on some time .
Given the permanent policy of regional destabilisation pursued by Damascus and Tehran , I can see how this destructive position adopted by Hamas is actively being fuelled by the Islamic republic and Syria .
The fact , however , that certain MEPs and even groups in our House wish to trust as an equal interlocutor and pander to Hamas , which is after all Israel 's arch enemy , totally baffles me . Even to this day .
Does this mean that the two-state political solution has become nothing but absurd hypocrisy in this House ?
Meanwhile , I warmly wish the Palestinian people a selfless leadership that , internally , shows evidence of a powerful government and externally , genuinely seeks the modus vivendi with Israel .
The newly appointed Fayyad emergency cabinet offers this opportunity .
In order to put this into practice , I am counting on the helping , motivating and controlling hands of all the European institutions .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Gaza Strip is not a new Palestinian state ; far from it , it is a prison , a prison in which people - Palestinians , the Palestinian people , and women , children and old people in particular - are obliged to live in barracks , shut away from the world .
The latest outbreak of violence , with the Hamas militias seizing power in the Gaza Strip , was of course made possible by wrongdoing on the part of European policymakers , American policymakers , Israeli policymakers and Fatah too .
For it was Israeli politicians who refused the Palestinian Government its tax revenues and built a wall to keep the Palestinian people in their place ; the Americans allowed that to happen and showed themselves incapable of forcing all the warring factions to sit down at a table together ; and , finally , it was the Europeans , including us in this House , who were unable to give support to a democratically elected government , some of the elements in which we found uncongenial or disagreeable - and hence found ourselves denying support to the moderates and failing to encourage the growth , within Hamas and elsewhere , of those forces who could have been amenable to reason .
It is they who are to blame for this state of affairs .
We know that , now Hamas has seized power , it is one of the four radical elements in the Middle East , together with Iran , Syria and Hizbollah .
We also know that radical Islamism of the kind preached by Hamas is very dangerous , that the elements associated with it are the forces behind global Islamist terrorism , and - of course - that we Europeans must defend ourselves against it .
On the other hand , though , we have to stand up for the Palestinians ' right to self-determination , which means that they should elect as their government the people they want rather than the ones we want , because we are not in a position to pick and choose them .
It follows , then , that we must not repeat our former mistakes ; we have to talk to , and support , those Palestinian forces that enjoy majority popular support .
Important though the security of Israel is to Europe , the future prospects for the Palestinian people are no less so , and if we manage to give them hope for the future , we stand a chance of establishing peace in the Middle East in the longer term .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( SK ) I have serious concerns over the current situation in the Palestinian territories .
The Palestinian authority is split .
Notwithstanding the outcome of the elections , the joint government of the Fatah and Hamas movements was doomed to struggle , and it was only a matter of time until the tensions erupted into a bloody conflict .
Hamas takes pride in the fact that , in their founding documents , the movement set for itself the goal of destroying Israel .
Judging by the current behaviour of Hamas , we can conclude they have never given up their terrorist actions and way of thinking .
How are we supposed to work on helping Palestinian citizens who live in refugee camps , have no jobs and live in wretched living conditions , if the same Palestinians elect a movement which subscribes to terrorism and aims to destroy their neighbour , Israel ?
How are we supposed to work on implementing the Oslo accords and the establishment of two equal states , Palestine and Israel , when one of the participants dreams of wiping out , through war and terrorism , the very existence of its neighbour with whom it should peacefully coexist ?
As a member of the political section of Euromed , I call on Parliament to condemn all forms of terrorism in Palestine and any alliances with Hezbollah terrorists .
The European Union must support the peace process in both Palestine and Israel .
Last but not least , the EU humanitarian assistance there should not , via non-transparent means , end up in the hands of terrorist organisations .
Deadline for tabling amendments : see Minutes
1 .
Protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Wallis report
2 .
Integrated pollution prevention and control ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Wallis report
3 .
Controls , tell-tales and indicators for two- or three-wheel motor vehicles ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Wallis report
4 .
Injunctions for the protection of consumers ' interests ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Wallis report
5 .
Steering equipment of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Wallis report
6 .
Maximum speed of and load platforms for wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Wallis report
7 .
Parts and characteristics of wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Wallis report
8 .
Field of vision and windscreen wipers for wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Wallis report
9 .
Minimum safety and health requirements for the use of work equipment ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Mayer report
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the successor to Mrs Wallis as rapporteur for codification , I should like to draw attention to a problem that Mrs Wallis also had .
The codification procedure is a simple , quick procedure .
It is based on agreement between the Council , Parliament and the Commission , and enables legal acts that have been amended several times to be consolidated into a single legal act .
Substantive changes are explicitly exempted from the codification , which is why I broadly welcome the agreement on a fast procedure .
Scrutiny is carried out by the legal services of the Council , Parliament and the Commission , which compare the revised legal acts carefully .
The result is then presented to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the rapporteur .
I am an advocate of simplification and of better lawmaking , but with one reservation .
As rapporteur , I receive the codified legal acts together with the result of the scrutiny by the legal services between one and three weeks before the vote in the Committee on Legal Affairs .
It is impossible to scrutinise so many legal acts carefully in such a short space of time .
There should be the option of careful scrutiny , however , when one is to subsequently vote on the legal acts in one 's own name .
I should like to request , therefore , that in future the codified version be sent to the legal services and the EP rapporteur at the same time .
The simplicity of the procedure would not be affected , and the position of the rapporteur would be greatly strengthened .
I think that this would be in the interests of the entire Parliament as well as the rapporteur for codification .
( Applause )
10 .
Approximation of Member States ' laws relating to trade marks ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Mayer report
11 .
Protection of workers against asbestos ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Mayer report
12 .
Community guarantee to the EIB ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Wallis report
13 .
Protection of pigs ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Wallis report
14 .
Pure-bred bovine breeding animals ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Mayer report
15 .
Community trade mark ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Mayer report
16 .
Production and marketing of eggs ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Mayer report
17 .
Scrutiny of European Agricultural Guarantee Fund financing ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Mayer report
18 .
Mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to certain levies , duties , taxes and other measures ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Mayer report
19 .
Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and São Tomé and Príncipe ( vote )
- Capoulas Santos report
20 .
Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Kiribati ( vote )
- Morillon report
21 .
Request for defence of the immunity of Mario Borghezio ( vote )
- Gargani report
22 .
Definition , description , presentation and labelling of spirit drinks ( vote )
- Schnellhardt report
23 .
Cat and dog fur ( vote )
- Svensson report
24 .
Broadband ( vote )
- Hökmark report
25 .
EU economic and trade relations with Russia ( vote )
- Quisthoudt-Rowohl report
- Before the vote on Amendment 4
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , while we welcome the idea that there should also be ' high standards of democracy ' , on behalf of my group I propose that the phrase ' and free-market principles ' should be retained .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 26
Mr President , in Amendment 26 , second part , second sentence , I should like to replace the word ' could ' with ' should ' .
This has been agreed with the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
26 .
Competition Policy 2005 ( vote )
- Ferreira report
-Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Ladies and gentlemen , given that unforeseen transport difficulties prevented me and other MEPs from taking part in yesterday 's debate , I should like to take this opportunity to thank the shadow rapporteurs for the atmosphere of cooperation and compromise that enabled us to reach a broad consensus .
I should also like to thank the Commission services and , in particular , Mrs Kroes for her openness , the personal interest she has taken in this matter and her readiness to engage in dialogue .
It has become particularly important today for there to be cooperation between the European institutions and for Parliament to be strongly involved , at a time when European competition policy covers strategic sectors such as energy and services of general economic interest , when it encompasses new areas such as the environment and when much competition has acquired a global dimension .
Consequently , we must go on updating competition policy and must keep up the spirit of cooperation evident during the process of drafting this report , for the benefit of Europe 's citizens .
27 .
Crisis of the Equitable Life Assurance Society ( vote )
- Draft European Parliament Recommendation author : Wallis
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - Mr President , this is a real report this time .
It is a report that represents 18 months of work of a committee of inquiry of this House .
This morning whilst we were having the debate , colleagues from various different groups approached me and said that they would like a roll-call vote .
We should have requested it yesterday , but in view of the number of colleagues who have come to me , I wonder if we could now do that .
( The request was accepted )
28 .
Family life and study ( vote )
- Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou report
- Before the vote on paragraph 24
( SV ) I have an oral amendment to the second clause of paragraph 24 .
I shall read it in Swedish : Parliament ' calls , furthermore , on the Member States to count maternity and parental leave during a period of study towards women 's / men 's aggregate time spent in work and their retirement pension entitlement periods , with a view to meeting fully the goal of genuine gender equality ' .
The word ' men 's ' should , then , be added .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
President . - That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details of the votes : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
in writing . - ( FR ) Changing patterns in the world of work , the fragility of certain sectors such as industry , the explosion in the services sector and increased mobility of the work force are all phenomena making it necessary for the European Parliament to work towards greater protection for workers .
As long ago as December , Mrs Bachelot 's report set out to establish a European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , and it is this same concern to take account of the rights of workers that lies behind the Directive on the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer .
Every year , thousands of employees are deprived of income , sometimes for months , as a result of their firms becoming bankrupt , thereby resulting in hardship .
This directive will allow codification of all the rules relating to the protection of the employee in the event of the insolvency of the employer , and it will apply to any employment relationship , whatever the type of contract .
The completion of the internal market , which is sometimes wrongly accused of increasing insecurity on the labour market , may , on the contrary , give rise to genuine legislation and the creation of a system of protection for employees .
This report , which I support , is evidence of this .
in writing . ( SK ) I am very pleased that we have adopted the EP Directive on minimum safety and health requirements for the use of work equipment .
The codified version was drafted using a data processing system on the basis of the consolidated wording of Directive 89 / 655 / EEC .
It is very important that employers should always take necessary measures to ensure the safety and health protection of their employees by means of suitable equipment and conditions for their work .
New employers in particular are sometimes prone to focus more on net profit , rather than spending on various safety equipment or creating work conditions ; as a result , the health and occasionally the lives of employees may be jeopardised .
Employers now face a clear framework of standards they must comply with ; therefore I welcome the adoption of this text , which unequivocally strengthens health and safety protection at work .
in writing . ( SK ) We have adopted a codified proposal based on the preliminary consolidated wording of Directive 83 / 477 / EEC as amended .
I am aware of the fact that improved safety , hygiene and health protection of employees envisages the elimination of asbestos and all asbestos-containing materials from the work environment , as these materials are extremely dangerous to human health , since they are associated with carcinogenicity .
The consolidation of this directive produces a binding text which prohibits the use of asbestos and materials derived from asbestos for construction , demolition and remediation works , and will improve in all respects the situation of workers exposed to asbestos .
I also welcome the preventive measures designed to protect health at work .
This report concerns the fisheries agreement with São Tomé and Principe on Community fishing opportunities for four years , beginning in June 2006 .
Under this agreement , Portugal has five licences for tuna surface longliners .
In this new agreement , there has been a 32 % overall reduction in fishing opportunities .
At the same time , the financial burden for shipowners - from EUR 25 to 35 per tonne of fish caught - has increased , while the financial burden for the Community has been reduced by the same amount .
These are measures that , in view of their impact on the sector , give us grave cause for concern .
At Community level , these conditions mean agreements with ever smaller fishing opportunities and with ever greater burdens and responsibilities for shipowners . The question is therefore that of how they actually contribute towards improving the economic situation for the fisheries sector in the various EU Member States .
Lastly , we have our biggest reservations about Amendment 2 of this report , adopted by Parliament , which confers discretionary power on the Commission to withdraw licences in the event of non-compliance with obligations .
In our opinion , the procedure in force for this type of situation must remain in place .
The agreement before us lays down Community fishing opportunities for the next six years in the waters of Kiribati , by and large maintaining the conditions of the May 2003 Fisheries Agreement .
The agreement , which is solely for tuna , retains the number of available licences for the Portuguese fleet , that is to say six licences for surface longliners , together with the distribution of financing , with shipowners contributing 35 % .
It is important to mention , however , the change in the sphere of reference : the old fisheries agreements with third countries , which were commercial in nature , has been replaced by the new Partnership Agreements , with fisheries protocols , which will effectively work more and more as development aid .
I wish to point out , in this context , that fishing opportunities are diminishing all the time , while the financial burdens for vessels are increasing and the fishing rules are becoming increasingly tough , which means that most fleets will not be able to take full advantage of these opportunities .
Furthermore , companies from EU countries in this sector sometimes relocate production .
This is a series of issues that cause us to have reservations and concerns , and when these agreements are put into practice , these issues should be studied and evaluated in greater depth .

( DE ) Mr President , I should like to start by thanking once more the rapporteur Mr Schnellhardt for negotiating an excellent compromise ; one that , thank goodness , has also obtained the necessary majority in plenary .
We Austrians were particularly interested in the issue of ' Jagatee ' .
Together with Ministers Pröll and Seehofer in the Council , we succeeded in reaching a compromise that we see as perfectly workable .
Our German friends , too , now have a drink that they are allowed to produce exclusively under the name ' Hüttentee ' .
I believe that this issue has been resolved as well as possible and also amicably .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank you for the fact that here in Parliament we are striving to safeguard Europe 's cultural heritage .
Across the political divide , we share the goal of ensuring that the traditional technical or geographical designations of spirituous liquors are accurate , and that no other products can use the same designations .
Not only are we safeguarding cultural diversity but we are also protecting consumers ' rights .
I have voted the way I did so that all consumers , wherever they order a glass of vodka , whiskey , rum or Czech slivovice , can be sure that they are getting exactly what they want in their drink .
I have voted , therefore , in favour of being able to distinguish from the wording on the label whether something is other than a traditional form of liquor .
Spirits made from bananas , for example , rather than from potatoes , cereals or molasses , should not be called banana vodka , but banana drink or banana spirit .
Perhaps it would not be so difficult to defend European vodka in the WTO .
European consumers must be sure that what they are buying is what they asked for and not a fake .
It is similarly important for the Czech Republic that the labelling of Czech slivovice , which is traditionally distilled from plums , cannot be used also for , say , European distilled spirits that are plum-flavoured because plum juice has been added to the spirit .
Trust me , that cannot be compared to plums distilled in slivovice , and if anyone is unsure about that , I would ask them to come to my country and try some .
I would ask my vote in favour in the last nominal vote to be recorded because my equipment was unfortunately not working .
( PL ) Mr President , unfortunately , the majority of Members supported a broader definition of vodka .
This was a defeat for many centuries of tradition .
The rapporteur , and the Members who supported the broader definition supported principles which will lead to the production of vodka that is of a poorer quality and tastes worse .
This could , in turn , result in a vodka made from various agricultural products , including those of animal origin and post-production waste , which is dangerous to consumer health .
Products such as vodka are associated with certain regions of the world , which often boast many years of vodka-making tradition .
These are national products and we cannot tinker with them by introducing ambiguous definitions , which is exactly what we have done today .
This decision is wrong .
( SK ) When Slovakia acceded the EU , local producers were required to make changes to the designation of alcohol and spirits .
The producers were not overly enthusiastic , but they complied with the need for change in a disciplined manner .
The ' rum ' they had produced became ' um ' ; to have retained the designation ' rum ' it would have had to be produced from sugar cane alcohol .
For economic reasons , producers preferred to stick with alcohol produced from grain or sugar beet molasses .
This is one of the reasons why in Slovakia we have ' um ' instead of ' rum ' , the former being a spirit with a specific rum flavouring people consume because of its taste , which has evolved over generations and has not changed since EU accession .
This is why I sympathise with my fellow Members from Poland , Sweden , Finland , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania ; this is why I have signed and voted in favour of the amendment demanding that there be a strict definition of vodka , which would regard grain , potatoes and , potentially , sugar beet molasses as the only acceptable raw materials .
I do not consider the Schnellhardt compromise acceptable , since , although it would not change the labelling on vodkas made from grain , potatoes or molasses , it would involve products made from other raw materials being designated ' vodka made from ... ' followed by the name of the original ingredient .
This is such a simple matter , and EU definitions should be just as simple .
Since the amendment was not adopted , I have abstained from voting on the report by my colleague , Mr Schnellhardt .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to speak about the Schnellhardt document .
I am not an admirer of vodka , and I have no desire to advertise the product ; however , I believe that the compromise solution we have adopted today , likewise the one regarding the definition of vodka , is a step forward .
I voted for it , although the country I represent - Lithuania - wanted a much more specific definition .
I think the solutions we have adopted today do not fully satisfy the hopes of consumers and European Community vodka manufacturers , especially from our region .
However , I voted in favour of the proposal on the understanding that it was a compromise solution .
( DE ) Mr President , I , too , voted in favour of the Schnellhardt report , as all countries - including my own , Austria - have developed their own , often regional , specialities and spirit drinks .
The issue of ' Jagatee ' has already been mentioned .
It was a very important one as far as we were concerned , as I believe that such traditions , including in the field of spirit drinks , are virtually part of a country 's national identity .
Protecting production methods also guarantees high quality and , of course , guarantees that established producers and production methods are protected .
The fact that the ' vodka war ' , too , has now been ended was a further reason for my voting in favour of this report .
The new regulation on spirit drinks will bring greater clarity to the definition of this kind of drink and to the methods used to produce it .
The Schnellhardt report improves on the Commission 's proposal by making it clearer and by including some spirit drinks that are difficult to define and others that were omitted from the original proposal .
The report has our backing because it is a complete document that includes two unique Portuguese drinks initially overlooked by the Commission , namely Madeira rum and poncha da Madeira .
As regards vodka , the decision was taken to vote for an amendment calling for clear reference to the raw materials from which it is made when it is not produced from the traditional raw materials of potatoes , cereals and molasses .
This strikes us as an appropriate position because it promotes the traditional , original production values of vodka and because it is in the consumers ' interest to be given clarification of the products they consume .
On the other hand , this is also a precautionary position aimed at preventing the situation from recurring in the future whereby the production and placing on the market of , say , a traditional Portuguese drink is undermined .
Although this amendment was not adopted , we supported the report . Reference was made , albeit less clearly , to the raw material used in vodka production .
I voted in favour of the Schnellhardt report on the proposal for a regulation on the definition , description , presentation and labelling of spirit drinks , because I consider it vital that consumers should not be misled .
I consider it important that producers should pass on clear information on the nature of the product in order to ensure greater transparency in the market .
The purpose of adopting a single regulation bringing together the two existing regulations is to pursue a well-defined policy for spirit drinks , adapting the current law to the new technical requirements also defined by the World Trade Organisation .
The Commission has adopted this proposal for a regulation aimed at updating the Community law applicable to spirit drinks , which includes the definition of criteria for recognising new geographical indications .
The proposal is also aimed at providing clear information to the consumer on the nature of the product and forces producers to pass on all necessary information in order to ensure that the consumer is not misled .
This was one of the texts that needed a number of last-minute compromises between the various political groups in order to reach an acceptable proposal for a regulation on the definition , description , presentation and labelling of spirit drinks .
At the heart of the dispute was what is meant by the term ' vodka ' . Some said it should only be made from cereals , potatoes and / or sugar beet molasses , whereas others argued that the labelling should enable consumers to distinguish the raw material used in its manufacture .
As regards Portugal , I feel that there are no problems with the proposals contained in the regulation as regards geographical indications , which include the various forms of wine , grape marc and pear spirits , Madeira rum , fruit spirit from the Algarve and Buçaco , ginjinha portuguesa , licor de Singeverga , Portuguese anis and poncha da Madeira .
I will be voting for this report .
I accept the need to bring the rules respecting vodka more closely in line with those of whisky .
Yet at the same time I hope we will continue to pay attention to the plight of those small producers of ' apple and pear spirit ' within the United Kingdom who in the past have suffered from unfair discrimination .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report that is designed to improve the applicability , readability and clarity of the labelling of spirit drinks .
Spirits will , therefore , be in keeping with the new technical requirements , and particularly with the rules and standards of the World Trade Organisation .
The aim is to allow European producers of spirits to retain their indications of geographical origin on the world market .
It was possible to retain the definition of ' agricultural rum ' during the negotiations .
Producers and consumers approved the compromise reached concerning , in particular , the quality criteria .
In the French Overseas Departments , the definition of ' agricultural rum ' makes it possible for producers to set themselves apart from competitors from third countries .
Produced exclusively from sugar-cane juice , the designation ' agricultural rum ' is a guarantee of quality recognised by consumers .
The solution that has been found with regard to the question of vodka makes it possible also to retain the designation ' traditional vodka ' , produced from cereals , potatoes or molasses , without preventing production using other agricultural products .
In the latter case , the label must bear the indication ' Vodka produced from ... ' .
in writing . ( SV ) I voted today against the report by Mr Schnellhardt in the final vote .
The point of departure is the social situation in Europe , where alcohol consumption needs to be cut back on .
Work on better public health needs to be given the highest priority .
In this situation it is preposterous for the European Parliament to define vodka and thus to support the use of an alcoholic drink that is harmful to people when consumed in substantial quantities .
in writing . - ( FR ) The battle over vodka really took place at midday in the Chamber during the vote on the revision of the legislation on spirit drinks , a vote during which the European Parliament certainly displayed fairness , but not firmness , in defence of culinary and wine-growing traditions .
It displayed fairness inasmuch as it rightly considered that vodka , an alcoholic beverage traditionally produced in Poland , Sweden , Finland and in the Baltic States , deserves legal protection in the same way as other spirits with protected designation of origin such as gin , whisky or brandy .
Then there was confusion as producers who distil vodka other than from potatoes or cereals ( apparently there are producers in Italy , the United Kingdom and even in Belgium ) will be able to retain the designation ' vodka ' for their spirit products in return for a simple statement on the label .
When all is said and done , it is not consumers who will be the losers in this affair but , rather , a certain conception of cultural heritage and of food or wine-growing traditions that are strongly rooted in our regions and territories .
Europe must , however , encourage people to devote themselves to these traditional industries and not cause local producers to despair .
in writing . ( SV ) Today , the European Parliament has voted on the definition of vodka .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , including myself , chose in the first place to vote in favour of a narrow definition of vodka which , from the perspective of the vodka-producing countries , should contain only grain and potatoes .
Unfortunately , this narrow approach did not win through .
In the future , it will be possible for other raw materials , such as grapes , to be put into vodka .
It is a wording that I accepted in the end , even though it was not my first choice .
in writing . - ( PL ) On 19 June 2007 , the European Parliament voted on Horst Schnellhardt 's ( PPE ) report which included , among other measures , the proposal to update the rather vague definition of vodka that has been in force since 1989 .
The latest definition of vodka , which appears in the report before us , and which was drawn up by the European Parliament in collaboration with the Council ( on the basis of a proposal made by the German presidency ) , is not favourable from the point of view of countries who are seen as traditional , European vodka producers , especially Poland .
This proposal allows vodka to be produced from any agricultural materials , which is contrary to the tradition and history of vodka production , or the requests tabled by Poland and the Scandinavian countries .
That is why I have voted against the compromise drawn up by the Council and Parliament .
At the same time , I would like to express my support for narrowing the list of raw ingredients used to produce this beverage to include only grain , potatoes and sugar beet .
in writing . I have been reassured that the compromise reached will not be detrimental to Scottish whisky .
I therefore support this report .
in writing .
( PL ) I am voting against Mr Schnellhardt 's report on the ' definition , description , presentation and labelling of spirit drinks ' .
A broad definition of vodka undoubtedly devalues its reputation as it poses a real risk to its quality .
Introducing vodkas onto the market which are not made from the usual ingredients and will benefit from the reputation of vodkas made from grain and potatoes , will also mislead consumers .
As far as they are concerned , the use of the label ' vodka ' will imply that that this is a reputable , high quality product made from grain and potatoes .
The Polish PSE delegation have made every effort to ensure that the definition of vodka remains in line with Polish interests and have called for traditional recipes and regional methods be respected in the production of spirit drinks .
Our position has not , however , gain the support of the parliamentary majority .
An instrument must be created to standardise the rules applicable to the trade in cat and dog fur , and products containing such fur , on the Community market and to place a complete ban on its use , import or export in the Community area .
This is based not only on the ethical consideration that these animals can be pets but also on the need to ensure a level of protection and respect for the animals ' well-being , which the cruel method of rearing and slaughtering these animals ignores .
The confidence of consumers and European fur traders must be restored , an objective that can only be fulfilled by means of a common body of law banning this trade , whereby the legal requirements in all Member States as regards the banning of the sale and distribution of cat and dog fur are clarified , and the barriers to the smooth running of the internal market in the fur industry as a whole are removed .
Mindful of the fact that European citizens are concerned about this illicit , immoral trade , I feel that the adoption of a range of practical measures by the Union in this area will help bring the citizens closer to the European institutions .
I voted in favour of the Svensson report because I feel that by creating a range of measures banning the use of cat and dog fur , we will be helping to put an end to this deeply inhumane trade .
I also feel it is vital to create Community-level methods of analysis whereby the origin of cat and dog fur can effectively be monitored and to ban the import of , and export from , the European market of cat and dog fur .
It therefore makes no sense for there to be any kind of derogation aimed at creating exemptions when it comes to the placing on the market of such fur .
In response to a large number of petitions and to concerns that have been expressed , this regulation proposes banning the placing on the market and the import of , or export from , the Community of cat and dog fur and products containing such fur .
The ban would replace the different existing measures implemented by several Member States and aimed at prohibiting the production and / or marketing of furs from cats and dogs .
The proposal also aims at ensuring that information on new methods able to detect cat and dog fur and to distinguish it from other types of fur is made available to the Commission and exchanged between Member States .
The rapporteur strongly endorses this proposal , highlighting however the need to clearly eliminate any legal loopholes that would undermine the import and trade ban as such and emphasising the need to tighten customs checks as well as administrative - and , where possible , also criminal - sanctions applied by Member States in order to create a truly dissuasive framework that would enable this shameful and illegal trade to be brought to an end .
I voted in favour of banning the import into , and export from , the EU of cat and dog fur ( and of products containing such fur ) from 31 December 2008 .
It is particularly important in this regard that no derogations be allowed and that the Regulation not contribute towards the promotion of the fur trade .
I reject the idea of a labelling requirement as insufficient and too costly .
I also voted in favour of specific criminal measures , such as confiscation or revocation of licences , and I hope that the Member States will lay down and ensure the implementation of such penalties .
There should be a regular exchange of views on the implementation of the Regulation .
A ban on the import of cat and dog fur into the EU must be fully implemented .
That is why I cannot support the derogations suggested by the Commission , but fully support the report .
We welcome the Hökmark report on ' Broadband ' .
We supported amendments which point out that public authorities should make every effort to ensure that all citizens have access to broadband .
The benefits of broadband need to be extended to every section of the population of Europe , including Ireland .
We believe that public authorities play a crucial role in ensuring and speeding up the deployment of , and access to , broadband in less economically developed regions where it would be more difficult to create ICT infrastructure available at affordable cost and of sufficient standard to provide the necessary services , particularly in rural districts .
General access to broadband is an essential prerequisite for social and economic development and cohesion , and improved public services .
The benefits of broadband should not be reserved for the few , and ' Info-exclusion ' should be avoided at all costs .
in writing . - ( FR ) I regret that the Hökmark report did not take up the many suggestions from the Committee on Regional Development , for which I was the rapporteur .
Consequently , it sidelines the European Commission 's initial concern , namely that ' despite the general increase in broadband connectivity , access in more remote and rural regions is limited because of high costs due to low density of population and remoteness ' , and hence the search for solutions .
We must recognise that in certain areas of the European Union - isolated and rural areas and new Member States - there is a market failure that justifies intervention by public authorities and particularly by local and regional authorities thanks to the Structural Funds .
I had experience of this in the Limousin with the DORSAL project .
I am , therefore , pleased by the adoption of the two Socialist amendments that bring matters down to earth because it is in fact in these remote areas that information and communication technologies are most necessary and useful as they make it possible to overcome distances by facilitating relations between users and services - clients and providers - and between the public and public institutions , and to reduce the costs and timescales for the provision of services .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the Hökmark report on Building a European Policy on Broadband , because it is very important to encourage initiatives facilitating access for all to the Internet and , in general , to knowledge .
In accordance with the Lisbon objectives , it is essential to develop information technologies and , among those , broadband .
Even if access to new technologies in the most remote regions is an objective that the European Union has to pursue , account must also be taken of the persistent discrepancies within single regions where new technologies are concerned .
There are still many villages which , being too far from urban centres , still do not have access to the Internet or which have access to it but unduly slow access that does not allow satisfactory connections , while the region as a whole to which these villages belong is , overall , well served .
For the sake of cohesion , these intra-regional disparities should also be better addressed with a view to combating the digital divide .
in writing . ( SV ) In his explanatory statement for the report , the rapporteur pushes two contradictory arguments .
On the one hand , he points out that it is not the EU 's task to finance broadband development .
On the other hand , he maintains that EU policy needs to support a more rapid pace of innovation in order to make Europe into the world 's most dynamic market .
To conduct a broadband policy at EU level with general resources is in itself indefensible .
What would happen if this policy were to fail , as the Lisbon Strategy has ?
Firstly , the June List believes that the development of broadband is a task for the market .
It is the market 's actors who , through technological development in the framework of free competition , must ensure that demand for their services is created .
Secondly , the June List believes that political objectives in this area need to be formulated and implemented at national level in the framework of institutional competition in order to devise constructive solutions for encouraging the development of broadband .
The June List is therefore voting against the report as a whole .
We welcome the adoption of our amendment aimed at considering that ' general access to broadband is an essential prerequisite for social development and improved public services and that public authorities should make every effort to ensure that all citizens have access to broadband , thereby enabling its benefits to extend to every section of the population , particularly in the less-developed areas of the Union ' . We are very disappointed , however , by the rejection of our amendments , which included the following :
' whereas some parts of geographically highly fragmented outermost regions still have no access to essential ICT infrastructure such as broadband Internet ; whereas this applies to , for example , the Western Azores group ( Flores and Corvo ) , which thus has to suffer greater constraints on account of its remoteness and is therefore being penalised twice over ' ;
and ' considers it necessary to allow for the differences between individual outermost regions , one example being the constraint imposed by geographical fragmentation of the kind that exists in the Azores and the Canary Islands , which implies a need to guarantee the right of access to essential ICT infrastructure such as broadband Internet in all parts of the outermost regions to their inhabitants as a whole ' .
I am voting in favour of Gunnar Hökmark 's report on a European policy on broadband .
The rapporteur rightly stresses that the development of broadband Internet connections will contribute to the creation of advanced , global healthcare systems , as well as facilitating better access to professional training and government administrative services .
The 500 million European citizens who have broadband access will also provide Europe with the opportunity to become the leading , knowledge-based economy in the world .
I fully support the appeal , addressed to Member States , for broadband access in all schools , universities and educational establishments .
I think that improving the broadband infrastructure should be a priority and that significant funds should be earmarked for this purpose .
I am also sure that European Union funds should be used to modernise or replace broadband networks that do not provide access with a sufficient traffic volume .
in writing . - ( FR ) The dynamism of regional economies is strongly dependent on the level of development of information and communication technologies , among which is access to the Internet via high speed broadband connections .
The European Union must indisputably play a major role in promoting , among its Member States and its regions , the fight against the ' digital divide ' , in order to reduce the gap separating individuals , businesses and territories in terms of access to the knowledge society .
Government support , channelled within the framework of public-private partnerships , must , as a priority , target the areas that are ill served .
Wireless connections and mobile and satellite communications can deliver broadband to areas traditionally excluded from fixed-line networks , thus offering interesting and inexpensive solutions for people living in remote or relatively inaccessible areas , such as the island or mountain regions and , of course , the outermost regions .
In the outermost regions , these technologies are even more useful than elsewhere , as they make it possible to overcome distances and reduce costs and timescales by facilitating relations between users and their service providers , between clients and their suppliers or even between the public and the public authorities .
( DE ) Mr President , we abstained from voting on the Quisthoudt-Rowohl report , despite welcoming , of course , the fact that there was a 20 % growth in mutual trade between Russia and the European Union last year and individual Member States have closer cooperation with Russia , for example in the field of oil and gas .
Better cooperation should be sought in general terms , although the main focus on both sides must be on the resolution of the issue of the meat embargo .
The most important thing is to refute the Russian accusations of poor quality and meat smuggling without delay in order to prepare the ground for negotiations on the strategic partnership agreement due to expire at the end of the year .
Energy supplies are being used as a strategic , political weapon - a fact that should have been clear to us since the Russian-Ukrainian conflict if it was not clear already .
In this regard , we Europeans will have to start considering a single line and policy strategy already , so that we have a clear position with which to defy Russia in the foreseeable event that such things recur .
We should not forget , however , that our dependence is reciprocal , and that our objective must be to form a viable axis between Europe and Russia , which - in my opinion - should not apply only to trade relations .
I believe that there should be a public service obligation imposed on service providers of broadband technology .
As someone who lives in a village in Gloucestershire , that only within the last 12 months or so has had access to broadband , I know the economic consequences of exclusion .
I accept that the installation of broadband will start with the more populous and accessible regions , but it should not be allowed to stop until over 99 % of the population is covered .
Service providers cannot be allowed to cherry-pick without adverse consequences for peripheral regions and economies .
I will vote in favour of this report as it is going a long way in the right direction , if not quite reaching my final destination .
This report reflects the current climate of inter-capitalist contradictions between the major powers of the EU and Russia .
The report sets out its approach to intervention in Russia - which goes to show that it is nothing but a guide to neoliberal policy - designed to induce Russia to pander to the interests and ambitions of the major economic and financial groups in the EU .
Take , for example , the significant criticism of ' the bill recently introduced in the Russian Federation , which allows the government to reject foreign bids for majority stakes in Russian companies , thus prohibiting foreign ownership of more than 49 % in companies active in 39 strategic industries ' .
The majority in Parliament ' questions the bill itself as well as the choice and the growing number of industries that have been classified as strategic and essential to national security ' in Russia .
Furthermore , and perhaps because it reveals too much of the real intentions of this report , the following paragraph was removed : ' considers that this does not represent a move towards improving the investment climate and that this raises fundamental questions regarding the role of the State in a market economy and competition in key sectors of the economy ; considers that the ownership situation of companies , in Russia as in other countries , is a matter which can best be determined by the market ' .
Need one say more ?
Russia 's importance to the EU is based on a combination of factors such as its geography , its scale , its strategic position , its importance in terms of energy supply - specifically as an alternative to energy sources located in the Middle East - the memories that are particularly fresh in most of the Member States that joined the EU in the last two rounds of enlargement , trade and , of course , Russia 's role in international relations .
With regard to all of these factors , realism is needed .
Realism must not , however , be confused with ignorance of the difficulties nor with the absence of a framework of values .
Although improvements have been made in some areas , today 's Russia is far from being a free and open democracy that upholds human rights in full .
I therefore applaud the way in which the EU succeeded in speaking with one voice at the recent EU-Russia summit and the fact that it managed to raise a number of the Member States ' concerns and interests .
Although the results achieved are not ideal , an approach such as this is preferable ; an approach that recognises the multiplicity of European interests , that represents those interests and that remains faithful to its framework of values .
Mr President , the votes today on the Ferreira report demonstrate once again the relentless attack on countries in Europe that operate low corporation tax regimes .
The putting in place of a common consolidated corporation tax base means that there will be greater distribution of corporation tax receipts to the exchequers of the larger EU Member States at the expense of others .
Even if eight or more countries agreed to a common consolidated corporate tax base , this would in turn have the effect of invalidating existing bilateral tax treaties with Member States that chose to participate in a CCCTB arrangement .
Efforts are already being made by some Member States whereby corporation tax receipts would be made in the country where is sold .
This would be very bad news from an Irish perspective because many of the large companies in Ireland only manufacture or produce new goods and services that are sold in the larger EU Member States .
Let nobody be in any doubt - and in particular after the very hostile and negative comments recently made by the German Finance Minister - that Ireland and other countries with low corporation tax regimes face a real battle to keep their low corporation tax structure in place , which has kept employment high , unemployment low and has been one of the main planks of a successful economy .
( SK ) I have voted against the report by Mrs Ferreira because in section 13 the rapporteur proposes the introduction of a consolidated tax base throughout the EU .
In my opinion , tax base consolidation would be the first step towards consolidating the rates of corporate income tax . This would have negative implications by diminishing the competitive pressures to which Member States are exposed .
In my opinion tax competition is necessary , since it prompts states to introduce necessary reforms .
My country , Slovakia , is experiencing an economic boom thanks to the numerous reforms implemented by the former prime minister , Mikuláš Dzurinda .
Slovakia is an example of how simple , transparent , neutral rules generate more government revenue .
Tax revenue does not depend merely on the tax rate , but first and foremost on a broad tax base and the number of exemptions , allowances , special regimes , etc .
For this reason , I am strongly opposed to any corporate income tax harmonisation .
Parliament tends to use annual sectoral reports - in this case on Competition Policy 2005 - to present its maximalist positions .
This time , it is doing so in relation to the idea of implementing the liberalisation of the entire energy sector by 1 July 2007 , in relation to the harmonisation of business taxation ( with a common consolidated corporate tax base ) and in relation to the reduction and control of state aid , which is a distinctive characteristic of the EU 's competition policy .
It also makes a point of amending competition rules when they block the concentration and centralisation of capital .
All of this is done in the name of the neoliberal Lisbon Agenda .
Hence our vote against .
There are two points in particular that deserve to be highlighted .
First , we wish to restate our opposition to changes of strategy in relation to mergers and the impact of competition .
These changes are aimed at encouraging even bigger European multinationals to compete globally , instead of at looking into the impact of the concentration of businesses in national markets , while ' monopolies ' and public authorities continue to be criticised .
Mergers and acquisitions have trebled in value since 2003 .
Secondly , there has been an attempt to apply competition rules to services of general interest by the back door .
I voted against paragraph 13 and the overall report on Competition Policy 2005 .
I am opposed to the introduction of a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base as I believe it would be a first step toward tax harmonisation .
The Union 's competition policy is vitally important in an open market economy .
Measures in the area of fair trade in goods and services - for example , price reductions , increased quality , choice for consumers and the important development of technological innovation - are crucial prerequisites if we are to make the most of the openness of the markets .
We voted today for greater clarification of competition rules and greater legal certainty , in order that maximum benefit can be derived from all the measures that have been taken to improve the effectiveness , transparency and consistency of this policy .
The current approach seeks to go beyond a merely formal outlook with regard to competition rules , so that we can better assess the actual or potential effects of certain practices or structural changes in companies .
Decentralisation is a further positive trend in this regard .
I therefore voted in favour of the Ferreira report .
The EPLP believes that the general approach of the rapporteur was the right one .
However , on the issue of the common consolidated corporate tax base , the EPLP keeps its long established view that this is a case of national sovereignty .
As such , we voted against the second part of paragraph 13 .
UKIP refuses to support the recommendation of the Equitable Life enquiry on a number of grounds . Principally that recommendations include a common regulatory policy similar in concept to the common agricultural and fisheries policies , which have proved disastrous .
Also a recommendation that taxpayers should compensate Equitable Life Policy holders but not National Provident Institution policy holders or failed institutional pension scheme members whose case is no less convincing .
The EPLP supported the setting up of this committee because it believed Parliament could use it as an opportunity to provide clarification and learn lessons from the Equitable Life crisis and give a voice to the victims .
Several of the facts of the crisis and its aftermath were not included in the report , so the final result is not balanced .
The report has also been used by the opposition parties to attack the Labour government , while misleading the policyholders by falsely raising their expectations .
This vote is on a recommendation to adopt the findings of the report and not the report itself , following the committee vote there were no further opportunities to amend or improve the text .
Therefore the EPLP abstains on this vote .
UKIP refuses to support the recommendation of the Equitable Life inquiry on a number of grounds , principally that recommendations include a common regulatory policy similar in concept to the common agricultural and fisheries policies , which have proved disastrous .
Also a recommendation that taxpayers should compensate Equitable Life policyholders but not National Provident Institution policyholders or failed institutional pension scheme members whose case is no less convincing .
in writing . - ( NL ) As a member of the committee of inquiry , I have looked into the quality aspects of legislation .
The committee of inquiry has concluded that whilst the Commission monitors the formal transposition , it does not sufficiently monitor the application .
Is legislation transposed correctly and is it transposed in such a way as to ensure that its application complies with the objectives of European legislation ?
We as MEPs should also monitor to a far greater extent what happens with legislation in the Member States once we have approved it .
As I see it , the responsible rapporteur should monitor what is subsequently done in the Member States .
The rapporteur needs to sound the alarm bell when things go wrong and if necessary , get the Commission to take action .
I would also counsel in favour of including the national parliaments .
Structured cooperation between the Member States in the area of national supervisors leaves a great deal to be desired .
This is not only affecting supervision in the area of financial markets , but also in all kinds of other areas .
In the Member States , the number of independent supervisors is increasing .
The big question is : who supervises these supervisors ? And who supervises the quality of cross-border cooperation between supervisors ?
Is this not where the European Commission could play a substantial role ?
I will be abstaining on this report .
When the committee of inquiry was established , I thought it would be an important opportunity to learn important lessons from the near-collapse of Equitable Life and provide some explanations to those who were the victims .
The problem is that the report disappoints with sins of both omission and commission .
It falsely raises the hopes and expectations of policyholders and has been used in a blatant political way to attack the Government .
In the circumstances of a committee of inquiry report where there is no possibility , in line with our Rules , to table amendments , I cannot in all conscience vote in favour of the report .
UKIP refuses to support the recommendation of the Equitable Life enquiry on a number of grounds . Principally that recommendations include a common regulatory policy similar in concept to the common agricultural and fisheries policies , which have proved disastrous .
Also a recommendation that taxpayers should compensate Equitable Life policy holders but not National Provident Institution policy holders or failed institutional pension scheme members whose case is no less convincing .
Mr President , I should like to emphasise my opposition to Amendments 7 and 8 .
The vote was not controlled and I wish to express my opposition , because their content is beside the point . It touches on the principle of subsidiarity and I personally believe that the reference to exceptions weakens the principle of equal treatment .
I hope that the report will have a good result and will help everyone , without exceptions .
( DE ) Mr President , on behalf of the Members from the German Free Democratic Party , I should like to say that Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou 's report deals with a very important issue , namely measures enabling the combination of family life with a period of studies .
We have cast our vote to show our solidarity with those of our fellow Members who worked on it .
Nevertheless , I should like to emphasise on behalf of my colleagues that , in our opinion , this issue is one that should be dealt with exclusively at national level rather than by the European Union .
Accordingly , this Parliament should take the opportunity presented by this report to conduct a more careful examination of which issues fall within our competence and which would be better left to the nation-states .
in writing . ( SV ) People 's level of education is crucial to their personal development and to European growth and innovation .
The opportunity for students to have families is also very significant from an equality perspective .
It is therefore important for the EU Member States to invest more in creating good conditions for enabling people to study and have families at the same time .
In the light of this , we chose to vote in favour of the report in spite of the fact that most of the topics it addresses are national , regional and local , rather than European , responsibilities .
This report underlines the importance to all young people , men and women , of the benefits of high quality education and training that is adapted to the new demands of the market , and of constantly updating their knowledge in order to be able to enter the labour market and make lasting progress .
The level of education is an essential factor in the growth and innovation capacity of a society .
The OECD considers that adding an additional year to the average time spent in education increases the rate of growth by about 5 % immediately and by about 2.5 % in the long term .
In countries with a higher level of studies , there is less inequality between people , which is a major challenge for Portugal , a country with the highest inequality and the lowest educational training in the EU .
In general , the higher the level of studies reached , the higher the level of employment .
Looking at the whole population aged from 25 to 64 , the employment rate of those with higher education qualifications was 84 % in 2001 , that is to say , approximately 15 points higher than the average for people of all levels of education and almost 30 points higher than for those who had not progressed further than lower secondary education .
in writing .
( PL ) Mr President , I am voting in favour of Marie Panayotopolous-Cassiotou 's report on a regulatory framework for measures to reconcile family life and a period of study in the European Union .
Member States should give more consideration to the position of young women and men with families The report accurately stresses the need for a framework of policies that would provide more support for young people so that they can study and raise a family without needing to prioritise one of these goals .
The rapporteur suggests that the expectations of young women and men who both study and have families should be taken more into account in terms of educational systems and social structures .
This could involve offering favourable student insurance as well as providing social support and medical care which could also cover the student 's dependants .
Other measures could include reducing the tax burden or not taxing students with families .
As a university lecturer , I think that the report 's appeal to Member States to work together with higher education and vocational institutions to create a more flexible framework for studying , which takes advantage of new technology in the field of education , deserves our full support .
in writing . Work-life balance and work-study-life balance is essential for a healthy and happy workforce .
Young women who study and have childcare responsibilities need to be given greater support across the EU .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.55 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Membership of Parliament
Ladies and gentlemen , the competent Irish authorities have informed me that , with effect from today , 19 June 2007 , Mr Colm Burke has been appointed as a Member of the European Parliament in place of Mr Simon Coveney .
I should like to wish Mr Burke a very warm welcome to the European Parliament .
May your work give you great pleasure .
Mr President , I should like to join with you in welcoming Colm here , replacing our colleague Simon Coveney , who has been elected to the Irish Parliament .
I take this opportunity to wish Simon every success in his future in national politics .
We have an excellent replacement in Colm Burke , from Simon 's constituency of Cork South .
Thank you very much , Mrs Doyle .
With your good wishes it must be a success !

Pursuant to Rule 3 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , until such time as his credentials have been verified or a ruling has been given on any dispute , and provided that he has made a written declaration that he does not hold any office incompatible with that of Member of the European Parliament , Mr Burke may take his seat in Parliament and on its bodies and shall enjoy all the rights attaching thereto .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
( The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting were approved )
Conclusions of the G8 meeting - MDGs at the Midway Point ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
statements by the Council and the Commission on the conclusions of the G8 Summit ;
the report by Mrs Kinnock , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the Millennium Development Goals - the midway point .
The Council is not present .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I shall make a few comments , as I have been asked to do , about the outcome of the Heiligendamm Summit regarding development issues and issues relating to Africa .
The mere fact that these issues should once again have received particular attention was already in itself good news .
The reaffirmation of Africa as an important subject in the G8 process is a good thing , but it is obviously nothing special considering the actual results .
I quite understand the criticisms of those who are disappointed by the references to development aid .
The compromise adopted limits itself to simply reiterating the Gleneagles commitment , and I think we could have been more ambitious .
We know that the European Union of 27 will , for its part , be financing between 80 and 100 % of the G8 commitment to Africa .
We should not allow the G8 members to neglect their own commitment which , as I recall , consisted of doubling aid to Africa .
Some G8 members are not at all on the right track for honouring this commitment .
Overall American aid , for example , has fallen by 20 % and Japan 's by 10 % , and they should certainly do more .
With regard to questions of governance as well as fundamental principles of development policy , I am reasonably happy that our approach to good governance , that is to say one that is multidimensional and holistic , as well as the wording that we suggested , have been retained in the final declaration on Africa .
Our governance strategy is focused on results and on offering incentives for reform to those countries that are engaged in appropriate and credible reforms of governance based on sound political will .
I am pleased to highlight the fact that the work of the G8 Summit this year focused particularly on education : that is undoubtedly one of our most valuable contributions .
The declaration clearly expresses the necessity for financing those needs that are not covered and that are estimated to have a monetary value of USD 500 million for 2007 in all the countries that come under the Fast Track Initiative .
I am also delighted with the final text on financial resources for health issues , for the Global Fund and for programmes for the prevention of transmission from mother to child .
The USD 60 billion that were promised for the next few years in order to combat HIV / AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis represent a clear and strict commitment in comparison with the cautious language that was used initially and that omitted any definite indication of the financial resources required .
I am going to conclude my remarks concerning the G8 with an observation of a more general nature .
The beauty contest of figures and declarations that the G8 seems to have become where development is concerned does not win over our African partners .
Quite the contrary , as the latter confront us with the lack of results on the ground and , above all , with our lack of respect for our commitments .
They do so all the more forcibly , moreover , having found an alternative model in China .
Not only is China purchasing huge amounts of raw materials in Africa , but it is constructing roads , ministries and hospitals in the months following the request it received and the promise it made .
That is quite a coup when our own procedures which , moreover , were basically established by the Council and the European Parliament , impose upon us de facto timescales of several years between the time when the agreement was reached and the time when it will actually be implemented .
We must also , however , learn a lesson where the G8 is concerned : while Africa is increasingly developing relations with emerging countries , the G8 beauty contest is going to become a side show which will become less and less convincing if we do not manage to include China and the other emerging countries in international initiatives on Africa and development .
It is , indeed , for this reason that I shall be going to China at the beginning of July : to talk about Africa with Chinese colleagues .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before I finish , I should like to say a few words about Mrs Kinnock 's report and therefore about the Millennium Development Goals at the midway point , the current relevance of which seems to me to be quite indisputable .
I remain convinced that the Millennium Goals are within our reach , provided , of course , that all those active in development - not only the sponsors but also partner countries - honour their commitments .
I should also like to emphasise the European Union 's firm and total commitment in this crucial period of implementing those goals .
On this point , I should like , therefore , to make a few observations - and , indeed , express a few reservations - regarding the detail of the message contained in the report .
If I am naturally very broadly in agreement with the content of this report , I am all the same a little surprised by the mixed message that the report sends out to the world regarding the European Union 's performance as a donor .
I should like to point out that the European Union is - and let us not forget this - the main provider of development aid , in terms of volume as well as in terms of percentage of gross domestic income : we devote EUR 100 per head to it , compared with the figures of only EUR 69 contributed by Japan and of EUR 53 contributed by the United States .
This is not a reason for wallowing in blissful self-satisfaction , of course , because progress is obviously possible and necessary in this area .
Such progress is , moreover , planned as the European Union is committed to it through the European Consensus on Development .
The report laments the fact that the increase in aid from certain Member States results partly from debt cancellation .
I agree , of course , with the thrust of this remark or this reservation .
Having said that , even leaving aside debt relief , aid from the European Union has increased , which is not the case where the other major donors are concerned .
We are , nonetheless , obviously sensitive to this argument , and that is why the Commission has invited the Member States to establish , by the end of the year , a national schedule showing the budget increases that will allow the Member States to achieve their development aid objectives by 2010 .
Moreover , we must not underestimate either the effectiveness measures or the multiplier effect of dividing the work between the Commission and the Member States . Nor must we underestimate the value of aligning ourselves with the strategies and procedures of partner countries or , still less , the growing recourse to budget support , which is considerable .
In these areas too , the European Union is in a position of undisputed leadership .
I note , however , a certain unease regarding budget support which , nevertheless , is the preferred instrument of partnership , reflecting confidence between partners who are equal in terms of rights and duties .
By supporting national policies and involving ourselves in the budget process , we are putting in place the instrument best suited to appropriation by the partner countries , an arrangement that also offers greater predictability and exceptional flexibility .
Of course , it is still possible to improve the mechanism .
That is the purpose of the contract for the Millennium Goals on which the Commission is currently working - a matter on which I touched briefly yesterday when I replied in committee to our colleague , Mr van den Berg - and we shall be able , in the weeks ahead , to discuss with you the criteria and the conditions of this contract for the Millennium Goals .
Those are just a few remarks . Otherwise , I believe that it is vital to join forces in pursuit of the Millennium Goals .
Thanks to our approach , developing countries will receive a clear message of solidarity from the European Union , which can only be a support to them in expressing their own determination .
In conclusion , I must thank Mrs Kinnock for this very significant report and congratulate her on it . It does put the issues in their proper context .
It is an extremely useful contribution and a constant source of inspiration for the work of the Commission .
rapporteur . - Mr President , thank you very much for being here , giving the status that these issues deserve in this Parliament .
I should also like to thank the Commissioner for his kind remarks .
I think many of us here deeply regret the fact that the Council chose not to be represented here today in discussions on the G8 and the Millennium Development Goals .
We are sorry that priorities took them elsewhere .
My report is an opportunity at the midway point to assess progress or otherwise on meeting the Millennium Development Goals .
Of course the reality is that many sub-Saharan countries are not on track to meet even one of the MDGs .
Virtually no country in Africa is on track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals for child and maternal health .
That is why our committee agreed that the European Union should continue to lead on efforts to support sexual and reproductive health rights through funding and other support .
In 2005 , the leaders of the rich world met at the G8 Summit in Gleneagles and undertook to double annual aid to poor countries to USD 50 billion , and to give 100 % debt cancellation .
In May 2005 , the EU Council had already set the agenda for the Gleneagles Summit which took place in July of that year .
They had agreed - and this is important - a time-bound commitment to meeting the 0.7 % of GNI and 100 % debt relief .
At the time of writing my report , it was clear that were serious questions of credibility in relation to certain Member States of the European Union .
This is where I have a fundamental disagreement with the Commissioner .
Excluding debt relief , a number of Member States are falling behind .
The Iraq and Nigerian debt deals have been counted in such a way as to distort the true picture on real aid .
It is estimated that it amounted to some USD 13 billion in 2006 .
In 2010 , when aid to Africa is supposed to reach USD 50 billion a year , debt relief would have been largely accounted for and would therefore no longer bolster the amount of aid a country gives .
The shortfall is now estimated by Oxfam to be an absolutely shocking USD 30 billion .
At the G8 , we saw efforts by some Member States of the European Union to press for the promises to be met .
But what we saw , as you said Commissioner , was a reiteration and confirmation of the 2005 promises to increase aid .
We are still lacking clear timetables and binding practical commitments .
We need more specifics and clear financial pledges which will , for instance , fill in the funding gaps for the countries endorsed by the Education Fast Track Initiative .
We also need clarity on the pledge to scale up universal access to HIV / Aids .
They talk about 5 million people in 2010 .
We want to know whether this is a global figure , because , if it is , it should be more like 10 million .
If it only applies to Africa , then the communiqué is presenting a somewhat different picture .
Of course , again , there is no specific target date .
The reality is that developing countries do not want some kind of cheque in the post or some kind of promissory note .
They want to be able to put credible and costed plans in place , as our own governments do .
On climate change , all the G8s except the US and Russia agreed to cut emissions by half by 2050 .
The US commitment to join in with the UN efforts was welcome .
However , again I have to say that there were no clear binding targets , and even the 50 % by 2050 target had no base year agreed by the G8 in Germany .
There is also no agreed intention to limit climate change to 2 ° C. In the context of the importance we attach to debt relief and to pledges on aid , we know that the whole issue of trade justice continues to elude us .
Last year in the G8 in St Petersburg they issued a grand clarion call for the Doha Round to reach a successful conclusion , but what you see , in fact , is a far cry from what developing countries thought they were signing up to when they signed up to a Doha development round .
All the G8 in Germany did was to repeat what they said in St Petersburg a year ago .
On EPAs , I particularly recommend Mr van den Berg 's amendment , which unfortunately was left out of the text that you have here because an error was made when the compilation took place .
I think it makes a very valuable addition to the debate on EPAs .
Finally , I would like to say that what we need to see now is an absolute change of gear .
In 2005 , thousands of our citizens across the world marched under the banner of making poverty history .
We are seeing that aid really works .
There are real improvements in reducing poverty , getting children into school , improving health and saving lives .
However , there has to be real social and political change , as well as the growing understanding that what we are calling for here is not for charity but rather for justice for the world 's developing countries .
( Applause )
Thank you for your excellent work , Mrs Kinnock , and congratulations on your report .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Millennium Development Goals , that were laid down in 2000 , are ambitious plans to drastically reduce world poverty by 2015 .
At the end of this month , we are half-way through this period , but not half-way in terms of realising these goals , unfortunately , not by a long shot .
The development agenda is running way behind schedule .
There are still too many people dying of starvation , too many children still have no access to schooling , too many women are still disadvantaged and AIDS , malaria and TBC are still claiming too many victims , and I could go on for some time , unfortunately .

It is vital that the quality and quantity of the aid should improve , and much depends on the political will in the countries .
Needless to say , all countries must deliver on their promise to set aside 0.7 % of the Gross Domestic Product for development aid .
This is not just about money , though .
It is mainly about better and more effective aid , and about better coordination of this aid .
Phantom aid , whereby the money is mainly spent on consultants , assessment reports and studies , must be reduced .
On behalf of my group , I should like to broach a number of other points .
First of all , I should like to draw your attention to the importance of transparency of financial flows .
It must be clear where the monies end up .
Secondly , with regard to debt reduction , whilst debts are a major problem to many countries , their reduction cannot and indeed , should not , be a reward for mismanagement by governments .
This is why debt reduction is only possible under strict conditions , including good governance and transparency .
It must be guaranteed that the resources which have become available are actually spent on fighting poverty .
Thirdly , I should like to draw your attention to the importance of trade .
Trade and the opening up of markets can , under certain conditions , represent a tremendous driving force for economic growth .
Countries must be able to count on our support in this .
As for intellectual property rights , I should like to caution against throwing out the baby with the bath water .
It must remain appealing for industry to continue to do research into the fight against poverty-related diseases .
A certain level of protection for patents of intellectual property rights is needed for this .
Finally , with regard to sexual and reproductive health , many women in developing countries run high risks , even risking their own lives , during and after pregnancy .
Many women die unnecessarily from it . Aid in this area is extremely urgent .
This is why we are in favour of more aid for these women .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , unfortunately , the Council is absent , something which the Socialist Group in the European Parliament is deeply disappointed about .
In 2000 , 191 world leaders committed to the Millennium Declaration to stamp out extreme poverty in the world by 2015 and to improve the health and well-being of the poorest .
At the moment , one in five of the world 's population has no access to basic social needs , including education and clean drinking water .
In exactly two and a half weeks ' time , we will be half-way towards the MDG deadline .
The excellent report by Mrs Kinnock , which we back fully , takes stock of what we have achieved thus far .
Over the past seven and a half years , people have worked hard on realising these goals , and a number of great successes have been achieved .
Particularly in Asia , where there has been a major reduction in poverty .
The number of people who have to survive on less than 1 dollar per day has decreased there by over a quarter of a billion people since 1990 .
In Central America too , things are visibly on the up .
In both regions , the number of undernourished children has decreased drastically .
Child mortality has been cut by many percentage points .
Hundreds of thousands of people in Central America and Asia have been lifted out of poverty , something which these regions and the whole world should be proud of .
What is still going wrong in Asia and Central America is the yawning gap between the rich and the poor .
We have to help implement strategies for a fairer distribution of natural resources and of soil , for fairer taxes , less corruption and good governance .
Too many people , despite all the growth and progress , are still deprived of basic social needs .
This is what the focus of European aid programmes , via civil society , should be .
On one continent , the Millennium Goals have been getting further away instead of closer in recent years .
Africa , despite separate valiant achievements , despite the efforts of many , is going downhill .
It is unlikely that any of these Millennium Goals will be met there on time .
Three quarters of the population suffer from AIDS / HIV in Sub-Saharan Africa .
The number of starving people has risen in that region by many tens of millions .
How can we change the mindset of the groups that are successful ?
How can we help African businesspeople , women 's cooperatives and micro-credit banks help turn the tide ?
First of all , by placing centre-stage not only the victims , but also the successes , including , for example , the end of the wars , in Mozambique among other places , not to mention top African diplomats such as Kofi Annan , fashion houses from Abuja , wine farmers from South Africa , pilots from Ghana , top football players from across Africa and female ICT entrepreneurs .
They are the ones who will change Africa .
They are the ones that I want to form partnerships with .
They are the ones on whom we should focus our European aid .
They must receive trade benefits instead of being pestered with our dumped goods .
It is time for a new beginning . A turning point , albeit an uphill one .
After all , if we combine quality and national resources with our genuine cooperation in the areas of aid and trade , Africa can rise from the ashes .
Genuine cooperation means that we need to focus the European Development Fund and our aid budgets more on the Millennium Goals , education and health care .
You are right , Commissioner , MDG contracts are a good way of achieving this .
This also includes the G8 , which set real deadlines for major tasks .
Genuine cooperation means generous economic partnership agreements .
African businesspeople must be able to place their products on our markets with added value .
If GSP-plus can help in this , then it should .
Let us build an African team made up of good players , of winners , and let us give the African team the chance of winning this football game in the second half of the 2015 match for the MDGs .
This will benefit Africa , and indeed , the rest of the world .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , it is probably not a coincidence that a great deal of Dutch is being spoken in a debate on development cooperation , something which pleases me enormously .
Judging from the G8 results , it is safe to say that the process of achieving the Millennium Development Goals is starting to become a case of one step forward and two steps back .
Indeed , the subject of Africa did come up briefly in Heiligendamm , even if it was with the intention of not alienating Bono and Bob Geldof .
These pledges from 2005 were once again reiterated , but no fresh commitments were made , let alone a timetable .
I share Mrs Kinnock 's concern that , at this rate , we will not get there by 2015 .
Moreover , the Kinnock report has become a very even-handed document , in which our group 's concerns have also been taken into consideration .
Let me list them for you briefly .
Firstly , the 0.7 % should not be an obsession .
The quality and effectiveness of the aid granted are at least as important as the quantity .
The so-called development spending of certain governments leaves many questions unanswered , and coordination often leaves something to be desired .
Secondly , more direct budgetary aid is inevitable if we want to achieve the MDG goals , but this should be conditional , primarily upon good governance and also on parliamentary control being carried out as a matter of vital importance .
Thirdly , we are in favour of further debt reduction .
Not linear , but conditional .
The capital that becomes available in this way could be paid into a fund that is first and foremost channelled into education and health care .
I should like to finish off by saying that the debate about whether we should give priority to achieving the MDGs or aid for trade is a false dilemma which we do not wish to get involved in .
As far as we are concerned , it is not a question of either / or , but of both / and .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , only a joint , global effort can help Africa today .
Europe 's persistent funding on so-called reproductive rights , including abortion , poses a fundamental obstacle to this unity .
From both a moral and a medical point of view , abortion is not the answer to the problem of childbirth-related deaths in Africa .
If we want to help African women in this field , we should send medical aid , provide drinking water , education and medical facilities .
Using European Union resources to fund abortion in Africa is contrary to the principles of providing aid .
It forces all European Union citizens to become indirectly involved in this matter .
It is also a form of moral imperialism directed towards Africa , which is an attitude that cannot be condoned in this House .
That is why I ask you to vote against points 40 and 41 in the report .
I particularly direct this appeal to the Christian Democrat Members in this House .
If my appeal is not successful , we will not be able to support this report .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are now conducting a mid-term review of the great efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals , and the assessment is poor - that much emerges clearly from Mrs Kinnock 's report .
My group supports this good report most emphatically .
If the political situation continues like this , many developing countries , particularly in Africa , will not achieve the Millennium Development Goals and most industrialised countries will not keep their promises to provide financial assistance .
Unfortunately , the G8 Summit in Heiligendamm in Germany was one more example of this .
Since 1999 , at two-year intervals , the same promises have been made and broken time and again .
This casts doubt on the credibility of the European Union in the eyes of many developing countries .
The promises made in Heiligendamm are now being offset against the promises made in Gleneagles .
Sixty billion US dollars for the Global Fund , but we are being told that that will be offset against the broken promises from Gleneagles .
This is what is known as double-entry book-keeping .
It is an attempt to cause confusion with figures without obligating individual countries .
I thought it was very good that the Commissioner expressed himself very clearly in this connection : that is precisely what is needed .
It is Parliament 's responsibility to state things clearly and exert the pressure needed to ensure that at least the European Union keeps to its progressive plan for achieving the 0.7 % target for Official Development Assistance by 2015 exactly and without book-keeping tricks .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we are taking stock of the G8 Summit .
This G8 Summit issued a declaration on climate change that is quite clearly worthless .
I endorse the statements made by environmental organisations ; Greenpeace said that it was absolutely insufficient , and Friends of the Earth Germany described the promises given as ' woolly ' .
No binding commitments emerged .
I endorse what Commissioner Michel said about there not having been nearly enough discussion on Africa .
Debt relief for the poorest countries is still overdue .
Since this is also a debate on the G8 Summit as a whole , however , I should like to remind the House once more that these G8 countries have no legitimacy whatsoever .
They are self-appointed world leaders .
This G8 Summit cost EUR 100 million , the fence around Heiligendamm alone costing EUR 12.5 million of this .
There was a very successful 80 000-strong demonstration against this Summit , and the rioting - which was wrong and regrettable - was used by the police to subsequently abandon the rule of law .
For example , we now know that undercover police investigators were among the demonstrators and probably also incited them to violence .
Lawyers were hardly able to do their jobs there , and judges became an extension of the police .
The lawyers had a long fight to even be allowed through to the prisoners .
Prison cages were set up , which Amnesty International has criticised in no uncertain terms and described as wrong .
The Summit was surrounded by repression worthy of a police state .
One does not always have to look far to find repression of citizens ; human rights are being trodden underfoot in the midst of the European Union , in the context of this G8 Summit .
Mr President , first I do not think that any citizen in the world has confidence in this G8 summit .
It is reminiscent of the feudal lords of 400 years ago , who met and decided certain things without giving the people a say .
This is modern feudalism .
The G8 will meet and a lottery will be held for eight delegates from poor countries to attend .
We are talking about Africa .
Tell me the name of one large hospital in the whole of Africa .
Would you go to Tanzania , Mr President , if you had a serious health problem ?
You would go to Germany or England .
Tell me the name of one large bank with its headquarters in Africa .
All the big banks to which we entrust our money are in the northern hemisphere .
This is a special type of racism to which we should finally admit . Or at the very least there is tolerance of a type of racism towards these countries .
What we give them are the tips we give someone who cleans our windows .
We need a decision , an ideology whereby all citizens of the world have the same rights to democracy and to health and to involvement in decisions which concern them .
I do not think that what is happening today is democracy .
We are sharing the wealth , we are creating cancer throughout the world , while the superpower - America - does not agree to support Kyoto , with the result that death and global warming are affecting everyone , and the people have no say .
We therefore need more democracy , better access and more respect for citizens , especially in countries where democracy is not yet shining brightly enough .
We must be careful , because otherwise we shall get a new AIDS from Africa , which will be more catastrophic than this AIDS which sends many citizens from the northern hemisphere to the other world .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to see that the Commissioner for Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Aid is back with us .
We know how busy his schedule is .
His leave of absence as Commissioner to play an active role in Belgium 's parliamentary elections may have come to an end - and this European Commissioner 's leave of absence has certainly not been in vain for his party , which I should like to congratulate him on .
Nonetheless , we have to note with admiration and some surprise that he remains active on both fronts , even after his leave : here in this Chamber as the Commissioner for Development Cooperation , but also in Brussels where feverish activity is prevailing as a new Belgian Government is being formed and where today , the Commissioner is urging my country 's French-speaking Green Party to join the government .
Indeed , it is not easy combining the job of European Commissioner with that of Belgium 's deputy ' informateur ' investigating on behalf of the crown whether a proposed cabinet formation will succeed .
The question whether this mix may not lead to possible bias and whether the Commission 's neutrality is in the balance as a result , probably comes into this too .
Quite apart from this comment , it would be better - and I am now referring to the Kinnock report - to turn our attention to the question of how scientific our approach is towards the Millennium Goals .
This provocative question was put by Amir Attaran , an authority in development cooperation at the University of Ottawa in Canada .
Indeed , Mr Attaran very much questions the scientific basis underpinning these objectives and above all , the way in which achieving these is being measured .
He mentions , by way of example , the objective concerning malaria , and states that even institutions such as the World Health Organisation admit that they are not certain of the relevant data that is being provided .
By accepting uncertain statistics as the truth , the UN is building a set of Millennium Objectives on quicksand , according to Mr Attaran .
Scientific reliability should be the first concern in development cooperation too .
It is time we held a thorough debate on this very subject .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur and my colleagues for the excellent work achieved and for the support given to my amendments within the Committee on Development .
I would like to spend some time on a few points .
The fight against AIDS , particularly in the light of the UN 's recent reports and the lack of progress made so far in the Millennium Development Goals , must continue to be a priority for the international community , an unbreakable commitment and a responsibility to be borne by the industrialised countries . This is because it is impossible to carry on talking of economic development , education and health infrastructure if in fact the active population that is able to carry out these reforms is being decimated day after day , despite the contribution of therapies and medicines that are clearly not yet adequate or not effective enough .
According to the UNAIDS report , there were between 4 and 6 million new cases in 2006 , with 3 million deaths in the same year , two-thirds of which were in sub-Saharan Africa , the region where the Millennium Development Goals are mainly applicable .
This is over 8 000 deaths a day , a figure which is truly untenable .
With regard to this struggle and the struggle against poverty in general we are very far from our roadmap and we can no longer accept the excuses of those countries - my own included , unfortunately - which have not yet met the commitments they have promised to the international community , bearing in mind the fact that these are already minimal .
We must ask the governments of the donor countries , in addition , not only for greater efficiency in development aid , but also for full consistency with their own trade policies , because supporting development means above all giving countries in difficulty the chance to raise themselves up with their own resources .
On the horizon there are , then , new challenges , stakes , tests and commitments .
My hope is that this time Europe will really be able to play the role that it ought to .
Mr President , at the end of the Second World War , when the concentration camps were liberated , we said , ' Never again ' : there would never again be such an example of man 's inhumanity to man .
We in this House , and all those at the G8 last week , know that there are millions of children under the age of five dying each year for want of vaccines that we , in what is called the West , have had for the last 30 years .
This is an even greater insult than what happened in those concentration camps , because we know it is happening .
It is happening in front of our eyes .
And what have we done ?
We have abdicated leadership .
We have abdicated leadership to rock stars - and thank God for them , because if they were not there to apply pressure , who would do so ?
This is a devastating lack of leadership in Europe .
When we talk about communicating Europe , we think we can talk to people about constitutional treaties and all of that .
It is nonsense .
As I have said before , people are not talking about constitutional treaties in pubs in Dublin or in restaurants in Germany .
But look at the people who went to Gleneagles , who took time off work to march to Gleneagles , who went to all of those rock concerts about the Third World .
Why are we not giving those people leadership ?
Where are the statesmen and stateswomen of Europe ?
All we have are politicians - and poor politicians at that .
No Delors , no Kohl .
This issue needs leadership , and the G8 let us down .
They did not give the leadership that this issue deserves , and this House has to insist that sort of standard does not continue .
We must insist that politicians in the West , within the European Union and within the G8 take real leadership on this issue .
Nothing else is acceptable and you , Mr President , have a part to play in this .
You could give us leadership in this House .
You could influence those who have the ability to change this .
We have the ability to change this .
We must not accept these standards .
The G8 was a grave disappointment to people .
It showed that we are really lacking in statesmen , in stateswomen and in leaders , and I hope that changes .
Thank you , Mr Mitchell .
I appreciate the fact that you place some importance on the President of the European Parliament , but he was not invited to Heiligendamm .
( PT ) The genocide in Darfur , serious crises in Zimbabwe , Somalia , Ethiopia and Nigeria , corruption , pandemics , desertification , the flow of arms and the race for oil and other natural resources ; all of these are factors fomenting further conflict in Africa and adding to the number of people desperate enough to risk their lives in order to get into Europe or to a place where they can find better conditions .
It is therefore depressing to see the G8 limiting themselves to repeating the Gleneagles promises that have not been kept .
At the halfway mark , as Mrs Kinnock 's report correctly says , the Millennium Goals have yet to be given due priority by European governments and the Commission .
In Africa , in particular , the Millennium Goals must enhance any security and development strategy , and in turn the joint cooperation strategy to be adopted at the EU-Africa summit to be held in December must not be just another photo opportunity .
Following the summit the European and African authorities must make phased commitments to meeting the Millennium Goals and must propose strategies that are above governments and that go beyond a blinkered , unseemly bout of one-upmanship with China .
Making commitments to strengthening democratic and civil society institutions in African countries includes investing in those that are fighting for human rights , for women 's rights and for civil liberties in Africa .
It also involves the EU and its African partners being tough with one another when it comes to compliance with already binding agreements such as Cotonou .
Without justice and the rule of law , there will be no good governance and , still less , sustainable development .
Mr President , I should like to make two points concerning the midway point for the Millennium Development Goals .
First , it is quite obvious that the eradication of poverty in the world is one of the most important challenges of the 21st century for the whole of mankind .
For me , as a medical doctor , it is perfectly clear that poverty and diseases such as HIV / AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis go hand in hand , creating a ' tsunami ' that wipes out millions of lives a year .
It is unfortunate that this awful tragedy has now become a bland , everyday statistic .
The eradication of poverty presupposes the elimination of those diseases and the strengthening of the health system in Africa through the provision of at least the projected USD 60 billion over the coming years by the G8 countries .
Today 's world has a chance to consign those diseases to the history books , and we have to succeed .
I also welcome the G8 decision to cancel 100 % of the outstanding obligations of the highly indebted poor countries to the IMF , the World Bank and the African Development Bank .
The MDGs can be achieved only in peaceful conditions , which means that many local military conflicts in Africa must be ended , especially the lengthy crisis in Darfur that has disregarded elementary human rights .
Secondly , I should like to point out that the new Member States , which just recently were recipients of official development assistance and which , for several years , have seen a rapid growth in their GDP , should increase their contributions , not only meet their fixed goals .
Naturally , I support the Kinnock report .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to three issues .
Unfortunately , the level of aid provided by a Union of fifteen Member States , calculated as a percentage of GDP and earmarked for the millennium goals , is decreasing .
The majority of countries still have not achieved even the intermediate goal of 0.33 % .
In the meantime , funding for basic education needs amounts to only 23 % and funding for healthcare stands at 36 % .
Only 18 out of the 60 countries in need have had their foreign debt cancelled .
These decisions are important , not only because they reduce the often unbearable financial burden borne by these countries , but also because , as the World Bank stated , countries whose debts have been reduced have doubled their spending on fighting poverty .
Thirdly , the most effective means of helping poor countries is to ensure they have access to the markets of the world 's most developed countries , as well as fostering the development of small enterprises and micro-companies in poor countries .
Finally , it is also important to support the development of local governments , NGOs and to establish a central management system for aid from the European Union 's budget , as this is the only way of improving effectiveness and limiting red tape and corruption .
( DA ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Kinnock for a brilliant report on the mid-term review of the Millennium Development Goals .
I am particularly pleased that we are demanding a reappraisal of trade , development and agricultural aid .
Our disgraceful practice of giving with one hand and taking away - indeed , often taking away more - with the other must cease .
At the same time , the report refers to a whole range of extremely relevant areas of aid .
That being said , it was only with difficulty that we got it through the Committee on Development .
Many amendments by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats were voted down by only small margins , and if they had been adopted we should have ended up with a much watered-down report .
Otherwise , the report contains nothing other than what , a long time ago , the Member States , solemnly and with much attention on them , promised the poor , together with severe criticism of the fact that the promises were not fulfilled .
The report clearly points out that the practice of using debt remission as a smart way of fulfilling one 's obligations is reprehensible .
Debt is rightly often written down or often completely written off in the donor countries , and as a result the countries that obtain money by way of aid in this way are the rich donor countries .
We cannot in all decency allow that to happen , and the whole of Parliament should unite in rejecting this kind of trickery .
We should persist in the criticism and self-criticism .
Our credibility is damaged , as promises should be kept .
The Millennium Development Goals , as well as the goals set out in last week 's pompous G8 speeches on the problems of Africa , are important , and the fact that the Council has not even taken the trouble to be in this House today does of course say something about how serious an attitude it has towards its promises .
The fact is that it is difficult to see how we are to take the Council seriously when it does not take itself seriously .
Attention should not , however , be directed only towards how the Member States can escape what is demanded of them or get away as lightly as possible from fulfilling the requirements .
What we should all agree on is how we are to achieve our goal of halving poverty before 2015 .
If , moreover , we are to retain our credibility with developing countries , we must also keep a close eye on whether we are in actual fact doing what we promise .
We should make efforts to find ways in which such monitoring can take place .
None of us should in future be able to get away unnoticed with ignoring our obligations .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the G8 has been a resounding failure in the fight against poverty and global warming .
The tired rituals of a summit that , although legitimate , is now anti-historical , given the resistance to the inclusion of new emerging countries such as Brazil , South Africa , China and India , are reflected in the lack of substance of its final declarations .
In 2005 , in Scotland , the rich countries solemnly undertook to increase public development aid to 50 billion dollars per year by 2010 , half of which was supposed to be given to Africa , so as to ensure that the Millennium Development Goals set by the United Nations for 2015 would be achieved .
Two years on , as shown by the Africa Progress Panel chaired by Kofi Annan , actual appropriations represent only 10 % of what was promised .
As though nothing were the matter , in Rostock the G8 countries issued a new commitment to grant funding of 60 billion dollars to combat AIDS , all in very vague and deliberately misleading terms .
No deadline was set and half of the amount is in fact recycled from commitments already made by the US Administration up to 2013 .
The increase of 3 billion per year over the commitments already made by the other governments , including the European ones , is completely insufficient to tackle the humanitarian emergency of AIDS and other pandemics .
On global warming a failure to make a decision was welcomed as a success .
The result of three days of meetings , at a cost of 120 million euros , was to send back to the UN a possible agreement on restricting the quantities of carbon dioxide to be emitted into the atmosphere .
It will not be possible to achieve any promise without calling into question the dominant economic and social models .
( SV ) Mr President , it is gratifying that the European Parliament 's legal service has established that it is wrong to use the non-ratified EU Constitution as a reference in this report .
The June List , which I represent , has consistently emphasised that it is reprehensible to refer to the EU Constitution , given that the populations in two of the EU Member States have clearly and unambiguously rejected it in referendums .
If it is to be possible for the Constitution to be used as a legal basis or reference , it needs to be ratified unanimously .
I would appeal to this House to respect this state of affairs in future .
The world 's rich countries have a moral duty to spread a part of their prosperity to developing countries .
I wholeheartedly support , then , the urgent objectives laid down in the Millennium Development Goals .
The June List believes , however , that aid issues should be dealt with exclusively by the individual Member State in cooperation with organisations that have broad international legitimacy and long experience .
The EU 's role in this connection should principally be that of phasing out the destructive fishing agreements that the EU concludes with poor developing countries and that of drastically reforming protectionist agricultural and trade policy .
This makes it difficult for farmers in poor developing countries to sell their products on the European market .
( SV ) Mr President , we talk a lot in this House about how much we pay in aid at present and about how much we should pay in the future .
We always maintain that insufficient money is provided by way of aid and that the Millennium Development Goals will not be achieved .
It will not be possible to achieve them if the developing countries do not receive such aid as enables them to develop their economies and thus help themselves .
Those here in Parliament who know me are aware that I represent Sweden but that I came to Sweden almost 14 years ago as a refugee from Bosnia .
I know therefore that when people are in a weak position and need help , they want aid of a kind that will enable them , within a short period , to help themselves and , as quickly as possible , become independent and autonomous and no longer need help .
What they definitely do not want are people who feel sorry for them and the kind of aid that leads to their becoming dependent on help in the future too .
It is also in the light of this that we must look at the criticism that I make of the report and in which I want to see still more emphasis on trade and its positive significance for development .
Another matter not sufficiently emphasised by the report is liberalisation .
The view that aid should increase without the developing countries being required , for example , to reduce their debts means that aid is given without any demands being made in terms either of liberalisation or debt restructuring .
Without liberalisation , debts increase still more , however , and then we arrive at the situation I described at the beginning of my speech in which aid leads to dependence on aid - a state of affairs that should never come about .
Many thanks , Mrs Ibrisagic .
From your name , one would not imagine you spoke such excellent Swedish : that sets a great example .
( NL ) Mr President , I should like to warmly congratulate Mrs Kinnock on a critical , but as I see it , particularly pertinent report .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his observations further to the G8 Summit held at Heiligendamm .
In fact , I can tell you , Commissioner , that I largely share your scepticism about the outcome .
In 2005 everyone was agreed that the Millennium Goals could be met provided the commitment and funds were there .
Less than two years later , this idea is apparently being met with far less enthusiasm , as the Heads of Government of the G8 are not going any further than reiterating the pledges of 2005 .
As some of our fellow MEPs have pointed out , the G8 countries have not managed to draft a desperately needed schedule that would help deliver on the promises .
There is no concrete funding plan in place that would make countries responsible for their commitments and any shortcomings , and it is already evident that the G8 countries will not manage to shift up the necessary gears to double the aid by 2010 .
In the fight against HIV / AIDS alone , there is a huge lack of funding .
In 2007 the shortfall stands at no less than 9 billion .
The promises that were made at the Summit in Gleneagles , namely to ensure universal access to HIV prevention , treatment and care by 2010 have not been kept , not by a long way .
Only one in six AIDS patients receives medication .
Every twelve seconds , somebody dies of AIDS and 70 % of new HIV infections occur in Sub-Saharan Africa .
This is simply unacceptable .
Commissioner , USD 50 billion for HIV , AIDS , TBC and malaria is simply not enough in order to get the G8 to deliver on a promise in the area of public health on time .
I should like to make one last point .
Meeting the MDGs is not simply a question of money , but also of rights .
Without access , for example , to sexual and reproductive health care for everyone , poverty cannot possibly be fought .
I hope , Commissioner , that Europe will continue to fulfil its pioneering role in this respect .
( ES ) Mr President , in 2005 , in Gleneagles , the G8 leaders sent out an exciting message with their promise to assign 42 000 million in health aid to Africa , focussing in particular on AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis .
In 2007 we have a new promise of EUR 44 000 million .
Is this commitment really new ?
We do not know .
Or is it just a new way to disguise their failure to deliver , as all of the large NGOs that follow these calculations closely claim ?
There is no concrete timetable and it is not clear how this new promise ties in with previous promises .
We must tell the citizens that our governments are not acting in a manner that is consistent with the things they say .
The very leaders who see people fleeing terrified to their countries from Africa , prepared to risk their lives only to die in the Mediterranean , express their great sadness at those dramatic pictures , but do not then live up to their promises when it comes to turning them into political decisions .
There must be a commitment to more aid - particularly for health and education , undoubtedly .
That commitment must also be taken to the negotiating table , however .
In its communiqué , the G8 describes the success of the Doha Round as being vital to the economic growth of the African continent . Vital , says the G8 .
Well , when we talk about Africa , it would be hypocritical for us to separate the things we say about humanitarian and aid issues from our behaviour at the Doha Round negotiating table , and I am not just talking about the European Union , I am talking about the whole of the first world , that first world that has come together within the G8 .
We cannot separate free trade , the reality of commercial exchanges , the reality of what Doha may mean for those countries , from the things we say about humanitarian and aid issues .
At the negotiating table , our promises must be turned into rather more than what is being offered in cash .
Finally , aid must be rational .
We must welcome the G8 's support for the Infrastructures Consortium for Africa , the ICA .
This is a concrete measure that I would like to highlight in particular .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mrs Kinnock on her very fine report .
It is difficult to speak on this issue in one minute , but I shall try .
The difficulty , in my opinion , is not only the amount of money , or the lack of money , donated to Africa by the EU or the Western world .
The problem is also the administration and coordination of this aid .
We are all aware of the constraints posed by weak governance in African countries .
Aid works in many cases , but aid donated without good governance will never make poverty history .
One idea that could be looked at is the need for individual European states , or groups of Member States , to take on a coordinating role in the administration of aid in individual African countries .
This would be a fundamental step towards making the donor countries accountable for the aid they spend .
Equally , it would demonstrate the best practice in terms of implementing the Millennium Development Goals .
I say this on the basis of my experience as a Minister in the Irish Government in dealing with poor communities in Dublin and in other European cities , whereby one government agency was responsible for coordinating everything we gave to those communities , and it was very successful .
I believe the same thing could be done at European or world level with regard to Africa .
I do not have enough time to speak on this , but the other big question is trade .
Without trade , there is no way that Africa can pull itself out of poverty .
That is another issue that must be addressed .
In any case , I believe that we need far greater coordination of the way in which we implement and spend our money in Africa .
If there is proper coordination we could make improvements in this area .
As we all know , it is not a simple task and there are no easy solutions , but we need to make changes to the way we deliver aid to the poorest people in Africa .

( NL ) Mr President , whilst it is a good thing that attention has been drawn to progress in some regions here today , the situation in black Africa is still tragic , as previous speakers , including Mr Van den Berg , have pointed out .
A distinction should be drawn geographically , but also one based on gender .
President Bush is now convinced that more should be done to fight AIDS , as it affects women as well as men .
I cannot get away from the impression that this is an important condition before money can be put on the table .
Only women die from maternal mortality by the very definition of the term .
There is no sign of improvement in the area of sexual and reproductive rights .
It seems that to many , a woman 's life is not as valuable .
In Sub-Sahara , 1 in 16 women dies as a result of pregnancy , for example in child birth or due to an unsafe abortion .
Sri Lanka demonstrates that investments actually save women 's lives .
Mr Szymánski , water and medicines alone are just not enough .
Women must be able to decide for themselves whether they want to become pregnant .
Difficult decisions about abortion , for example , should be taken on an individual basis rather than form part of a broad and general statement that is made from the comfort of our own chairs .
Commissioner , you are right that the EU is an important money lender and also fulfils an important role in this .
EU countries have not delivered on their Cairo promises either , though .
What mechanism do you intend to put into motion for this ?

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Kinnock , for her report which , if it had been adopted in time , would have sent a clear message to the Heads of State gathered at the G8 and the entire international community about how vital it is to take decisive action to achieve a reversal of our course .
This is the request of millions of people who are still dying of hunger , thirst and disease , or because of wars .
Although it would not be enough , it would certainly mean a lot if the G8 countries and the international community kept faith with the commitments they have made .
If no action is taken , however , on the structural causes of poverty and underdevelopment , people will continue to die .
Commissioner Michel is right about the need for concerted and consistent strategies on several fronts , such as the quantity and quality of public development aid , debt cancellation and the revision of the rules of international trade and also , certainly , the assumption of responsibility , transparency and sound government by developing countries .
I should like to highlight a few points : with regard to the quality of aid , it is particularly necessary to put an end to the highly damaging practice of aid linked to economic and geopolitical interests , as well as the inconsistency between the European Union 's development , trade and agricultural policies .
It is also necessary to review the EPAs and to seek alternative paths that are compatible with achieving the MDGs , overcoming the stalemate in the Doha round negotiations .
The three Millennium Development Goals on health issues will never be achieved if there is no universal access to therapies and medicines .
Too often international legislation on intellectual property rights infringes the priority of the rights to health and life of millions of people , to the benefit of the profits of the multinational pharmaceutical groups .
The disappointing agreements achieved at the G8 also highlight the contradictions of the world 's large powers , which spend on development 5 % of what they spend on weapons of death and destruction .
( EL ) Mr President , I in turn should like to congratulate Mrs Kinnock on her own initiative report on such an important issue .
It is interesting for the European Parliament , midway towards the deadline set for achieving the Millennium Development Goals , to see how far we are from achieving them and , by extension , to revise some of the means for achieving them .
It is a pity that numerous countries in the poorest area of the world , in Sub-Saharan Africa , are a long way from achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
Clearly the Millennium Development Goals will not be achieved unless the poorer , developing countries receive increased , improved aid to complement their own domestic resources .
The United Nations , the African Union , the G8 and the European Union must follow current estimates about the need to increase aid to Africa by approximately EUR 3.7 billion a year .
In addition , as the biggest donor of humanitarian aid , the European Union must persist with efforts to have the debts of developing countries wiped out .
Nonetheless , I must admit that what concerns me most is the inability to achieve the target in education .
One hundred and twenty-one million children , 65 million of whom are girls , have never been to school .
In addition to Goal 2 on free compulsory primary education for everyone , the conclusions of the 1990 World Summit for Children included a goal for the year 2000 of universal access to education , with at least 80 % of children completing basic education .
Unfortunately , we are a long way from that goal .
The developing countries must realise that , if they fail to invest in the quality of their human resources , they are condemned to the same development situation ad infinitum .
Mr President , I want to talk about the G8 Summit and make two points .
The first is on climate change .
This was good news , because the US agreed to stay within the UN process , but bad news that no binding targets were agreed and worse news , in a way , that we made no progress on getting the emerging economies , like India , Brazil and China , within the process .
Commissioner , we have a lot of work to do in the run-up to Bali .
I know you are not the lead Commissioner for climate change , but as the Commissioner for Development , you have a key role to play in keeping the momentum on climate change going because , as you know , the poor in the developing world are already paying the price of climate change .
Therefore , I hope you will be putting that at the top of your agenda .
While the poor pay the price , if we look at the other key aspect of the G8 , foreign aid , we see that the rich pay lip service .
Looking at the figures , we see that the G8 is way off track on aid to the developing world and , amongst those , EU countries are some of the worst performers .
Commissioner , my theory is that we will be back here in two or three years ' time , lamenting yet again the failure to make progress on foreign aid .
The pledge to double aid was made at an EU summit .
Are you keeping a scoreboard on this , or do we have to rely on NGOs to give us the score ?
In fact , we should be looking at scoreboards on climate change and on aid , because what Mr Mitchell said earlier about credibility and the EU is correct .
People out there will judge us on how we perform on the issues they really care about : tackling climate change and poverty .
The Constitution issue is important to us , but not to the public .
Therefore , unless we deliver on those issues , we will not have much credibility with the outside world .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Michel , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking Mrs Kinnock for her report .
Because of time constraints , I shall discuss just one point at this juncture , which - regrettably - is given hardly a mention in this report .
In my opinion , the vital importance of decent work as a means of eliminating poverty is a tremendously significant factor in the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
Where are we up to now with regard to these goals ?
As I see it , the results of the mid-term review of this are disastrous .
Most of the Millennium Development Goals have not even begun to be achieved and , according to realistic estimates , will not have been achieved even by 2015 .
This is an indictment of the donor countries .
Newspaper reports of the supposed successes of the G8 Summit do not change this fact .
Mr President , as usual , Mrs Kinnock has produced a good report , but producing a good report , as we all do in this Parliament , is not enough .
I am very concerned that in paragraph 40 and , in particular , paragraph 41 of her report , Mrs Kinnock mentions the Maputo Plan .
The Maputo Plan , as I understand it , promotes abortion and goes far beyond the Cairo Declaration .
The United Nations Declaration of the Rights of the Child states that the child , by reason of his physical or mental immaturity , needs specific safeguards and care , including appropriate legal protection , before as well as after birth .
According to the UN , some 8.5 million people around the world die every year because of starvation .
This is in contrast to the 46 million children who are aborted each year according to the WHO .
That is about the same as or more than the population of Spain .
That means that from the moment you are conceived , you are five times more likely to die through abortion than starvation .
Contrast the 46 million abortions with the total of 56 million people who die in the world each year .
Forty-six million abortions is also in contrast to the 70 000 women who sadly make the choice to have an illegal abortion and die because of it .
Therefore , the ratio is that for every one woman who falls pregnant and then dies because of an illegal abortion , 650 viable children are aborted in the womb - what should be , as nature intended , the safest place in the world for a baby to grow .
I strongly urge my colleagues to vote against paragraphs 40 and 41 which have nothing to do with maternal mortality , which is supposed to be the theme of MDG 5 .
Nor have these paragraphs anything to do with either sexual or reproductive rights because abortion has no connection to sexuality : it is not healthy , it is obviously not about reproduction - quite the opposite - and in my view , it is certainly not a right .
( SV ) Mr President , I was quite touched by what the previous speaker said .
I therefore find it rather difficult to talk , but I shall try to stick to what I intended to say .
When I was at school , I learned that people in Africa were starving because they had cut down the trees in the places where they lived so that nothing could grow there any longer .
In a way they had , then , more or less brought the situation on themselves .
Now , there is more and more to indicate that it is in actual fact we in the rich world who , through our life-style and our substantial emissions of carbon dioxide and other climate-affecting gases , have caused climate change in sub-Saharan Africa , as a result of which the inhabitants of that region are unable to provide themselves with enough food and water .
This undeniably makes us see world poverty in a different perspective .
Our responsibility for eradicating poverty is that much greater if it is we ourselves who have caused it .
Mrs Kinnock has a special section on climate change in her report , emphasising our responsibility for ensuring that our carbon dioxide emissions do not affect the poorest people on earth .
If we are to manage to do this , we need both drastically to reduce our emissions of climate-affecting gases and to support developing countries so that they might cope successfully with the huge adjustment that the world has to make .
What is at issue is everything from dealing with , for example , raised water levels to ensuring that developing countries that are able to produce renewable energy have the opportunity to do so and thus also have the opportunity to lift themselves out of poverty .
If the world is to achieve the Millennium Development Goals , we must concentrate more on these considerations and give higher priority to them .
Nor , if we seriously want to reduce mortality due , for example , to HIV , AIDS and unsafe pregnancies , should we allow religious notions to stand in the way of people 's freedom of choice and their ability to protect themselves against life-threatening diseases and unwanted pregnancies .
Reproductive rights , information concerning legal abortion and access to contraception are , and remain , necessary features of our work designed to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
All other considerations are merely prejudices , and I am amazed to hear them expressed in this House .
We should be more enlightened than that .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , today 's debate makes us take a clear look at just how far we have still to go by 2015 in order to achieve the Millennium Goals .
It should be pointed out in this House that these goals are vital in the context of development cooperation and that they must encourage aid that is effective and coherent .
As the due date approaches , the slender results obtained , particularly in sub-Saharan Africa , force us to be more demanding and to redouble our efforts in order to keep our promises .
Faced with what is at stake , the European Union must play its political role fully in order to strengthen the means for development and the effectiveness of its action on the African continent .
2015 is almost upon us .
This , therefore , is not the time to run out of steam or to throw in the towel .
As the leading global supplier of official development aid , the European Union has the means to help the countries of the South to achieve stability and to benefit from economic , social and human development .
If we have the means , therefore , let us now think about the tools for effectiveness , so that the aid given is matched by tangible and lasting results .
This requirement means mobilising all those involved .
It is not a matter of charity towards these countries , but of aid for development .
The promises made concerning the realisation of these fundamental goals are numerous .
One can , therefore , note the commitments made during the very disappointing G8 summit , which decided to allocate EUR 44 billion in aid for the fight against the pandemics in Africa and which reaffirmed the commitment of 2005 .
Let us only hope and pray that these promises become more than mere words .
For that to happen , these initiatives must now be translated into practical and measurable action .
It is urgent that we take action .
Let us intensify our efforts in a spirit of partnership so that we do not miss the 2015 deadline .
Mr President , a minute is very little to address what is a huge subject .
I have been a little bit distressed by some of the mood of this debate and I wonder whether , if we asked African women what they want , they would have had some of the answers that have come up here today .
The women I spoke to in Malawi certainly spoke about the need for education , for food , for jobs and for hope , and I thought that is what the Millennium Development Goals would give them , but it is clear that we are not going to get there in time .
In the 30 seconds I have left I want to address , in particular , the trade aspect of all of this : paragraphs 83 and 89 are particularly interesting .
There is a suggestion that the WTO negotiations might be an answer to some of the problems of Africa and yet paragraph 89 states very clearly that the LDCs will benefit very little from extensive trade liberalisation , and I think Africans need to remove barriers to trade within their own continent and look very closely at that issue while we in Europe help them develop trade with the rest of the world .
But we wish we could do more and I hope that this debate will help in that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I need hardly tell you that it is always frustrating to have to respond within a very short time to an avalanche of comments , most of which have been very apt .
I certainly agree very broadly with the comments , assessments and ideas I have heard .
Let me begin with the G8 .
I must confess that I , too , have been extremely disappointed to see the G8 summits become more and more of an essentially ritualistic exercise , and I regret the fact that , the more ritualistic this exercise becomes , the less credible it is , and one day people will start asking whether it actually serves any useful purpose .
I heard someone - from the left of the Chamber , I think - ask about the representative nature or legitimacy of the G8 .
I believe that question needs to be asked .
There can be no denying that huge swathes of the real world in geopolitical and demographic terms remain unrepresented , and that is rather a pity .
The G8 is becoming more and more of a beauty contest , and it is , of course , extremely sad to see the very concept being discredited by the participants ' failure to honour the promises they repeat year after year .
It is always possible to see some grounds for satisfaction in this type of meeting , but they are not enough to convince us that it is a very useful and wholehearted exercise .
I must needs adopt an impressionistic approach in my responses to some of the more trenchant comments that have been made .
First of all , on the question of HIV / AIDS , let me say that the two main channels for the provision of financial assistance by the European Community for the fight against HIV / AIDS are support given to countries to improve their health-care provision , particularly in Africa , and the allocation of funds under thematic budget headings .
You can rest assured that we shall deploy all the resources at our disposal .
The health programmes being conducted in 21 African countries account for EUR 396 million , with an additional amount of EUR 62 million earmarked for the coming months .
I will not conceal the fact that it is through these thematic budget lines and the funds assigned to the ACP under the eighth and ninth EDFs that the Community is contributing to the Global Fund to Fight Aids , Tuberculosis and Malaria , in which we have been holding the office of Vice-Chair of the Board .
Following the creation of the Fund in 2002 , the European Community paid a total of EUR 522.5 million into it for the period from 2002 to 2006 .
Added to the contributions from the Member States , this makes the European Union the largest donor to the Global Fund to Fight Aids , Tuberculosis and Malaria .
A word on climate change in answer to one honourable Member : I fully share your concern about the threat posed by climate change to developing countries and to their efforts to achieve the Millennium Goals .
I believe that issues relating to climate change should be incorporated into development cooperation .
Back in 2003 we adopted an EU action plan on climate change and development , which we are implementing jointly with the Member States .
Progress in the implementation of this action plan is currently under review , and the findings indicate that , while it has been a good platform for joint action on the part of the European Union , the way in which the plan is being carried out is not really commensurate with the size and importance of the challenge .
I therefore intend to launch a strategy for the intensification of our cooperation with the developing countries most severely affected by climate change .
The aim is to work towards the establishment of a global alliance on climate change to underpin the dialogue and cooperation between the European Union and developing countries on the reduction of emissions and on adaptation to changes in the climate .
I also intend to share details of this proposal with you fairly soon .
That is one specific .
As far as the economic partnership agreements are concerned , I will not dwell on these for too long .
Suffice it to say that I am one of those who are convinced that no real development can take place - in the sense of creating the sort of wealth that can fund social services , that can fund all the main access channels to public services - in the absence of access to trade and of economic dynamism .
Consequently , the economic partnership agreements as we envisage them , as we perceive them and as we are implementing them are , strictly speaking , development policy agreements .
The priority is not the trade dimension but development .
The differences of opinion that may exist between some people and myself on this matter will be common knowledge .
I believe that their existence can be taken as read .
The decision to conclude the economic partnership agreements before the end of 2007 was taken jointly by the European Union and the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries .
The debate and the controversy to which this decision gave rise have been very worthwhile , particularly because they have led to acceptance of longer transitional periods , recognition of the specific nature of certain sensitive products and also acceptance of the principle of financing regional funds designed to offset losses of earnings that result from the elimination of tariff barriers .
This is a question to which we shall return , but it is undoubtedly due to the debate that was launched here in this House , particularly by Mrs Kinnock and others , that the Commission , its partners and the other interested parties have come up with far more flexible proposals that take more account of reality .
I am convinced that debt relief helps to fund development .
There is nothing unusual about that position .
It is quite simply based on our common reference framework in the field of development policy , on the European Consensus that the European Parliament and the Commission approved scarcely a year and a half ago .
The European Consensus refers to the OECD definition of public development aid and includes debt relief .
The European Union has also undertaken to find lasting solutions to the problem of unsustainable debt burdens .
That said , Mrs Kinnock , you are undoubtedly correct .
Everyone hopes there will be more debt relief , none more than I. You are also correct in saying that it is actually no more than one shot and that , if governments want to honour their pledges , they must increase the value in real and absolute terms of the amounts they devote to their development aid policies over the next few years .
That , incidentally , is the message the Commission conveyed to the Member States in its communication in April .
As for amending the OECD rules , which has been mooted recently , I do not consider that necessary .
I may add that , in my view , there is a risk that challenging these rules would trigger a discussion on the eligibility of other financial contributions which , as far as I am concerned , have nothing to do with development policies .
I do not intend to say any more on the matter .
Everyone knows full well what I am thinking of .
On the important question of social and human development , I must say - and I say this all the more readily because Mr Deva , who raised this point , is a man whom I hold in very high regard - that I do not share your point of view .
The Commission supports policies and initiatives that enable men and women to make free and informed choices about the number of children they have and the intervals between their births and that give them access to high-quality family planning and reproductive health services and to skilled assistance during labour .
I am afraid that I do not share your position , which appears far too radical to me and does not seem to take sufficient account of the concept of individual liberty .
There is a philosophical divergence here which we have to acknowledge .
People differ , Mr Deva .
We are not necessarily all the same , and I believe that the authority argument and the submission argument cut both ways .
While I can understand your saying that it is wrong to submit to abortion in practice or in principle , I do not believe we can submit to a religious precept either .
That , at least , is my point of view .
I would like to refer to another element that seems important to me , namely the effectiveness of aid .
In my view , aid - whether international , European or other aid - will become far more effective when we become a little less obsessed - and I am not trying to impute blame - with the need to wave our own flag .
Once we focus properly on the aim of alleviating misery and helping the poorest inhabitants of our planet rather than worrying about who is doing what and how each of us can raise the profile of our activities , that , I believe , is when we shall become far more efficient .
That is what we are working for , and we are moving forward with a code of conduct in an attempt to induce the Member States to accept more coordination , more convergence and a more rational division of labour , because these things can only enhance our efficiency .
I must say to you in all honesty , however - because I hear you very clearly , and I know that almost everyone shares this point of view and that , moreover , when we listen to the statements made by governments , ministers , prime ministers , this message is one of the threads that runs through all of them - that these aims are far from having been achieved in practice .
We have carried out joint analyses in connection with the preparation of country strategy papers , and we have proposed joint programming .
I can tell you today that , for the operational programming of the tenth European Development Fund , I would put the number of Member States that have decided to take part in joint programming at about ten , and even they will not take part in all the programming arrangements .
I can cite very few cases of joint programming .
That , however , is clearly the objective .
The objective is not to know who is doing what but to know who does what best .
As I have already had occasion to say , the Commission has no wish to pull all the strings .
The Commission is prepared to delegate responsibilities and to part-fund those who take responsibility , in other words the countries piloting particular areas of activity or projects , provided there is more to be gained by delegation than could be gained from our acting alone .
That is the direction in which we must try to move .
I remain optimistic , because I believe that , as we progress , we shall furnish proof that efficiency comes with greater coordination , convergence and harmonisation ; these are the keys to efficiency .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote on Glenys Kinnock 's report will take place tomorrow .
ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( debate )
The next item is the report by Thierry Cornillet , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2006 .
Mr President , I shall present you with a few figures on the activity of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2006 .
It met twice , in Vienna and Bridgetown , as is the norm for the Assembly .
Just to slip in a word about Bridgetown , it so happens that Bridgetown is in Barbados and that Barbados is regarded as a tourist destination , like the entire Caribbean .
Needless to say , the press pounced on this engagement , proclaiming that the Members of the European Parliament were off on a jaunt to the Caribbean .
It is difficult enough to make a joint assembly work without travelling to its member countries .
Now it just happens that among the countries of the Caribbean and the Pacific , and even among the countries of Africa , are some in which tourism is a major economic activity .
Is that a reason not to go there ?
Avoiding those countries would be discourteous and would paint a distorted picture of the activity of ACP countries .
Another statistic is that nine resolutions were adopted .
I will not enumerate them all but simply point out that some highlighted future problems , such as tourism and development , bird flu and energy problems in ACP countries .
My next statistic is that there were seven joint delegations , one of which - the mission to Malta and Tenerife - raised awareness of migration problems .
I would like to emphasise some aspects of the year 's activities .
I must mention the arrival on the scene , and indeed the increased involvement in the work of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly , of non-governmental players .
That is an entirely welcome development , even if the involvement of these players often takes the form of parallel events .
Be that as it may , their participation is undoubtedly a useful complement to the work of our Assembly .
I have had the honour of being the Vice-President responsible for these matters . My term of office lasts until the next meeting of the Bureau , and I believe it is important that this post is filled .
Another point concerns the economic partnership agreements .
I noted Commissioner Michel 's passionate support for these agreements .
Here too , the Joint Parliamentary Assembly has played a leading role by monitoring the negotiations and by creating a two-way information flow , through which European Members of Parliament can obtain fuller knowledge of the lie of the land in the ACP countries and our ACP partners can see through the fantasies concocted by some deranged individuals , who misrepresent the economic-partnership agreements as some sort of Trojan horse of Liberalism , and I thank Commissioner Michel for reminding us that they are instruments of development policy and that their terms have not been set in stone , contrary to the rumours circulating in the corridors of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
Lastly , we have held hearings with the chief negotiators and the competent Commissioners on this matter , which has enabled us to deepen our knowledge of the economic-partnership agreements .
With regard to Darfur , I will not revisit the substance of this issue , which , I am sorry to say , is still far from having been exhausted .
I simply wish to highlight an aberration , namely the use of separate voting colleges .
At the first session , we had a common resolution on Darfur adopted in Vienna , whereas in Bridgetown a separate vote was requested ; this blocked the resolution , because our ACP counterparts did not adopt it .
They effectively yielded to pressure from a number of countries .
In the report , I suggest that this practice be abandoned , so that the Joint Parliamentary Assembly can function as a genuine joint assembly in which the democratic principle alone prevails .
As for the parliamentary dimension - to which I shall return in my conclusion , Commissioner - let me simply remind you of the commitment you made on the transmission of the strategy papers to the ACP countries , of course , and to the European Parliament .
I think it is important that our ACP counterparts should be involved .
Finally , as regards the rise of the Pan-African Parliament , I believe it is very important that we should have a partnership with that Parliament and a parallel partnership with the African Union .
I believe that a delegation went there and that we have undertaken to host a visit by its President .
Another point relates to the strengthening of sub-regions within the ACP area .
There are four regions in Africa plus the Caribbean and the Pacific regions , and it would be beneficial to strengthen the sub-regions , since only a regional approach will allow the economic-partnership agreements to be properly implemented in the interests of everyone .
Lastly , let me conclude with the parliamentary dimension .
It is absolutely essential that we , by which I mean the Members of the European Parliament but more especially our parliamentary counterparts in the ACP countries , explore the potential of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly as a source of information .
Such a function would entail an upgrading of the secretarial capabilities of the ACP side .
This would involve introductory training and a higher level of interest among our parliamentary counterparts in the European Development Fund and its implementation but also in the formulation of integrated national and regional plans , in the country strategy papers and in the economic partnership agreements .
We welcome the allocation of some of the EDF funds to the training of Members of Parliament with a view to ensuring that the Joint Parliamentary Assembly has recourse to people who have the structures , engage in the deliberations and possess the information with which they can make the Assembly a really useful body .
Member of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Joint Parliamentary Assembly is becoming an increasingly sturdy pillar of cooperation between the European Union and the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries .
I have attended all the sessions of the Assembly since I became the Commissioner responsible for development and humanitarian aid .
I know exactly how far that institution has come .
The Assembly is now increasingly parliamentary in stature and conduct , with debates that are more open and fewer regional tensions .
The Assembly has proved capable of addressing a wide range of topics and of reaching agreement on sensitive issues such as post-conflict rehabilitation , sustainable resource management and the economic partnership agreements .
The excellent report by Mr Cornillet and the Committee on Development presents a faithful portrayal of this development .
You highlight the advances that have been made but without ignoring the problems that still have to be resolved .
The report also identifies the challenges looming on the horizon .
I thank you for your appreciation , expressed in point 2 , of the Commission 's desire to subject the strategy papers to parliamentary scrutiny .
You naturally express regret that this has not been possible , but you are no doubt aware that , following the adoption of our position on this matter , the Member States managed to reach agreement on the insertion of a new provision into the implementing regulation for the tenth cycle of the European Development Fund .
That provision prescribes the transmission , for information purposes , of the ACP country strategy papers to the Joint Parliamentary Assembly at the same time as they are sent to the Member States represented on the EDF Committee .
I welcome this solution , which certainly takes account of the specific nature of the EDF , because the Joint Parliamentary Assembly is an institution which is explicitly recognised by the Cotonou Agreement and which is therefore best placed to monitor the proper functioning of the programming process under the tenth EDF , given that the latter is not part of the Community budget .
This also provides an opportunity for the Assembly to demonstrate its ability to play a genuine political role in our cooperation .
Lastly , let me take this opportunity to add my congratulations to the Government and Parliament of Barbados and to the Austrian Presidency for their excellent organisation of last year 's Assembly sessions .
I shall be seeing some of you again next week at Wiesbaden , in Germany , for the next session of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Cornillet on his report on the activities of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly pertaining to 2006 .
It was once again a fruitful year .
Important topics were discussed , including the problems with energy , tourism , water in the ACP countries , the promotion of peace and security , problems surrounding fisheries in the different countries and the EPAs , of course , the new trade agreements .
The format of this parliamentary delegation remains special and unique .
The fact that 77 MEPs and 77 ACP parliamentarians - one parliamentarian from each ACP country - meet a few times a year to discuss development policy is important .
Not forgetting the preparations , which are a combined effort between European and ACP countries .
These meetings are also extremely important for our parliamentary work , because we are not only talking about them , but also with them regarding the implementation of the Cotonou Agreement and development policy in general .
This should , of course , have been done from the start in the Europe-Africa strategy , but this strategy was conceived too unilaterally from a European viewpoint .
Fortunately , we will now have a joint strategy from both the European and African Union for the development of Africa .
This is a priority , rightly so .
The poverty levels in Africa are the highest and the most worrying .
It is good to see the Joint Parliamentary Assembly continuing to develop further and the dialogue between the ACP countries and the European Union gathering momentum . It is also good to see that it appears increasingly possible to broach sensitive issues , such as corruption or worrying situations , including those in the Horn of Africa and Sudan .
Zimbabwe remains a thorny issue .
As the situation in that country is unacceptable , we have to do everything in our power to protect the position of the citizens over there and to stop the human rights violations .
Next week , we will be meeting once again , in Wiesbaden , Germany .
I am looking forward to this meeting and I hope we will have another good dialogue where difficult issues can once again be raised .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I really enjoyed hearing the Commissioner say that the Joint Parliamentary Assembly was now a robust organisation .
It certainly is .
I would like to thank him for his loyal participation in each of the JPAs so far .
I would also like to note that the President of Parliament will attend the session next week in Wiesbaden , as did his predecessor , President Borrell , who is now a member of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
This involvement is very important and gives status and importance to the Joint Parliamentary Assembly , which , as others have said , including Mr Cornillet in his excellent report and presentation , continues to grow and to thrive .
That is because it is nurtured by so many committed and active parliamentarians , from the ACP and from this Parliament .
We enjoy very active collaboration in the Joint Parliamentary Assembly and , again as Mr Cornillet says , the parliamentary nature of our work has noticeably increased .
We have a wide-ranging agenda and , whatever lists we may wish to make , all our work relates to the Cotonou Partnership Agreement , which is a binding , contractual agreement between Europe and the ACP member states .
The nature of the partnership between all those countries is absolutely unique .
What makes it so is the obligation within the Cotonou Partnership Treaty to have this parliamentary dimension .
That is something we should be very proud of .
Another important point is that we have worked very hard to improve the ability of parliamentarians from ACP countries to scrutinise the actions of the executive and the governments in their countries .
They also have to hold their governments to account , because that is what parliamentarians are meant to do .
But , quite frankly , in most of the ACP countries where we have talked and worked with parliamentarians , they are seldom brought into the ambit of the work undertaken by their governments .
The Commission has been somewhat guilty in this respect as well , because in consultations , such as on the country strategy papers , they have had written into the agreements the need for negotiations and consultations with civil society .
I have no problem with that ; that is very good .
On the other hand , parliamentarians are the elected representatives and I would like to see much more engagement by them in programming , in implementation , in monitoring and in evaluation .
We also need to urge European national parliaments to scrutinise the European Development Fund .
They can help us in that way .
I think that the work of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly has changed over the 13 years I have been a member , and for the better .
It used to be the case that it was completely dominated by European parliamentarians .
I think all of us here can fairly say that is no longer the case .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Mr Cornillet has written an excellent summary of the activities of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) in 2006 , a JPA that is growing in credibility and power , which no longer avoids difficult debates , including migration , and which also dares make choices , even though the ambition remains to reach consensus as a rule .
A typical example of this - which also represents one of the best moments for me - was the debate and the resolution on the status of the negotiations on EPAs .
A resolution that has fundamentally served as a basis for Mr Sturdy 's report which we approved here in this House .
A report that was thus partly supported by our colleagues from the ACP parliaments .
I would also like to make two observations that are less positive .
Firstly , as Mr Cornillet already mentioned , an even-handed resolution on East Africa was rejected in Bridgetown , because it was preceded by separate voting , despite the fact that a huge majority in the Assembly were in favour .
This is at odds with the spirit of solidarity and cohesion within the JPA .
It begs the question whether it is time that the Rules of Procedure were reviewed so that blocking minorities on both sides can be done away with .
Secondly - and we have to be honest about this - there is still pressure from the ACP Secretariat on the voting behaviour of ACP members of parliament .
That too is unacceptable , just like the influence which ambassadors are systematically trying to exercise .
What is promising is that the ACP countries have decided to organise a study in order to assess the activities of the Secretariat , but something will need to come of this assessment , of course .
To sum up then , my conclusion is that 2006 was a good year for our JPA .
Let us hope that we can take another step towards strengthening its parliamentary and political character .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I also wanted to welcome the report on behalf of my group , the Greens and EFA .
I believe , however , that any analysis of the work of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly must be primarily political .
In this respect , can we be satisfied with the state of the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries after years of a development policy in which the Union has been the largest provider of funds ?
That is the question .
And what progress has been made on the road to democracy ?
In the course of our regular visits to these countries , we have been forced to conclude that human misery is growing there and that democracy is still very much in its infancy .
Even if our work in the Joint Assembly is proceeding well , as Mr Cornillet assures us , it must not be the tree that hides the rest of the wood , for we have the means to go further , further in mutual respect of our European interests and , of course , in meeting the expectations of the ACP countries .
There is hope - as illustrated , for example , by the process of transition to democracy that has begun in Mauritania .
What the Union still needs to do - and I am addressing the Commission here - is to honour its commitments by helping the Mauritanians to make a successful transition and to re-establish decent living conditions .
Support from the Joint Parliamentary Assembly for the Mauritanian National Assembly could be one step in that direction .
Come what may , Commissioner , I would like to focus on the fight against poverty .
We have discussed this at length .
It has to be said that combating poverty involves the resolution of environmental issues , to which insufficient consideration is given in our work - and I am addressing Mr Cornillet here .
I would also like to mention the report on sustainable development that was produced as part of our work on the action plans which are now being implemented by the ACP countries .
What do we do to stop desertification , which is driving hundreds of African to flee into squalid shanty towns or to set out , even at the risk of their lives , for an imagined European El Dorado ?
That is the question , and the world is waiting for an answer .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , representatives of the Member States and officials of the Commission , we are in agreement with the general thrust of the Cornillet report , which is characterised by common sense , goodwill and noble intentions , although most of these , I fear , are pious hopes .
Let us nevertheless emphasise one point , namely the excessively sharp contrast between the importance and even the gravitas being attached today to the question of our relations with the countries of Africa and the indifference shown by the European oligarchies , particularly in this Parliament , towards the countries of the South .
Yes , dear colleagues , we are sinning by indifference .
There is no comparison between the significance , which is sometimes minimal , of the matters that take up nine tenths and more of our debates and votes and the seriousness of the growing imbalance between the continents of Europe and Africa .
I say ' Africa ' , by the way , because I do not believe there is a need to spread the ACP effort too thinly ; the brunt of it should be devoted to the original focal point of the Lomé Conventions , which was and must remain sub-Saharan Africa .
The issue is undoubtedly too authentically political , too crudely political , to be dealt with by supranational institutions , which are , by nature , too weak to deal with anything but technical matters .
Accordingly , it is perfectly normal for us to turn to the Member States and to call , as the Cornillet report does exceedingly well , for greater involvement of the national parliaments , for by seeking to address the major problems on a European scale we would end up not dealing with them at all and at the same time releasing the Member States from their obligations .
Yes , Mr Cornillet , the solution , here as elsewhere , is to trust the Member States and the truly democratic institutions , namely the national parliaments .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although this comes as no surprise , it is nevertheless to be welcomed that the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly recognises in its report that the immigration issue will be dominating future relations between the EU and the developing world , and Africa in particular .
The activities and recommendations of this institution in question - because that is , after all , what this report is about to some extent - call for a few critical observations , though .
Whilst fact-finding missions in Malta , Spain and Senegal may be useful , they brought few new insights this time round , unfortunately .
What can we learn from a report about the effects of migration of educated employees in terms of national development ?
The migration of educated employees leads to a brain drain in the countries of origin and is in any case detrimental to these countries .
This is , after all , the great paradox , of course : those in favour of more migration to Europe in order to fill vacancies in so-called bottleneck professions all too often overlook the fact that this migration leads to the impoverishment of the countries of origin , with the effect that the weakest are at risk of being left behind alone .
We should have the courage to say this out loud .
In the final analysis , though , the Joint Assembly 's vision and its response to migration are , of course , predictable .
As a link between the European institutions , the Joint Assembly simply repeats policy from official Europe on migration .
This is anything but effective and firm immigration policy , where clear messages are sent to the countries of origin and conditions imposed to suit the JPA 's own needs .
In terms of human rights , democracy and good governance , this forum is a faithful reflection of official EU policy and utterly fails to send out a powerful signal .
A signal that demonstrates to the relevant countries that a refusal to respect human rights and apply democratic principles should be reciprocated with a reduction , or even scrapping , of all forms of development aid .
Mr President , firstly I welcome this report .
I think it is very timely , coming as it does on the eve of the meeting we are about to attend in Wiesbaden .
However , - I do not know whether the Commissioner is actually listening to this debate - sometimes I feel we are like gadflies on the periphery , where we raise issues and they do not get much attention except from ourselves when we write very fine reports of this kind .
But I do think that there is an opportunity for innovation and for change .
I come from a country where we had famine , literally in recent history - I spoke to somebody who spoke to somebody who lived through the last Great Famine in Ireland : it is that recent .
One of the things that made a great change in Ireland , as in the United States , was property ownership .
I would like to commend both Nirj Deva and Jürgen Schröder for constantly raising this issue .
I think it is an issue we need to raise .
We need to try to bring new ideas such as this one to the fore .
If you look at the history of Ireland and how the partition of Ireland came about , in the north of Ireland a lot of people who came there were given small plots of land and ownership of that .
From that , they grew flax and they gained capital and prospered .
In the south of Ireland we had absentee landlords , and tenants who could not afford to pay their way and who had no ownership of their property .
The same thing happened in the United States , a country that had huge difficulties in the beginning .
People were given ownership of property there , and that made a great change .
Particularly in Africa and in the Third World generally , we have to start looking at ways we can give people ownership of capital .
I believe that , whereas I welcome and support the general thrust of this report , we need to start looking at new ways and added value that we - Parliament , the Commission and the Council - can bring to the issue of the Third World .
I think in the area of giving ownership of property , there is an issue worth pursuing .
( FR ) Mr President , I must thank my honourable colleague Thierry Cornillet for his excellent report .
He expresses clearly and forcefully the power of work that the Joint Parliamentary Assembly accomplished in 2006 .
Through the quality of its output , I believe the Assembly has established itself as a pivotal player in the dialogue on North-South cooperation .
The Assembly has made its mark by expressing itself forcefully on Darfur in Vienna , by scorning taboos to apportion blame and by proposing a road map designed to end the crisis .
It also made its mark by expressing its views on the crucial question of the economic-partnership agreements in Bridgetown .
Its message , moreover , was a unanimous declaration that these agreements must remain instruments of development , as Commissioner Michel reaffirmed a short while ago during the previous debate .
The political clout of the Joint Assembly will continue to increase over the coming months now that the Commission has undertaken to grant it the right to examine all country and regional strategy papers for the African , Caribbean and Pacific areas and now that the Assembly can convene regional conferences in order to come up with specific responses on major issues such as migration .
In view of these new powers - even if they are not really powers - we must take care to ensure that the Assembly has the means to perform its tasks .
I wish to say to the Commission and the Commissioner that we shall have to act together to find flexible and effective ways to work jointly on the procedure for the exercise of this new right to examine strategy papers .
It is cumbersome , it is difficult , but we must rise to the challenge .
I also appeal to the working group on parliamentary reform to take account of the specific characteristics of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the constraints affecting it , because , when the parliamentary calendar is compiled these days , some of our commitments clash with the work of the Assembly .
Finally , I would like to pay tribute to Mrs Kinnock for the manner in which she has been co-chairing the Assembly .
Mr President , I welcome this report from my colleague Mr Cornillet .
It provides a concise and comprehensive summary of the work of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly last year .
The annual report is a good moment to take stock and consider what is working well in the JPA and what could work better .
We are answerable to our electors about whether non-legislative bodies , such as the JPA , are good value for money .
I would suggest three positive indicators that the JPA is robust , as was said earlier , and that it is earning its keep and increasing in relevance .
As the rapporteur said , the involvement of non-state players is a positive development , and so is the growth of fringe meetings .
These bring together Members sharing common concerns , for example ACP delegates representing remote and arid areas and MEPs working on climate change .
It is in these informal discussions that MEPs and ACP parliamentarians can often work together best .
Secondly , I believe there is a desire on all sides to make the JPA more responsive , more capable of reacting to current events .
The rapporteur refers to this in paragraph 17 .
Of course , there needs to be a structure to debate , but the formal structure of discussions and reports is very drawn out .
We need to find ways of making the JPA more immediately engaged and reactive .
That brings me to my third point : the level of participation by members of both houses has sometimes been disappointing .
Naturally , the first duty of parliamentarians on both sides is to their own legislatures , so , inevitably , there are diary clashes .
I am , therefore , really pleased that the European Parliament is looking at changing its timetable and earmarking some weeks - the new ' turquoise weeks ' - for external meetings .
I hope this will get rid of conflicts of duty on the European side and greatly improve active attendance by the 78 MEPs .
This is something we should continue to monitor as the changes to the European Parliament timetable are implemented .
Mr President , one of the issues that will be addressed at the forthcoming ACP-EU Council meeting in Germany next week will be a re-evaluation EU policy on Sudan .
There is an ever-deteriorating security situation in Darfur , and let no one think otherwise .
Without a safe and secure environment , we cannot access the people most in need .
A full-scale humanitarian crisis is being faced by over four million people who are living in Darfur at this time .
More than half a million people were displaced from Sudan in 2006 alone .
The international community has simply not been tough enough when dealing with the Sudanese Government over Darfur .
The Sudanese Government has played a game of cat-and-mouse with the international community so that the European Union and the United Nations would have as weak a role as possible in Sudan .
I welcome recent moves to increase the presence of African Union forces in Sudan under what is known as the African Union Mission there , but the difficulty for these troops is that they are not well trained and there are not enough of them .
Moreover , the European Union must look to tighten the sanctions regime against the Sudanese Government to incorporate a ban on travel into the European Union by key Sudanese Government members and officials and to block Sudanese Government representatives from making financial investments in Europe .
Mr President , the JPA deals with more than Africa , but it is Africa that dominates so much of our attention .
Two weeks ago , Archbishop Desmond Tutu was in Parliament talking specifically about Darfur and more generally about Africa .
He said thank you for not succumbing to donor fatigue and Afro-pessimism and thank you for not allowing governments to turn a blind eye .
But he shared our concerns about the Zimbabwe regime , which has destroyed a once-vibrant economy , oppressed its people and polluted the relationship between Africa and the European Union .
The Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) has finally recognised that there is a problem in Zimbabwe and has mandated President Mbeki of South Africa to facilitate talks between the Mugabe regime and the Zimbabwean opposition .
There has already been some progress .
The first meeting took place between Zanu PF and the MDC last weekend in South Africa , but an enormous amount remains to be done .
Let us remember that just a few days ago , two MDC activists from Matobo district were abducted and murdered .
Just as SADC is beginning to understand that Mugabe 's regime is a problem , so the ACP is also stirring .
In March , the ACP-EU Bureau called on the Zimbabwean Government to re-establish respect for human rights and the rule of law in accordance with the Cotonou Agreement .
Next week Zimbabwe is on the agenda of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
There is an urgent need for both colleges in the ACP-EU to speak as one on the appalling aberration that is Zimbabwe .
After the JPA , the African Union Summit will be held in Ghana .
We must do all that we can to encourage the African nations to go to this summit determined to support the Mbeki initiation and to do all that is possible to bring about rapid political change for the better in Zimbabwe for the sake of all the people of that country and , indeed , all the people of Africa .
( PL ) Mr President , in the field of development policy we often talk about taking local conditions into account .
One of the regular ways of finding out what those representing our partners in the developing world want is the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
The report summarising the work of the assembly last year is a very interesting and important document .
I would like to thank Mr Cornillet for his work .
The assembly dealt with a range of issues that are important to developing countries , including energy , water , bird flu , the role of regional integration in fostering peace and security , the social and environmental aspects of fishing , the co-dependence of tourism and development , as well as progress in negotiations on economic partnership agreements .
I would like to draw your attention to a certain problem .
I think , that there is no real sense in maintaining a superficial dialogue with representatives of countries that regularly infringe human rights .
It is a pure myth that participation or the opportunity to observe the work of the assembly will have a positive effect on their policies .
For some , their presence at this forum simply serves as propaganda rather than dialogue .
Propaganda cannot provide us with real solutions .
This is something I experienced myself during the Communist period in Poland .
Back then , the intention was to replace policies with propaganda .
Countries which behave in this way are wasting our time , money and potential .
They are also damaging the image of the ACP countries .
They have very short-term goals , namely to prevent any criticism of their own internal situation .
They do not want anyone to help them as they believe that their actions are correct and appropriate .
If we want the assembly to be a real , joint centre for establishing political positions , the attitudes of countries such as Cuba , Zimbabwe or Sudan have to change .
( FI ) Mr President , as a member of the ACP-EU delegation , I attended both Joint Parliamentary Assemblies in 2006 .
The Assembly is of crucial importance to the establishment of political dialogue as referred to in Article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement .
The meetings in Vienna and Bridgetown were mainly successful and there was a lively debate at both .
I am particularly pleased with the way their parliamentary nature was emphasised .
At the meeting in Barbados I was one of those who drafted the resolution adopted on water in developing economies .
The procedure whereby a parliamentary representative of the EU and one of the ACP together draw up a resolution for the Parliamentary Assembly is a fruitful one .
The drafting procedure adds legitimacy to the decision-making process .
I would like to stress the importance of following up important resolutions , in which the role of the standing committees is central .
Enough time needs to be set aside for this for dialogue to deepen .
It is of crucial importance to third countries how fundamentally society is rooted in good governance , the rule of law and democratic structures .
They also lie at the heart of the expectations which the ACP countries have regarding development .
I am therefore wholeheartedly in favour of the request made by the Parliamentary Assembly that a share of the appropriations in the European Development Fund should be spent on concrete projects which support administrative reform .
The educational programmes organised for members of parliament is one example .
Another problem is the few resources which many members of ACP parliaments have : there are few opportunities to respond to the ambitions of strong governments .
The report fails to mention one essential issue : it is vital to respond to the intolerable situation in Zimbabwe .
The country 's human rights situation is one of the grimmest in Africa and Mugabe 's Government is plunging the country into ever deeper despair .
It will no doubt also try to block discussion of the state of the country at next week 's ACP-EU Assembly in Wiesbaden .
This should definitely be prevented : there needs to be a proper debate .
Mr President , let me first say that I obviously cannot respond to all the comments which have been made , but the Commission shares the view that national parliaments must play a key role in the definition of national policies and development strategies in our partner countries .
I say that in answer to Mrs Kinnock .
I agree with her there , needless to say .
The only thing is that we must find a way to achieve that objective .
I doubt whether I would be within my rights to ask the national parliaments of our partner countries to respond to the country strategy papers .
The principle of not intruding on the territory of another institution remains intact , and I am not very sure how this process can be organised .
I was relying heavily on the Joint Parliamentary Assembly to be the interface with the national parliaments , but I can assure you that I am quite willing to examine any proposed solution to see how that aspect can be improved .
I also wish to inform you that the Troika has opened the door to progress in the preparation of the joint EU-Africa strategy .
That is an exercise , of course , with which the European Parliament has been closely associated .
On the basis of the agreement reached by the Troika , the Commission will adopt a communication on 27 June on the objectives of the strategy and on the road map for its adoption at the EU-Africa summit in Lisbon , scheduled for 7 and 8 December of this year .
My departments are in permanent contact with Parliament , both on the content of these documents and on the organisational aspect .
I attach great importance to the participation of the three main EU institutions in the formulation of these strategies .
In this context , I must emphasise that one of the innovative aspects of this strategy would be the establishment of a genuine partnership of peoples .
I would therefore like to involve the parliaments - the European Parliament , the Pan-African Parliament and the African national parliaments - in the implementation of this strategy on a permanent basis .
I am open to all your suggestions .
It is conceivable , for example , that there might be a joint hearing of the European Parliament and the Pan-African Parliament or a joint meeting of the European Commission and the Commission of the African Union .
Logistical and political support could conceivably be given to the Pan-African Parliament - in fact , provision has already been made for that - and assistance to the national parliaments in Africa would be feasible too .
There are , incidentally , parliaments of EU Member States which are already doing this .
We have only just started .
We can therefore work together to meet this major challenge .
Let me respond to a couple of remarks chosen at random .
Mr Van Orden , you referred to the case of Zimbabwe in connection with the EU-Africa summit .
While I share , at least in fairly broad terms , the judgments you passed on President Mugabe , the important thing for me today is that the European Union and Africa should be able to hold this summit .
I must remind you that there has not been a summit of this kind since Cairo , while an Africa-China summit has taken place in the meantime .
So what matters to me is that our summit should take place .
Someone also spoke of sanctions against Sudan .
I have to tell you that I would not have any problem with sanctions if someone could demonstrate to me that they are useful and do not penalise ordinary people .
Generally speaking , I am fairly sceptical about sanctions .
I am a far greater believer in the carrot than the stick , and I put far more faith in the exertion of pressure .
Besides , with President al-Bashir having accepted the hybrid peacekeeping force , particularly in Darfur , I am not convinced that this is the time to be raising the spectre of new sanctions .
Sanctions , we know , can be applied at any time , and I am not sure that the sanctions some people have in mind would necessarily be useful .
Mr Mitchell spoke of access to property ownership .
This idea has been extensively developed by Mr De Soto , and I have been following this matter very closely .
I am also a member of an informal working party in which , together with Madeleine Albright , we have been working on this idea of property ownership , with which you are no doubt familiar .
I find the idea very appealing , and I am trying to see how we could contribute to such a scheme through the European Development Fund .
Experiments are taking place , and I believe this is a very interesting and important approach in the quest for an effective solution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Fact-finding mission to the regions of Andalusia , Valencia and Madrid ( debate )
The next items are :
the oral question by Marcin Libicki and Michael Cashman , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , to the Council on the fact-finding mission to the regions of Andalusia , Valencia and Madrid - B6-0127 / 2007 ) , and
the oral question by Marcin Libicki and Michael Cashman , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , to the Commission on the fact-finding mission to the regions of Andalusia , Valencia and Madrid - B6-0128 / 2007 ) , and
Like all of my honourable colleagues , I believe that I cannot but deplore the absence of the Council , which will not be in attendance to answer Members ' questions .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to check something .
As far as I understand , I have two and a half minutes to speak because it seems that Mr Cashman is also going to speak on this matter .
Am I right in believing that I have two and a half minutes of speaking time ?
I wanted to check because you did not mention this earlier .
Mr President , from the point of view of tourists and northern Europeans wishing to relocate , the Mediterranean coast is the most attractive destination .
The coast of Spain has been particularly exposed to extremely intensive urbanisation .
This extreme urbanisation has resulted in a number of conflicts .
There seem to be three parties involved in this conflict , namely the developers , the authorities and the residents .
What is more , and this should be highlighted , the conflict involves both Spaniards and citizens of other Member States who want to settle in these regions , or who have already moved there .
As a result of the enormous number of petitions on this matter that were sent to the Committee on Petitions , we organised a special fact finding visit and , as early as December 2005 , the European Parliament adopted a resolution , based on these petitions , on the infringement of directives on public procurement , water supplies , and the infringement of property rights .
Another fact finding visit took place this year and on 11 April 2007 the Committee on Petitions drew up their position on the matter , with reference to the previous resolution passed by the European Parliament .
In this context , I would like to address a question to both the Commission and the Council .
What activities have been undertaken by the Commission and the Council to ensure that Community legislation is applied correctly and that the citizens ' basic property rights are respected , as laid down in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union ?
author . - Mr President , it saddens me to have to take the floor once again on this issue .
More than 18 months after the adoption of the Fourtou Report in December 2005 by an overwhelming majority of this House , we are still debating the same issues , and nothing has changed .
The Council is absent - that is shameful !
Citizens from many Member States , including my own , but also Spain , Germany , Holland and Belgium , are having their legally acquired lands taken by local authorities without due process , which I am convinced is in breach of EU law .
Moreover , they are being forced to pay large sums of money - tens of thousands of euros - to pay for new infrastructure and new developments that they do not want and which are on their land .
The situation I am describing sounds unimaginable in the 21st century EU but it is a sad reality for thousands of citizens in Spain .
People have bought land or property in good faith only to see it taken away by what can only be described as , at best , administrative incompetence or , at worst , criminal negligence and corruption .
This issue was brought to the attention of the Committee on Petitions in 2003 .
Back then , 15 000 citizens wrote to us asking for help .
What have we done ?
Well , we have adopted the Fourtou report , which brought forward a series of recommendations to the Valencian Government .
The Valencian Government brought forward minor changes in the LUV , which do not address the key problems of land grab .
It is worth mentioning that large numbers of projects in Valencia were rushed through prior to the entry into force of the new law .
This is a clear sign that constructors and developers wanted to continue to exploit the loopholes of the previous law .
We have now sent three fact-finding missions .
The last came under shameful attacks from the Partido Popular , which were attacks upon the integrity of this House .
It saddens me to say that the President of this House , Mr Pöttering , remains indifferent to the attacks upon the integrity of this House .
The Partido Popular politicians say that the petitions in Valencia have been imagined .
The pain is real , the pain is desperate , and that is why people have looked to us .
The Commission is unhappy .
It believes that possible infringements of EU law are under way .
Therefore , I say this : to do nothing is not an option , we have exhausted what we can do in this House and this will be resolved in the Court of Justice or before the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg , and it will be to the shame of the Partido Popular in Spain .


Mr President , let me start by thanking Mr Libicki and Mr Cashman for their hard work in preparing the report on behalf of the Committee on Petitions on the third fact-finding mission to Valencia .
This mission gave committee members an opportunity to meet the representatives of the administrations and the complainants and to gain first-hand experience of the situation on the ground .
The urbanisation projects in Spanish regions at stake involve three main aspects : public procurement , fundamental rights and environmental rules .
Let me give you a few indications of our actions in these areas .
Firstly , on public procurement : the Commission takes the view that approval of integrated action programmes under the Valencia Land Planning Law involves the award of public works and services contracts .
We consider that some activities were carried out in a way which infringes EU public procurement legislation .
I informed Parliament about this in December 2005 .
We thus decided to launch infringement proceedings again Spain on this issue .
The Commission challenged the existing law on land and town planning at the time .
On 30 December 2005 , the regional authorities approved a new land law which revoked and replaced the previous one .
However , the new law does not correct some of these infringements , which relate to tender notices or the information required by tender notices and the unclear definition of the contract 's object .
It contains other provisions that are also incompatible with the directive on public works , supply and services contracts .
We pursued the legal procedure during 2006 .
The replies we received from the competent authorities were not convincing .
I therefore intend to propose that the Commission should refer this case to the Court of Justice .
Secondly , with regard to fundamental rights , the Commission cannot intervene in this area .
In our view , the alleged infringements of property rights do not involve any provision of Community law which would enable the Commission to intervene on these grounds .
Thirdly , on environmental legislation : here too the Commission can only take legal steps when Community law is infringed .
However , as far as the environment is concerned , land development policy as such does not fall within the competence of the Union .
The departments under the responsibility of my colleague Mr Dimas do , however , investigate land development cases where these are alleged to infringe Community environmental law .
I can assure you that the Commission will continue to see to it that the competent Spanish authorities comply with EU environmental rules when implementing urban development plans .
The Commission has already taken action in other cases when they fell within its remit , i.e. when urban development projects breached environmental directives , for instance those on water or on environmental impact assessment .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , this matter has been discussed actively and passively , and I am not going to get into the fundamental issue , because it has been discussed on many occasions in the Committee on Petitions .
I would , however , like to talk about an issue that I believe to be important , and that is that , by bringing this resolution to plenary , we are facing a problem of competences , because I believe , ladies and gentlemen , that we are impinging on national competences .
You want to replace the decisions of the regional parliaments , you want to replace the decisions of national parliaments , you want to replace the Constitutional Court , you want to replace the Spanish jurisdictional body .
In other words , this resolution is an invasion of competences on an unprecedented scale .
I therefore believe that Parliament 's Legal Service should tell us whether we can vote on absolutely everything when national and regional competences are being trampled upon , as they are in this case .
The truth is that the Commission 's response has reassured me .
It is reassuring to my political group to hear that it has not been possible , and it is not possible , to intervene , because , naturally , the Valencian Parliament and Government have always acted in accordance with the law , in accordance with the jurisdictional approach that that government has always defended .
I simply wished to end with a question that we have also been hearing within the Committee on Petitions : We were told that the citizens would remember , that , when it came to voting , the citizens would express themselves and that they would make the Valencian Government or the Madrid Government pay for what was happening .
Well , the citizens have spoken and they have shown clear support for a programme , for a well-known project , for what has been done in the Community of Valencia , for what has been done in the Community of Madrid , and they have given majorities , not relative majorities , but absolute majorities , to the governments of the People 's Party , both in Madrid and in Valencia .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I do not believe that the fundamental objective of the Committee on Petitions ' excellent work is to bring down any particular regional government in Spain , however regrettable its actions may have been .
What the Committee on Petitions has done is to act according to a politically unquestionable principle .
When it comes to defending the rights of citizens , national sovereignty and national borders do not matter .
The point is that , in certain Spanish autonomous communities , not in the whole of the country , certain regional autonomous governments are damaging the environment , damaging the sustainability of the citizens ' lives and hence violating individual and collective rights .
This is happening in Valencia and it is happening in Madrid , which is my autonomous community .
The President of the Community of Madrid has not just done it in the past , but she intends to continue doing so : just today , her projects were moving in that direction .
We are not talking about houses , but , for example , she is determined to press ahead with a road project - previously the M-50 , which she now calls the M-61 - which intends to destroy no less than the Monte de el Pardo , an area of crucial ecological importance .
I would like to congratulate the Committee on Petitions and say that it has accepted the demands of the petitioners and citizens - and this resolution also does so - and furthermore I would like to express my support for this serious work and say that the insults to the integrity of this House and the members of that delegation were as unacceptable as some of the content that it is intended to maintained here .
Doing what is right is more important than anything else .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Mr Iturgaiz , winning elections does not give anybody the right to show disdain for European legislation .
A mere vote by the majority of councillors of a municipality cannot lead to the public interest being used to justify a great misappropriation .
A political majority cannot be used as an excuse to cancel out local democracy through the creation of parallel local councils whose protagonists are the insatiable town-planners and the omnipotent construction companies .
The mere fact that a town-planning project is approved does not give anybody the right to jeopardise the conservation of water resources and valuable land of several generations by covering everything in an avalanche of concrete .
What has been lacking is greater transparency and a minimum degree of respect for small-holders and public participation in all processes .
Yes , the Valencian , Andalusian and Madrid building scandal is a European scandal that demands a European response .
We demand that the Commission act vigorously and urgently in the face of flagrant violations of the Directive on public procurement , the framework Directive on water and the ' Habitats ' Directive on the part of the Valencian authorities and other regional governments .
Many of the 750 000 homes built in Spain last year , more than in France and Germany put together , have failed to respect Community Law .
Why can the Commission not act straight away ?
Mr President , clearly the issues that are being addressed in relation to Spain are not confined to Spain , and I offer that as some consolation to our Spanish colleagues on the PPE-DE side of the House .
Similar problems , not in relation to property ownership but certainly in relation to impact on the environment , on heritage and , indeed , on people 's quality of life are occurring as a result of major infrastructural developments in Ireland , and it seems to be an issue that we at European level have not been able to get to grips with because the European legislation is not stringent enough or , indeed , the Commission is not in a position to act fast enough in terms of addressing complaints when they are made .
When I visited Madrid , for instance , I was made aware of the situation there , in which the regional authority redesignated a ring round around Madrid as a city street , decided to develop it as a motorway , broke it up into about a dozen different pieces and argued that it therefore did not need to have an environmental impact assessment applied to it .
Now , the Commission eventually decided that this was wrong , but three quarters of the motorway had already been built by the time that decision was made .
( ES ) Mr President , this Parliament 's missions to the region of Valencia have resulted from the reported cases of town-planning abuse , which have been reflected in the media and which have been of concern to many citizens .
It is not the visits by MEPs that are scaring away potential home buyers .
In fact , these missions help to enable the tens of thousands of European citizens who wish to live in our territory to do so in the confidence that they are investing in a place that has clear rules and that is respectful of the environment .
Future customers are increasingly demanding and these two elements represent a competitive advantage that we cannot allow to be destroyed through uncontrolled town-planning .
Over recent years , complaints about this kind of abuse have increased from citizens who believe that they have been victims of actions that have affected their properties or which have seriously spoiled the environment in which they live .
In spite of this , I would also like to point out that I do not believe that they are generalised or that they happen every day .
The promises made by the regional authorities prior to these missions have not been fulfilled , however , and they have not resolved the problems , reformed the laws , assisted the people affected or applied the recommendations approved by this Parliament in 2005 .
There were elections in the region of Valencia on 27 May and it is true that this is a good time to begin a new stage and , above all , to put right , and , to start with , to acknowledge , this problem , something that the regional government has not yet done .
Also to accept the fact that it has not been capable of resolving it so far .
It is also time to stop being arrogant and stop showing distain for the MEPs who visited the region .

I would like to say , finally , that my party , the Socialist Party , is once again willing , as it has been on several occasions , to contribute to resolving this problem ; in the case of the region of Valencia , therefore , it would say once again that a broad social and political agreement is needed which includes all of the parties affected and which involves the reform of Valencian town-planning law in order to bring it into line with the Treaties and in order to increase the legal security of all of the parties , and which also includes the establishment of assistance and dispute-settlement mechanisms for citizens who feel that they are affected by town-planning abuses .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , many petitions on this issue show that buying real estate can be a real challenge .
The cases mentioned raise a number of complicated legal issues that relate to property law .
This is the exclusive competence of the Member States ; the Commission cannot interfere with this .
Any redress in this respect must be brought before national authorities and we cannot create false expectations on the part of the petitioners .
However , where cases raise questions of European law , the Commission takes its role as guardian of the Treaties seriously , where we establish whether there are infringements of Community law .
In our view , this is the case regarding public procurement legislation .
We have already started infringement actions about this .
We intend to pursue these actions with a view to obtaining full compliance with Community law .
In accordance with Rule 108 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received one motion for a resolution at the end of this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.35 p.m. and resumed at 6 p.m. )

Commission Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0125 / 2007 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Commission .
Part One
Subject : Insurance companies in the EU
Insurance companies will reportedly conclude insurance policies only in respect of vehicles which are registered in and have number plates issued by the State in which each company is based , despite the fact that EU legislation makes provision for the insurance of vehicles with number plates issued by another Member State .
In the light of the third directive on direct insurance 92 / 49 / EEC and the fourth directive on motor vehicle insurance 2000 / 26 / EEC , will the Commission propose a review of the directives so that European consumers will be able themselves to choose their insurance companies and the State in which it is in their interests to conclude their motor vehicle insurance ?
Does the Commission consider that this freedom will also promote competition and thereby appreciably reduce the cost of insurance ?
Mr President , the principal aims of the EU legislative framework are a high degree of protection of road traffic accident victims , the promotion of free circulation of vehicles and the encouragement of cross-border activities of insurance undertakings .
The EU legal framework for compulsory motor insurance is a major EU success story .
Developed since the early 1970s , it has been a fundamental factor in making the free movement of motorists and their vehicles in the Union a reality .
The motor insurance directives have permitted the abolition of border checks on insurance , so the vehicles can be driven as easily between Member States as between one country .
They also allow for easy compensation for the thousands of accidents involving vehicles from more than one Member State .
The motor insurance directives require that insurers have a local presence for claims settlement and oblige them to be members of the local guarantee fund and the local green card bureau .
This is to protect victims , in particular from having to enter into cross-border negotiations with an insurance company established in another Member State .
The membership of the local green card bureau ensures a smooth functioning of a system without a need to check the insurance certificates .
All EU Member States , Switzerland , Norway , Iceland , Croatia and Andorra participate on the basis of the ' Multilateral Agreement ' .
The link between the country where the vehicle is registered and the insurer 's membership of that country 's guarantee fund is also an expression of the solidarity of the local motoring population .
European consumers have the possibility to seek motor insurance cover EU-wide as far as the above specific conditions set for insurers are met .
Whether insurers are prepared to enter into insurance contracts for cars registered in another country depends largely on the insurers ' commercial policy and their willingness to cover risks largely or wholly situated in another country , where the risk structures may be substantially different from what they are familiar with in their home country .
With this in mind , it is perhaps not surprising that the volume of cross-frontier business in this branch is very limited .
However , some argue that there is a lack of competition and that a higher volume of cross-frontier business might bring down motor insurance premium levels .
We are assessing this question as part of our ongoing public consultation on retail financial services .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your reply ; however , I should like to insist on my question following this morning 's debate and the huge Equitable Life scandal , with millions of victims calling for fair compensation on the grounds of the poor administration of the insurance company .
Perhaps this example alone is enough to convince the Commission to liberalise the car insurance market and the way in which citizens themselves choose what is in their best interest , in which case they would be wholly and personally responsible for their choices .
Buying residential property represents a difficult and time-consuming challenge for consumers .
Legal and fiscal matters are big challenges , even in one 's own Member State .
These challenges are only exacerbated when consumers are purchasing a residential property outside their Member State : procedures often are completely different from the ones in place ' at home ' .
While the Commission is fully aware of these facts , there is no simple answer .
Taxation and property laws that lie at the origin of the complexity fall largely outside the scope of Community competence .
Nevertheless , the Commission supports initiatives that promote transparency in European housing and mortgage-lending markets .
Transparency is particularly important for consumers , especially where rules vary from one country to the next .
Consumers need full and accurate information to be able to make an informed choice when buying a property in another Member State .
The request for an information leaflet for consumers purchasing property has also been made within our ongoing review of the European mortgage credit markets , where stakeholders suggested that the Commission create and maintain an online guide to the main legal and other issues relating to cross-border lending .
I am in favour of such initiatives .
Buying property across borders is a natural consequence of the freedoms that constitute the essence of the Single Market .
Where consumers face practical problems or lack of information , we must try to help them , for example by pointing out what problems they may encounter and by pointing them in the direction of the relevant bodies and authorities that can assist them .
The Commission will look into these issues and see what is feasible .
But let me be honest : this is not an easy task .
The Commission does not necessarily have access to all the information that would be required , nor would we necessarily have the means to verify that such information is accurate or up to date .
Before moving ahead , we must be certain that we can overcome this challenge .
Working together with third parties may also be an option .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
I suppose in this area , as in all other areas , the clause caveat emptor should always apply first and foremost .
However , there are complexities , as you rightly said , and I welcome the fact that you have looked at what the European mortgage providers are considering .
However , there is another aspect - the need to have a second will .
If you own a property outside your country of residence , it is necessary to have a second will to cover the execution of your estate in that scenario .
So , even though there are differences across the 27 Member States , and further complexities within them , there are certain core values which could be put up on the Commission website , as you rightly say .
I would encourage you to work further towards that goal , highlighting at the same time that caveat emptor should always apply first and foremost .
I certainly agree with the honourable Member .
As I said , it could be quite a difficult task to undertake this body of work .
As Mr Crowley mentioned , the underlying principle must always be caveat emptor .
In all these areas , whether you are buying property or financial products , it is something that everybody must be aware of .
As I said earlier today , when someone comes along offering you a deal that seems too good to be true , it usually is too good to be true .
That is something we must bear in mind .
Mr Crowley mentioned the question of having a second will .
Only last weekend I read an article in a professional magazine that was advising people who have properties in Spain , for example , that it was essential to make a will there covering that particular property and how to go about it .
By the way , I do not have a property in Spain as of now , but many Irish people I know do , and are not aware of this requirement .
This article was in a magazine that would only be read by people working in accountancy .
What Mr Crowley says is very important .
Only a very small percentage of Irish people who have homes in that very nice country of Spain would be aware of this information .
One of the 48 recommendations set out by the expert group was for there to be an information leaflet .
It will be a bit of a task to determine what we can cover adequately within the leaflet , but we will certainly have an attempt at it .
The danger is that , since we will not be able to cover everything , we may face the moral hazard of not supplying all the information , but let us see what we can achieve .
If we are trying to have a single market for all areas , the logical thing then is to provide the information that goes across these particular fronts .
It would also help improve the image of the European Union if ordinary people were to say that was something very worthwhile had come from the European Union .
We will make an attempt at it .
How successful we will be , I do not know .
( LT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I agree that this question is complicated .
I myself have written a book on how to establish a business in the 15 old European Union countries , including the purchase of real estate , taxes and other considerations .
You mentioned that there are compendiums of information .
Could you specify which compendiums of information there are ?
If they are not complete , they need to be updated so that people circulating freely within the European Union could have all the information they need about these conditions , including the purchase of real estate .
For fear there has been a mistake they do not exist yet .
Mr Crowley 's question was whether we could consider preparing an information leaflet and this action was also recommended by the Expert Group on Mortgage Credit .
We are examining this and will attempt to see what we can do in terms of having a proper information leaflet , subject to the various caveats I myself entered about how this would be produced .
I congratulate the Member for her initiative in tackling this in an obviously professional capacity I imagine it was a considerable amount of work .
However , as I said in my former reply , we might endeavour to marry the expertise that is available out there among private organisations who might agree to having some type of joint approach , using what is already there rather then starting afresh ourselves .
So perhaps the honourable Member would be willing to give some of the information she has to my departments and we might exploit her obvious talents in this matter .
Subject : External Service of the European Union and immigration policy
Given the recent extension of the Union 's powers in the area of immigration , and the implementation of Commission action in this area , does the Union 's External Service have the resources to enable it to help the Member States with the new cooperation modalities which have been put into action in this field , on issues such as the hiring of legal immigrants or the repatriation of immigrants and their integration into their home societies ?
The external dimension of EU migration policy and Commission action in this area has developed a lot over the last few years due to the needs regarding migration , in particular for the definition but also the implementation of a global approach to migration .
We think this is important for the future and we are trying to do what we can to come to a global approach .
In the context of this global approach , we are developing various initiatives relating to all aspects of migration .
That means including legal migration , but particularly the fight against illegal migration , readmission and readmission agreements , return , reintegration , asylum , migration and development , and migration and integration .
From the outset , I have personally committed myself to the 3 % target in the Neighbourhood Policy Instrument .
I am already beginning to give definite form to the commitment as regards the countries under my responsibility .
Together with Mr Frattini and Mr Michel , I have just presented to the Commission for adoption the 2007-2010 thematic strategy for the thematic programme on cooperation with third countries in the areas of migration and asylum .
The programme provides for an indicative amount of more than EUR 380 million over the period 2007-2013 for cooperation with third countries in the areas of migration and asylum , including on labour migration and reintegration of returnees .
The Commission delegations play a key role in the implementation of this ambitious agenda , both at political but also at operational level , and Brussels-based Commission departments systematically inform the Commission delegations of , and involve them in , new developments related to migration .
Political dialogue with third countries is conducted jointly by the delegations and Brussels-based departments .
At operational level , delegations are also responsible , for instance , for identifying needs and constraints , to ensure that actions financed with Community external assistance are properly implemented .
In addition , delegations in countries where migration has emerged as an important new topic in the context of Community external assistance are also assisted by the departments in Brussels through training measures , thematic networks at operational level and support missions .
Through these measures , we in the Commission ensure that the delegations are able to interact with the Member States but also with third countries , and to implement migration-related Community assistance .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , over recent months I have listened to the statements by you and by Commissioners Michel and Frattini , and I have found the commitments that you have made very encouraging .
My concern is that we in the European Union often express excessive amounts of will , we make statements but then they are not followed up by actions because we lack resources .
For example , the Frontex system has faced immense difficulties controlling illegal immigration .
The commitments made by the three Commissioners would require the establishment of a European Union external service of a new kind , not economic or political , but rather of a social and work nature , something similar to the work and social organisations that all of the Member States currently have .
Does the Commissioner believe that that kind of external service can be established ?
Do you have sufficient resources ?
What can Parliament do to help the Commissioner to establish this new role ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , Mr Papadimoulis , the Commission is completing its analysis of Greece 's revised GDP and GNP figures .
It has used the same procedure for that analysis as for all of the other Member States .
The procedure and timetable employed are as follows :
On 22 September last year , Greece presented the Commission with the revised figures on its gross domestic product and its gross national product .
These figures represented a revision upwards of approximately 26 % .
At the end of October last year , therefore , a month after having received that information , Eurostat communicated those figures for an initial analysis by the Member States ' GNI-Committee .
The committee then issued a statement to the effect that it did not have sufficient information on the revised data and the changes in methodology communicated by Greece .
The committee also pointed to the urgent need for Greece to cooperate fully with Eurostat and to provide a completely revised inventory of its GDP and its GNP , explaining in detail the new sources and methods used by Greece for its national accounts , in order to enable Eurostat to carry out a complete verification of the new data and inform the committee of the results of that verification .
Greece presented the inventory to Eurostat on 6 February of this year , in the form of a 460-page document in Greek .
Following the relevant translation , Eurostat is completing the analysis of that documentation and it will send a mission to Greece by the end of this month .
Like those carried out in other countries , experts from other Member States take part in that mission , in order to ensure the necessary degree of transparency .
The results of the mission will be analysed with Greece firstly and then any comments made within that context will be taken into account in the final wording of the report assessing the revised figures for Greek GDP and GNP .
Eurostat will present this report to the committee for an in-depth debate .
It is hoped that it will be presented no later than October 2007 .
With regard to the second part of your question : according to our spring forecasts , carried out on the basis of the non-revised Greek GDP figures , the public deficit for this year is expected to fall to 2.4 % , compared to last year 's 2.6 % .
For 2008 , on the assumption that current policies are not changed , the Commission foresees a slight increase in public deficit , from 2.4 % to 2.7 % .
All of this is on the basis of the GDP figures prior to the revision .
With regard to the level of indebtedness , it is calculated that it will continue to fall , from the 104.5 % of GDP in 2006 to around 100.7 % in 2007 and 97.5 % in 2008 .
In view of these figures , on 16 May of this year the Commission recommended to the Council that the excessive deficit procedure , which had been opened up two years earlier , be ended , and on 5 June of this year the Ecofin Council adopted the decision to close the procedure , in accordance with the Commission 's proposal .
Furthermore , on 27 February of this year , on the recommendation of the Commission , the Ecofin Council approved its opinion on Greece 's updated stability programme for 2006-2009 and in that opinion Ecofin recommends that Greece take advantage of the favourable economic situation to progress towards the mid-term objective - which is budgetary balance - in order to continue improving the budgetary process , increasing its transparency and defining a budgetary strategy within a longer-term perspective which effectively applies mechanisms intended for the supervision and control of primary spending .
Furthermore , and in view of the high indebtedness and the expected increase as a result of ageing , it is recommended that the Greek authorities as soon as possible draw up future forecasts for spending linked to ageing and improve the long-term sustainability of the public accounts , providing the resources necessary to achieve the mid-term objective .
On 20 April , following the meeting of the Eurogroup in Berlin , the Greek Minister for the Economy and Finance formally and publicly announced that the government had decided to bring forward from 2012 to 2010 the time limit for achieving that medium-term budgetary objective .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your detailed reply .
In a statement after 5 June , you expressed the Commission 's concern about the large deficit in the balance of payments of the Greek economy and recommended strict measures in order to achieve a sustainable and constant reduction in the deficit and the debt .
My question therefore is : have you discussed the measures proposed by the Commission with the Greek Government ?
Do you have replies and commitments from the Greek Government for the measures that you consider necessary ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , with regard to the provisions of the euro zone 's single monetary policy , Sweden is currently one of the Member States that are subject to an exception .
At the moment there are 13 Member States subject to that exception and , furthermore , we have the case of the United Kingdom , which has the famous ' opt-out ' clause and which is not therefore included amongst the States with exceptions .
With the exception of Denmark , all of the other Member States with exceptions , that is to say , 12 Member States must adopt the euro as their currency , to which end they must seek to meet the convergence criteria laid down in the Treaty .
Nevertheless , the Treaty does not set explicit time limits for the Member States to comply with that obligation .
Our last convergence report , which covers the States with exceptions , was published in December 2006 , and in it the Commission concluded that Sweden met the price stability criterion , the criterion relating to the public budget situation and the criterion on the convergence of long-term interest rates .
Nevertheless , according to that same convergence report , Sweden did not meet the exchange rate criterion , which requires the Member State in question to have remained within the normal margins of fluctuation laid down in the exchange rate mechanism ( ERM II ) without any serious tensions for at least two years prior to the assessment .
Furthermore , in last December 's convergence report , the Commission pointed out that the Swedish legislation was not fully compatible with Articles 108 and 109 of the Treaty with regard to the regulation of the Central Bank and its integration into the European system of central banks .
In view of this assessment , the Commission concluded that there was no need to modify Sweden 's status as a Member State with an exception in this area .
In accordance with the Treaty , the Commission and the European Central Bank will publish the next convergence report in 2008 , in principle in May 2008 .
With regard to the final part of your question , which relates , by way of comparison , to the security of energy supply , the provisions of the Treaties in force have already led the European Parliament and the Council to adopt directives relating , on the one hand , to the security of natural gas supply , and , on the other , to safeguarding the security of electricity supply in investment in infrastructures .
These directives must be transposed into national legislation , and in the case of the latter directive , it must be transposed by 1 December of this year .
We are not therefore in two completely identical situations from a legal point of view .
With regard to the obligation to join the euro , the Treaty does not stipulate any maximum time limit , nor the rules for implementation , but leaves it to the convergence assessment that is carried out every two years .
In the case that you give as an example , however , that of energy security , there are directives that must be applied by the Member States , and in the event of non-compliance the relevant infringement procedures are applied .
( LT ) Commissioner , I am not happy with your answer because in Sweden 's accession agreement it is clearly stated that Sweden must implement all agreements in force at that time .
In other words , on the principle of closer cooperation , no exceptions are possible .
Now the Swedes have decided , four years after a referendum on the subject , to again vote against the introduction of the euro .
Does this mean that countries may choose which parts of the accession agreement to honour and which parts not to honour ?
I have in mind the Lithuanian nuclear electricity generation plant at Ignalina , which is safe and which the Lithuanians do not want to close .
Should we perhaps just refrain from closing the plant without bothering to consult anyone ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , Sweden must apply the Treaties , of course .
The fact that a referendum has been held does not excuse Sweden from its obligation to apply the Treaties .
The Commission also has to apply the Treaty , and what it has done , and what it is going to continue to do , is analyse every two years , as the Treaty demands , whether or not the Member State in question in this case Sweden - fulfils the required conditions for entering the euro .
For the time being it does not do so .
Sweden has a problem because its currency is not included in the exchange rate mechanism and , therefore , it does not fulfil the exchange rate stability criterion , it does not conform to the criterion on bringing its legislation into line with the rules laid down in the articles of the Treaty that I referred to earlier , and we point that out .
What all Member States must do is try to prepare for that moment .
As the honourable Member knows , and as you all know , the results of the referendum held in Sweden in 2003 are not going to remain in force forever .
We have well-known cases of referendums that delivered a certain position in a particular country , but that position changed over time because the will of its citizens , expressed by means of elections or new referendums , changed .
I would insist that , from the point of view of the type of legal obligations laid down in the Treaty , the situation is not comparable if we analyse , on the one hand , the need to move towards Economic and Monetary Union and , on the other , the need to comply with the energy security rules that are included amongst our fundamental rules .
We shall now proceed to supplementary questions .
I have received more questions than I can accept . Consequently , I can only give two MEPs the opportunity to speak .
I must comply with the provisions laid down in Rule 109 and Annex II of the Rules of Procedure , which cover the conduct of Questions to the Commission .
I have chosen Mr Lundgren and Mrs Kauppi .
( SV ) Mr President , notwithstanding the Rules of Procedure , there is good reason for considering how this whole issue of Swedish membership of the currency union has been dealt with .
When the referendum on Swedish membership of the European Union was organised in 1994 , it was made clear that we were not obliged to join the currency union if we voted in favour of EU membership .
That was an issue about which we had negotiated and on which we could decide later .
That is the political background to this matter .
I agree with the Commissioner that Sweden cannot be forced into ERM II as long as we do not fulfil the requirements for participation in it .
What I would point out , however , is this : is it really imaginable - and this is my question to the Commissioner - that a country that has joined ERM II can ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , I am not sure whether Mr Lundgren has actually asked a question , but in any event he and I agree that there is at least that point that you mentioned in your speech , Mr Lundgren , and there are also the legal incompatibilities which make it impossible at the moment to say that Sweden fulfils the criteria for joining the euro .
I would say once again that at no point does the Treaty lay down maximum or minimum time limits .
It lays down a general obligation to prepare , to seek to fulfil the conditions , but it does not stipulate a specific timetable .
The Treaty must therefore be interpreted with the same flexibility that was employed when it was drawn up , not according to criteria that are different to those laid down in the Treaty .
In any event , I would say that we need to apply common sense , as we so often have to do in politics .
If the Swedish citizens said no four years ago , we will have to ask them when they decide to change their minds , should they decide to do so .
I do not believe that any country can be obliged to join a currency against its will .
I would like to ask three direct questions .
The first is a purely technical issue : is the Accession Treaty clause for the Swedish Accession Treaty completely identical to those of the 12 Member States which joined after 2004 ?
Secondly , I understand that Mrs Budreikaitis not as much interested in the euro as she is in the former interpretations of the Accession Treaties .
If there is no deadline for implementing something in primary legislation , is it possible to postpone it forever ?
Thirdly , do you think that the referendum is relevant to the debate ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr Czarnecki , being a Member State of the European Union , as we have just discussed in the last reply , brings with it the obligation to adopt the euro , except in the case of Denmark and the United Kingdom , which negotiated an ' opt-out ' clause .
The Member States that are not yet members of the euro zone are committed to adopting the single currency once they fulfil the conditions necessary in order to do so and to try to prepare for fulfilling them .
When the Commission confirms , on the basis of its own assessment ( the convergence report ) , and the European Central Bank does the same , that Poland meets all of the conditions laid down in Article 121 ( 1 ) of the Treaty , Poland 's exception can be removed , in accordance with Article 122 ( 2 ) , and the zloty can be introduced into the euro .

For the time being , Poland does not entirely fulfil the convergence criteria with regard to the situation of public finances - because the Polish public deficit is higher than 3 % - and nor does it fulfil the criterion with regard to the stability of exchange rates insofar as the zloty does not belong to the exchange rate mechanism .
Furthermore , the legislation regulating the Central Bank in Poland does not yet conform to the Treaty 's requirements , according to the analysis included in our latest convergence report of December 2006 .
The Commission does not make predictions concerning when the Member States will or may fulfil the required conditions , but it certainly encourages all of them to gear their policies towards achieving macroeconomic stability and to promote productivity growth .
These policies promote sustainable economic convergence , which is the best basis for preparing the countries that wish to enter the euro and for enjoying all the benefits of belonging to the single currency once they are in the euro zone .
( PL ) Commissioner , thank you for your speech .
However , I would like to say that we are obviously aware of the conditions that need to be fulfilled in order to join the Eurozone .
My country has clearly stated that this is still not the right moment in economic terms , and that a decision will certainly be taken in a few years .
I am very aware of the fact that the European Commission cannot discuss dates , but could we broadly state that 2012 would be a more or less suitable date for both sides ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , I would insist that it does not fall to the Commission to reply to that question .
I believe that it is a question that should be addressed , and that I sometimes address , to the Polish authorities .
When I meet with the Polish authorities , I ask them : have your intentions , timetable and objectives for joining the euro been established yet ?
And I do not ask out of mere curiosity , but because I am convinced that , for an economy such as the Polish economy - and for many other economies of Member States of the European Union that do not yet belong to the single currency - it would be extremely useful to set that target date in order to guide macroeconomic policies and structural reforms in a consistent and coherent manner towards compliance with the conditions in order to prepare an economy to take the best possible advantage of the benefits of belonging to the euro .
Since the enlargement , we have experienced some very positive times in terms of the behaviour of the currency markets and of the financial markets , but that is not always going to be the case , and the financial markets , the rating agencies , the investors , are also going to put those questions to the Polish authorities .
Not only are you , the Members of the European Parliament , and we , the Commissioners , going to ask them , but the economic agents , observers and investors are asking them and will continue to do so with increasing insistence .
I therefore believe that it is good for everybody that the countries that are going to join the euro , not just through obligation , but above all through conviction , and which are undergoing a process of convergence , growth and modernisation , through a very significant reform effort , clarify this element of the strategy ; above all , because it is good for them and for their own interests .
Would the Commissioner be willing to answer the same question again but in relation to the United Kingdom ?
As you pointed out earlier , the UK has no obligation to join the euro but it has the right to do so , provided it meets the conditions .
How close is the UK to actually meeting the conditions ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , it is true that the situation in the United Kingdom - as I have already said , and as you have repeated - is not the same .
The United Kingdom has an ' opt-out ' clause , and , therefore , the comments I made earlier with regard to the 12 countries that do not have that clause do not apply to it .
Even with that clause , however , the day will come - and I hope that you and I will see it soon - when the British authorities , regardless of that clause , decide to prepare for joining the euro because they believe that it is positive for the British economy .
When will that day come ?
If you ask me whether I believe it will be this year , I shall say no , I do not believe that it will be this year .
My impression is that , in the current phase of the economic cycle of the British economy and of the euro zone economy , the arguments in favour are not going to increase over the coming months or in the immediate future .
I always respond to that question with a particular observation , however .
I believe that the time will come when the circumstances that the British , being the good pragmatists they are , analyse each month with regard to the pros and cons of joining the euro will change , and will show the British citizens , British politicians and the City of London , to name three significant parties in this regard , that it will be good for the British economy to enter the euro at a particular time .
I am sure that that time will come , but , to be frank , I believe that it will come after the next crisis .
( LT ) Honourable Commissioner , I also would like to link the last two issues and ask you a specific question .
I personally do not doubt the advantages of the euro ; however , in some countries , which do not yet have the euro , public opinion is different .
How would the situation be affected by , for example , referendums in Poland or Lithuania , or Hungary or the Czech Republic , in which people voted against the introduction of the euro ?
How it would affect the moral climate is clear , but what about the legal and practical situation ?
Mr President , Baroness Ludford , according to EU law , it is up to the UK authorities to carry out impact assessments of infrastructure projects and to ensure that all applicable environmental standards are complied with before , during and after the realisation of these projects .
Nevertheless , the Commission is closely monitoring the United Kingdom 's implementation of the relevant provisions in Community law .
The plans for the sustainable development of Heathrow involve an undertaking by the UK government not to build a third runway without prior public consultation and only to do so if noise and air quality conditions are strictly adhered to .
A complete environmental impact assessment has therefore begun , which must comply with the provisions of the 1985 directive covering assessments of this nature , and with the provisions of the 2001 Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive .
According to the 1996 Directive on the Management and Quality of Ambient Air and directives arising from it , air quality plans must , where necessary , be implemented in order that the set limit values are complied with .
The impact of Heathrow Airport is covered by the air quality plan of the London metropolitan area .
In 2005 , however , air quality levels in the area often exceeded the limit values laid down for PM10 particles .
Moreover , pursuant to the 2002 Directive on environmental noise , Heathrow must , before the end of this month , draw up a strategic noise map that includes an analysis of possible eventualities .
A year after this map has been drawn up , an appropriate action plan must be drawn up following a process of public consultation .
To sum up , the Commission is following the development of the EU 's biggest airport with interest and is monitoring the implementation of the relevant provisions in Community law .
However , the specific provisions on the extension of the airport , for example the provision relating to the building of a third runway , rests with the British authorities in this particular case .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answer .
This will reassure Londoners that the Commission is indeed keeping a watchful eye , though , as you say , the main responsibility lies with the UK Government .
However , an extra runway at Heathrow would allow an extra 500 flights a day to pass over London .
The UK Government 's optimistic claim that air pollution can be kept within EU legal limits appears to rest on hopes of cleaner planes and controls on vehicle traffic around the airport .
Aviation already accounts for one third of all London 's carbon emissions .
Therefore , we would ask the Commission to keep that close watch on what is going to happen .
We are expecting the consultation soon , but it needs the Commission to keep a very close eye to make sure that Londoners are protected .
While it is easy to lambaste plans for new runways , is the Commission aware that last week , as an indication of just how essential a third runway is at Heathrow , the Chief Executive of British Airways said that without it there is no prospect of restoring BA flights between my constituency in Belfast and the capital city of my country , London ?
Thus , should those who would jump to oppose progress not pause to reflect on the prejudice and the hardship which they would impose on citizens of the UK and elsewhere who need the modern , efficient flight connections that projects such as this would provide ?

Mr President , Baroness Ludford , I must reiterate what I said in my reply to Baroness Ludford 's question .
The Commission must monitor compliance with Community law .
As I mentioned , there are a number of applicable directives , and monitoring their effective implementation is our responsibility .
In the particular case raised in Baroness Ludford 's question , that is to say , the third runway at Heathrow , let me repeat that responsibility lies with the British authorities and , pursuant to the subsidiarity principle , the Commission may not interfere in issues for which responsibility lies with a particular Member State .
Subject : European ' ecological governance '
Does the Commission intend to draw up a global , cohesive action plan for ' ecological governance ' , which will consolidate , simplify and highlight the existence of the existing regulatory framework for the parties concerned ?
Will the plan include the new legislative initiatives on the environment , and reflect the EU 's external commitments on environmental issues ?
Will it also ensure cohesion between the EU 's environmental , trade and industrial policies ?

Mr President , Mr Papastamkos , since it published its White Paper in 2001 , the Commission has always stressed the importance it attaches to the quality of governance in its actions , in order to ensure that the European institutions function effectively and democratically , in fruitful cooperation with civil society .
Governance is an issue that cuts across all policy areas , not only the environment .
We must acknowledge , however , that the citizens and NGOs place special emphasis on the quality of their environment and that civil society wants to be kept informed and to be involved as regards environmental issues .
The 1998 Aarhus Convention is of particular importance in this connection , as it provides for access to information , public involvement in the decision-making process and justice when it comes to environmental issues .
This Convention , to which the Community and the Member States are party , reinforces the commitments mentioned in the White Paper on European Governance .
The Commission has applied principles of governance fully in its initiatives .
As regards the issues raised by Mr Papastamkos in his question , I should like to point out to him that all important measures that the Commission is planning to present to other institutions are included in its annual work programme .
This programme is presented to the other institutions - including , of course , Parliament , which debates it every year - and is accessible to the public .
Most environmental measures are based on the Sixth Environment Action Programme .
Furthermore , all of the Commission 's proposals fully reflect the undertakings made by the Community in international agreements , including those relating to trade policy and the environment .
Lastly , the Commission is playing an active role in the debate on improving international environmental governance .
The EU has put forward a practical proposal to set up a UN environmental organisation , on the basis of a UN environmental programme .
This body would have authority and clear legal functions as regards the early detection , monitoring and recovery of data , and would work on a consolidated scientific basis , thereby improving decision-making and the adoption of policies based on scientific evidence .

( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the environmental acquis contains approximately 400 texts of secondary law and international conventions and they are , of course , used and applied by governments , local authorities , enterprises and the civil society .
What has this famous ' better regulation ' strategy yielded to date ?
Two years ago I proposed here in this Chamber the need to establish an international environmental organisation .
What is the Commission 's position ?
The environment , as we all know , is a public commodity and , as such , has no borders .
What is the Commission 's position on the establishment of an international environmental court ?

Mr President , Mr Martin , the Commission bases EU climate policy and its scientific analysis of climate change on the most robust , up-to-date information available .
The Commission is aware that , according to recent research , with greenhouse gases stabilising at 550 parts per million ( ppm ) CO2 equivalent , the chances of meeting the objective of limiting global warming to two degrees are dwindling .
Accordingly , in its Communication entitled ' Limiting global warming to 2 ° c ' adopted this year , the Commission stated that in order to ensure that there is a 50 % chance of not exceeding the 2 ° c limit , it will be necessary to keep greenhouse gas concentrations at substantially less than 550ppm CO2 equivalent in the decades ahead . It also stated that emissions must then go down in order to achieve stabilisation at around 450ppm .
This means that between now and 2050 , worldwide greenhouse gas emissions must go down by at least 50 % in relation to 1990 levels .
The Commission 's analysis demonstrated that this objective is technically feasible and economically viable if those mainly responsible for emissions take action quickly .
This technical feasibility was confirmed recently by the report issued by Working Group 3 of the International Panel on Climate Change .
The scientific studies carried out by Mr Meinhausen mentioned by Mr Martin in his question also underpin this ambitious objective .
In order to limit climate change to 2 ° c , to a 2 ° c increase , developed countries must take the initiative of collectively reducing greenhouse gas emissions to 30 % in relation to 1990 levels by 2020 , which is the objective we set in the proposals we adopted in January of this year in the Commission , and that subsequently received the Council 's support .
At the same time , emissions from developing countries must reach their maximum targets between 2020 and 2025 .
We are facing a global challenge , and the EU , which is responsible for 14 % of the total greenhouse gas emissions on the planet , is ready to take the lead on the issue on the international stage .
The EU is sure that the UN Conference on Climate Change to be held in Bali later this year will provide the impetus for negotiations on future international cooperation on climate change after 2012 , which will lead to - or , rather , should lead to - an agreement on what must be done to achieve a global reduction in emissions .
I should like to add that , on the basis of the conclusions of the last G8 Summit - taking account of both the progress and the limitations of those conclusions - we feel that significant progress was made on this agreement a few days ago in Heiligendamm .
Firstly , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his very detailed and , in some ways , encouraging reply .
However , he has acknowledged in that reply that the 550 ppm target is unlikely to achieve his objectives .
Will the Commission , in the run-up to Bali , put forward the idea of Europe taking a lead and going for a 400 ppm target as a way of setting a good example to the rest of the world ?
I also accept his point that Europe acting alone will be insufficient .

Mr President , as Europeans we are convinced that , as I said in my first answer to Mr Martin , enormous progress needs to be made and that the EU must play a leading role on the world stage .
By moving forward together we can achieve much more ambitious goals , the likes of which others responsible for significant greenhouse gas emissions are not prepared to undertake , at the end-of-year Conference on the post-Kyoto era , and Europe will find itself alone in making such commitments .
Europe alone , as we said in our January proposals , must move forward in setting ambitious objectives .
It will not be possible , however , to make the kind of commitments we wish to unless the other participants at the Conference do likewise .
Subject : Waste tourism
What is the Commission 's opinion of the developing waste tourism between Bavaria and the Czech Republic and what measures is it planning to reduce waste tourism within the EU and with the EU 's closest neighbours ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , Mr Posselt , the European Union applies strict legislation to transfers of waste between Member Status and to transfers to third countries .
Community legislation on the transfer of waste is aimed at preventing the illegal transportation of waste , including cases in which waste is transported illegally from one Member State to another in what is known , and what you have described in your question , as ' waste tourism ' .
The transport of waste is only authorised when subsequent recovery or elimination operations conform to the environmental protection requirements laid down in European and Member State legislation .
European legislation lays down the strictest possible requirements with regard to the transport of dangerous goods and waste intended for elimination .
According to this legislation , it is illegal to transport this kind of waste to another Member State unless there has been prior written notification to the competent authority of the originating country .
Furthermore , in order to be able to carry out the transfer , authorisations must have been received from the competent authorities of the countries of origin , destination and transit .
The Commission 's main priorities include ensuring that Member States correctly apply European legislation on the transfer of waste , as well as preventing and reducing illegal transfers .
The Commission has adopted a series of measures for achieving these objectives .
This year awareness-raising events and meetings have been organised with the Member States , with a view to improving implementation and compliance with the rules on the transfer of waste in the Member States .
Another important step will be the Commission 's adoption of a proposal for a directive on environmental protection by means of criminal legislation .
We cannot accept the illegal transport of waste from Germany to the Czech Republic or the illegal dumping of waste at the final destination .
We are aware that similar situations may exist in other Member States , in addition to the one you raise in your question .
The Commission will monitor the situation closely with a view to ensuring the correct application of European environmental legislation .
Both the Commission and the Member States share the responsibility for guaranteeing the effective application of this legislation .
The Member States must provide for inspections and controls of waste transfers on the ground and effective , proportionate and dissuasive sanctions in the event of infringements .
( DE ) I am much obliged to the Commissioner for that good , exhaustive reply .
I now have two supplementary questions .
Firstly , in the Commissioner 's opinion , is enough being done to combat illegal waste tourism ?
Secondly , is it true that the phenomenon is only shifting to the new external borders of the EU : for example to Ukraine or South-East Europe ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , I am no expert in this field , but I can tell you that when it comes to this kind of action , and given that both you in your question and I in my reply note that illegal transportation exists , anything that can be done in addition to what is already being done will be welcome , and this is applicable both to our own responsibilities for ensuring compliance with European law and - as I said in my initial reply - to the actions of the Member States , which have the monitoring and inspection instruments on the ground .
With regard to the places in which this kind of illegal activity is taking place , according to the information available - as I pointed out in my reply - transfers of this type do not just take place between Germany and the Czech Republic , but also between Germany and certain other new Member States .
And this transit may also exist beyond the borders of the European Union .
In any event , with regard to transfers , to transport between Member States , it is particularly useful that this debate should confirm the intention and commitment of the European institutions to carry out our duties as vigorously as possible and call upon the politicians in the Member States to do likewise .
Subject : Cancer screening
Cancer affects 2 million people in the EU , of which 276 678 reside in the UK .
In light of the recent recommendations by the Council on cancer screening , does the Commission have any information on how effectively the Member States perceive this recommendation ?
Mr President , I would like to thank the Member for the question , even though I have to be honest and say that I wish he was tabling it six months from now , because we are currently in the process of preparing our report on exactly this matter , i.e. the implementation of the Council recommendation , and we expect to have the report adopted by the end of this year .
So we expect to have a discussion on the report , mainly under the Slovenian Presidency in the first half of next year .
This report will provide information on the implementation and possible impact of the recommendation in the Member States , in the European Economic Area states and candidate countries .
Additionally , wherever possible , the degree of national implementation will be reported in relation to the existing European screening benchmarks in breast and cervical cancer .
We expect to derive the facts from two main sources : the Member States , which will be directly contacted by the Commission , and the European Cancer Network , which is responsible for obtaining evidence on the impact and the degree of implementation from independent experts in the field .
I would like to take the opportunity , additionally , to inform you that we are also collecting cancer epidemiological data through the European Union Network for Information on Cancer that was established in 2005 , which is co-funded by the Commission and managed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer .
The aim is to compile information relevant to monitoring the cancer burden in European populations .
The end of this project is scheduled for the end of August 2007 - two months from now .
All the data , therefore , will in principle be available from that date .
I asked the Commissioner the question because I was aware that on the horizon there are some very good activities planned , and I wish to thank him for that .
I asked the question because I have been talking to doctors , consultants and oncologists in my own city of London , and in the United Kingdom we have a disproportionate number of cancer cases for what is a prosperous Member State .
The question I want to ask you is : when I go back to those oncologists , what will I tell them ?
Will I tell them that you will make every effort to ensure that the Council recommendation is implemented and that the Commission will take seriously the disproportionate figures we see from Member State to Member State , and that you will make a comparative example of Member States so that we can do something about some of these rates , which are far too high ?
I can assure you that I will do my utmost to have the screening recommendations fulfilled and implemented as much as possible .
They are recommendations , nevertheless , and we have to acknowledge this weakness in the European system .
Therefore , in the end , it is up to each Member State to apply and implement them as effectively as possible .
Perhaps the report will put some pressure on the Member States .
However , the fact is that , from the information we already have , there is still great diversity between Member States as to implementation of their screening guidelines and , unfortunately , the worst situation is in many of the new Member States .
Based on the report , there will be a discussion under the Slovenian Presidency which they will announce soon to Parliament .
Cancer will be the main health theme during the Presidency .
Therefore , I am sure we will have more opportunities to discuss this issue .
From my part , I will do everything to have these guidelines and recommendations applied as effectively and as faithfully as possible .
( DE ) Screening is important , but prevention is better .
In recent months , a vaccine against cervical cancer has been developed : a cancer that is always particularly problematic in young women .
Member States have adopted completely different practices : some make it available on the national health service , whilst in others it is only available privately .
This makes it very expensive and it becomes a social issue .
Does the Commission envisage any prospect of putting pressure on Member States to give as many young women and girls as possible access to this vaccine ?
Yes , I know about that , and in fact we had an opportunity to discuss this issue at the Informal Health Council in Aachen in April .
We have now asked the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) , which is working on this issue , to produce guidelines and give advice on this subject .
Of course , what is covered and what is not covered by the health system is , as you know , the responsibility of the Member States , but I believe that , based on the ECDC 's guidance , we can discuss the issue further with the Member States and offer science .
However , the final decision on finances will be left to the Member States .
One of the great strengths of the European Union in the field of health is the ability to spread best practices .
Apart from examining the outcome of the screening recommendations , will the Commission take as an example the country that comes out best in terms of screening , treatment and low mortality rates and analyse not just how they got there , but how this could be applied to other Member States ?
There is no point in just gathering statistics and saying ' These countries are doing it well ' or ' these countries are doing it badly ' .
We also need to know why the best countries are succeeding and how we might transpose that into other healthcare systems across the Community .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , the European Commission does indeed plan to approve a new strategy on health for 2007 and this strategy will be a general framework with quantifiable targets which take an integrated approach to all initiatives in the health sector at European level .
I agree with what I might call the inference in the honourable Member 's question that children and young people are a special priority for the European Commission .
The strategy will refer to issues such as the importance of a healthy way of life and the need to combat obesity , smoking and alcoholism , but will also make special reference to sectors that affect children and young people .
Of course , as I said in the previous question , our initiative on high-calibre health and safety services will be approved shortly and account will be taken within this framework of all the common fundamental values adopted by the Ministers of Health a year ago which support the European Union 's health care systems .
The values referred to in the decision by the Ministers include equality , universality and equal access to health services for everyone - and of course that includes children - regardless of their financial circumstances and these values will be taken into account in all the relevant initiatives by the European Commission .
Of course , the provision of health services comes within the competence of the Member States , but the Commission will support the Member States in this endeavour and these values will also be taken into account in our initiatives wherever and whenever they refer to the health sector .
We believe that all this will form a useful point of reference for all Community action in the health sector .
( EL ) Mr President , for children especially , as the strategy on children 's rights is being debated and the competent commission has not expressed an opinion in the health sector , I wish to ask if provision has been made to introduce certain regular examinations throughout Europe , in order to safeguard the standard of health and the early diagnosis of illnesses .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , it goes without saying that this comes within the competence of the Member States but , under the various strategies which will be adopted and within the framework of the exchange of best practices in various sectors , of course the question of the best method of prevention will also be discussed and prompt examination is clearly an important preventive method .
However , we assume that this will be addressed in each sector separately .
I do not expect there to be a horizontal provision especially for children ; however , in every health sector and in every health problem that can be avoided , the strategy and the initiative will refer specifically to children and to prevention .
( DE ) Mr President , the Commissioner raised the issue of alcoholism .
In Austria , a rare - or not so rare - phenomenon has emerged among young people , namely that of ' binge drinking ' .
The aim seems to be to drink oneself unconscious in as little time as possible .
In the Commissioner 's experience , is this an exclusively Austrian phenomenon , or is there a trend towards this throughout Europe ?
If it is a European trend , does he already have some measures in mind to counter such extreme drinking and prevent it in the long term ?
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , this problem of excessive consumption of alcohol may indeed have started as a problem in the north or northwestern Member States of the European Union , but it is now extending to the more southern countries .
We already know that this problem is being faced by Spain and I have had frequent opportunity to discuss this issue with the Minister of Health .
This issue is addressed in the strategy to combat the harmful effects of the excessive consumption of alcohol adopted last year and supported by the Member States .
We are in fact waiting for the European Parliament 's position on this issue , but the question of young people and combating this form of excessive consumption of alcohol in general are among the strategy 's main objectives .
However , to a very great extent , and I must repeat again something I said earlier , the competence lies with the Member States .
However , we believe that , through efforts to exchange best practices and transfer experience from one Member State to another and cooperation with all the agencies involved , we shall be able to achieve positive results .
That is precisely why , last week , we had the first meeting of the European Alcohol and Health Forum and , of course , the problem raised by the honourable Member was one of the items addressed by the European Alcohol and Health Forum .
( DE ) The aim is to live a long , healthy life .
Does the Commission have any suggestions as to how the existing EU programmes , such as the Seventh Research Framework Programme or the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme , could be used to achieve these objectives , and what are the Commission 's plans for the period up to 2013 ?
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , of course in the health sector in general , the basic strategy of the European Commission for this period is prevention .
That is precisely why we are focusing on numerous efforts concerned with negative repercussions on the health sector , as I said earlier , such as alcohol , smoking , obesity , mental health and all these issues .
However , this too will be part of the strategy ; the approach will apply to all European policies in all sectors , especially the research sector you referred to , and to other sectors of the European Union , such as the agricultural , transport and regional policy sectors .
In the research sector in particular , I work in close collaboration with my colleague and much of it is devoted to health research , such as research into cancer , research into avian influenza and in other health sectors , because we consider that it is one of the basic priorities and that is also acknowledged in the seventh financing protocol .
Subject : Health services
On 20 April 2007 , the Commission published the results of the consultation on health services it had launched in September 2006 .

As the majority of respondents were ' in favour of Community action in the field of health ' , can the Commission give an initial outline of the action it intends to take on the matter , in particular with a view to improving the provision of information to patients - making it possible for them to make informed choices - and ensuring greater clarity as regards the arrangements for and time limits in respect of obtaining healthcare in another Member State ? What right of redress does the Commission intend to propose in cases in which national authorities refuse to grant prior authorisation ?
On these health services , as I said earlier , we had the opportunity to discuss this in May during the debate on the report by Mrs Vergnaud , which was very helpful to us .
I can inform Parliament that we are now in the process of drafting a proposal .
After a few ministerial discussions this was endorsed by the Health Ministers in the latest Council , which expressed its expectation for the Commission to present the proposal in exactly the same way as the Parliament .
So we expect to do this as soon as possible , definitely before the end of the year .
We previously had a broad public consultation and the input from that will also be taken into account , but the basic outcome is that there is added value for initiative at European level .
An important part of it will of course be the issue of information , and we would like this to be done in the most accurate and objective way .
Our intention is to find solutions that add real value for patients , health professionals and healthcare providers , without creating new bureaucratic barriers , and respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
We will ensure coherence between the proposals on health services and the ongoing parallel Commission initiatives on social services of general interest , the wider issue of services of general interest , and the ongoing modernisation and simplification of the regulations on the coordination of social security systems .
As I said earlier , information to citizens is an important part , so there will be efforts to access information ; some have already been taken and have already been put in place with a recently launched website on meeting the costs for healthcare abroad .
This website , which is already available in French , English and German , will be available in all official languages very soon .
We will of course inform Parliament of forthcoming proposals as soon as they are finalised within the Commission , but I can broadly describe the main issues the proposals will address : improved information to patients , in particular about cross-border healthcare ; the issue of the general quality and safety of health services ; the rights of the patients to redress when they suffer harm ; respect for privacy ; procedural guarantees for patients in relation to cross-border healthcare ; collection of data on cross-border health services ; and support for European cooperation on issues such as European reference networks , developing quality and safety guidelines or developing comparable data and indicators .
. - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to know whether the Commission has annual statistics yet indicating the number of citizens of each Member State who wish to avail themselves of health care in another state and , if so , for what main reasons .
In the absence of such statistics , does the Commission have the number of complaints that may have been filed by citizens of a Member State who have been refused authorisation to receive health care in another Member State ?
One of the problems is that we do not have sufficient statistics on this issue .
But we know from the evidence we have in front of us is that it is at least 1 % of healthcare , so this will increase expectations .
The main reason so far is the issue of the lack of information .
People are not aware they have this right , and the more they become aware of this the more they will seek treatment abroad .
This is an opportunity for us to regulate before it becomes too big an issue , before it is too late .
I am afraid I do not have any indication of the complaints from people not being granted authorisation .
As you know , we have had cases before the European Court of Justice where citizens were dissatisfied with a negative decision but , at the same time , the patients ' lack of knowledge that they can seek redress at European level does not give us an accurate and clear picture either . That is why , when I was answering you question earlier , I only had in front of me the collection of data and cross-border health service which will be one of the priorities of the upcoming initiative .
Questions which had not been answered for lack of time would receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.40 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )
Derogations from internal market rules for defence procurement on the basis of Article 296 TEC ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on derogations from internal market rules for defence procurement on the basis of Article 296 TEC , by Arlene McCarthy , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection - B6-0122 / 2007 ) .

author . - Mr President , I am sorry Mr Booth has gone because I would like to tell him that I am a music lover and perhaps next time he could perform a Euro-rap when my report is up !
As the Commissioner is aware , the defence procurement market accounts for a large share of EU public procurement , estimated at about EUR 80 billion out of a combined Member State defence budget of EUR 170 billion , and that is why we are tabling this question today : defence procurement is still being awarded within mostly fragmented national markets .
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , therefore , takes note of the Commission 's interpretative communication on the application of Article 296 of the Treaty in the field of defence procurement , adopted on 7 December 2006 .
This helped clarify the existing legal framework .
However , we also further note efforts by the Commission to propose new legislation , which should substantially contribute to creating a more competitive environment for the European defence industry and its suppliers .
Therefore , we want to ask the Commissioner the following questions .
What progress is being made on the draft directive on the procurement of defence equipment not subject to the derogations of Article 296 ?
What are the subsequent steps planned by the Commission in this area ?
How does the Commission evaluate , from the perspective of a fair and efficient working of the internal market , the situation within the European defence industry , where in different Member States a significant number of highly skilled jobs appear to be at risk ?
What impact does it expect the directive to have on the sector , and what is the Commission 's strategy to induce Member States to cooperate more closely on defence procurement issues , to improve transparency and gradually open up their national defence procurement markets in order to establish a well-performing and competitive environment for this sensitive sector ?
We should also like to know what conclusions can be drawn from the code of conduct that was established in 2006 , and how the Commission understands the future relationship between a potential directive and the code of conduct .
Thank you , Mrs McCarthy .
I would like to remind you that rap music and the Greek hendecasyllabic metre have the same rhythm .
You and Mr Booth are closer than you think .
Mr President , four years ago the Commission announced its intention to develop a European security and defence policy .
Since then , we have been striving to establish a more open and fair European defence market through a number of initiatives .
The new procurement directive for defence equipment is a crucial element of this overall strategy and is one of the Commission 's strategic priorities for this year .
At present , the vast majority of defence equipment tenders are conducted outside Community rules .
Member States rely upon the derogation from the Treaty under Article 296 .
In the Commission 's view , this derogation should be limited to the exceptional cases .
We gave some guidance on the matter last December .
Nevertheless , the derogation is still the rule more than the exception .
Most defence procurement has therefore remained outside of the internal market principles .
This means that all 27 Member States procure defence equipment in accordance with their own national regulations , often resulting in non-transparent and sometimes discriminatory practices .
We recognise that current public procurement rules are really suited to the particular needs of the defence procurement .
But we believe we can achieve important economic gains if we open up national defence markets , which represent 0.8 % of the European Union 's GDP and one quarter of public procurement at state level .
Member States and industry widely acknowledge these advantages .
Fair and transparent conditions would allow companies , especially SMEs , to tender more easily in other Member States and thus widen their access to business opportunities in a much larger home market .
Longer production runs would allow economies of scale .
This in turn would help to reduce costs and lead to lower prices .
The final beneficiary of that would be the taxpayer .
Our proposal would adapt certain Community procurement rules to the specific nature of defence and give awarding authorities greater flexibility for sensitive procurement procedures .
This will also make it easier for Member States to use the derogation under Article 296 of the Treaty only in exceptional cases .
As is the case under the other procurement directives , Member States will continue exchanging views on defence procurement issues via the Advisory Committee on Public Procurement , once the directive has been implemented .
I wish to emphasise that the new directive will implement the code of conduct of the European Defence Agency .
The code of conduct applies only to contracts which are exempted from the Community rules on the basis of Article 296 , while the future directive will apply to contracts which are not exempted from Community rules .
Together the code of conduct and the new directive will enhance transparency and fair competition on defence partners in the European Union .
I am pleased to indicate that work on the proposal for a defence directive is well advanced .
My services are currently finalising the impact assessment which will tell us more about the expected impact of the initiative on the market , including social issues .
In parallel we are working closely with Member States via the Advisory Committee on Public Procurement and via the European Defence Agency .
Industry is also involved in the impact assessment .
The Commission is planning to adopt a proposal in the autumn .
At this stage we aim to present it as part of a package , together with a proposal for a regulation on intra-Community transfers of military equipment and a communication on defence industries .
Since we started the reference in the field of defence procurement , Parliament has always been one of our strongest supporters .
This is clearly reflected in Parliament 's resolution of 2005 .
I wish to thank you for this and hope that our fruitful cooperation will continue in the future .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I wish to begin by welcoming the Commissioner 's clear commitment to producing the new directive as soon as possible and by thanking him for outlining a number of important measures on which he and his departments are already working .
Clearly , this is a particularly sensitive area because of both its strategic nature and some of the industrial policy issues surrounding the whole defence sector .
I should like to raise two particular points , to which the Commissioner could perhaps respond in his winding-up statement .
Firstly , it is clear that in many areas of defence equipment procurement there are very complex contractual arrangements , in many cases also involving a significant amount of product development .
In other words , the specification of the equipment may involve new technology evolutions .
These arrangements will be very different in many cases from conventional buying contracts , although , as I indicated in my response to Mrs McCarthy 's report , there is increasing interest in more transparent conditions for these types of contracts .
I wonder whether the Commissioner could indicate or confirm that he will be taking these specific strategic needs into account .
The second point , which is a difficult one , is that in many cases defence procurement agreements also have some form of offset agreement attached to them .
For instance , the procuring countries may be looking for some form of local investment , involving local firms in assembling the equipment .
Or , in some cases , there is a completely different sort of financial offset in terms of an agreement to buy products from a company in another market .
These arrangements seem to raise difficult issues in the context of both competition and procurement law , and I should be grateful if the Commissioner could confirm that he will be looking at these in the review of the directive he has promised .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is not only a tricky subject but , astonishingly , also an area in which Member States are persistently infringing European law .
The Green Paper was discussed in 2004 , Parliament tabled a motion for a resolution in 2006 , and now we have a new interpretation - yet , in reality , hardly anything has changed .
Member States are continuing to do as they please .
Has the CFSP failed in this respect ?
I can see no real improvement since 2004 .
Member States and members of national parliaments seem to be completely unaware of Article 296 of the EC Treaty - as , indeed , it describes an exceptional situation rather than the rule .
In addition , the European Court of Justice has found once again that this is not a case of a general automatic derogation .
Yet there is no improvement to be seen , even though - and this , too , may still be worth mentioning - the group concerned consists of just six Member States .
There , too , I do not currently see any improvement .
To put it clearly , I do not want any increase in the defence budget ; above all , my group wants to see savings by means of cooperation and the use of synergies .
Parliament has made some recommendations in this regard , for example on the components the new Code of Conduct should have .
Perhaps the Commissioner could add something in this regard ?
We have also requested better cooperation from the Commission - and not only the Commission , but also the European Defence Agency .
I cannot see much evidence of this in reality .
I should like to reiterate that we have made suggestions on the mechanisms for the competitive award of contracts the Commission still needs to change for us to finally achieve what everyone in this House wants .
After all , we agree with the Commission that a genuine European defence market is necessary to reduce military expenditure costs and to make production more efficient in the interests of the taxpayer and the public .
Mr President , Commissioner , Chairman , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by giving my sincere thanks to the Commissioner for his speech clarifying the current position of the Commission on this subject .
He pointed out that Parliament is a good ally of the Commission 's , and indeed we do support his view that a more transparent , effective and open European defence market is an important objective , with a view both to strengthening the sector in Europe and to further objectives .
I believe that what I have just said goes for all my fellow Members : I would point to the broad consensus we achieved on our resolution on the Green Paper .
We learn with interest that the work on the Directive on the procurement of defence equipment is well advanced and that the Commission intends to present a proposal in autumn .
Mrs Weiler has just pointed out that defence markets are still largely national in character .
The State is the only relevant bidder for defence equipment , and it is true that , in the case of many award decisions , recourse is still taken to legal bases that are questionable , to say the least .
However , I agree with Mrs Weiler : there is little support for increasing the defence budget .
I believe that this draft Directive takes exactly the right course , namely increasing the efficiency reserve in the European armaments industry , ending the fragmentation of the market , and really improving efficiency and achieving economies of scale .
That is why we welcome the Commissioner 's remarks on expected growth and on increased competitiveness on the European defence equipment market .
I believe that this will also have a positive effect on the trained labour market .
We need a clear definition of the equipment covered by the derogation .
The existing regulations are indeed insufficient to meet the particular needs of the defence equipment market .
Therefore , we also welcome the Commission 's initiative to adapt the rules to the state of affairs on the defence equipment market and to strive for greater flexibility in this regard .
I would be grateful if the Commissioner could tell us why he decided to adapt general public procurement law instead of presenting a separate directive .
This may well be appropriate , but I should like him to say a few words about this .
The bottom line is that we agree with the Commissioner when he says that the opening-up of this market will increase transparency and competition and thus ultimately reduce the burden on taxpayers .
Finally , I should like to emphasise that , as I see it , this draft Directive is far more important than any considerations of industrial or internal-market policy .
It will contribute to the development of European security and defence policy , thus bringing about progress in what is traditionally a core domain of national sovereignty .
The Directive will bring about progress that may not be revolutionary , but is hopefully measurable , towards a European Security and Defence Policy truly deserving of the name .
I would like to add that I would be obliged if , in future , such debates were held in Brussels and not in Strasbourg .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , each year , around EUR 180 billion are spent on defence within the borders of the European Union 's common market .
Almost half of this amount is not subject to the public procurement legislation currently in force .
We need to analyse this situation , which has resulted from the application of Article 296 of the Treaty in relation to public procurement in the field of defence .
The Communication has partly clarified the issue .
In view of the specific nature of the arms manufacturing industry and the need to integrate it into the defence policies of specific Member States of the European Union and NATO , we need to ensure the technical compatibility of the equipment and communication systems , as well as the proper compatibility of equipment and appliances .
We need greater cooperation between individual countries , a properly functioning defence industry and well organised supplies .
The objective of our activities should be to draw up a directive on public procurement in the defence sector .
A stable arms market and stability with respect to the procurement procedures used will have a positive effect on the sector , in terms of employment and efficiency .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the basis for today 's debate is the report by our former colleague Mr Würmeling .
It was on this basis that the Commission issued its communication at the end of last year , which was intended to clarify the application of Article 296 but in fact had little effect .
After all , it was initially geared exclusively towards non-military goods , and thus the majority of military procurements inevitably fell within the scope of this derogation .
Therefore , it is really up to the Commission to ensure that , firstly , the rules on public procurement in the defence sector really support the work of the European Defence Agency and , secondly , that they take account of the fact that , as many of the previous speakers have said , this is a sector that exhibits peculiarities .
I have three questions for Commissioner McCreevy , therefore .
Firstly , does a directive in this field not have the flaw from the outset that it is based on a communication that was originally intended to cover only non-military goods , and is consequently unable to achieve what we expect of it as regards the common security policy ?
Secondly , would it not be possible to update the 1958 list , which sets out the derogations relatively clearly but is now out of date ?
Has the Commission abandoned the task of updating this for good ?
Thirdly , the Commissioner rightly said that normal public procurement law is not suited to the defence sector .
Following on from Mr Lambsdorff 's question , I would be very interested to hear how the Commissioner intends to take account of the peculiarities of the defence sector in a directive .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , each year , the 27 Member States of the European Union spend EUR 170 billion on defence .
These 27 Member States have two million soldiers , 10 000 tanks and 3 000 fighter aircraft .
In spite of this , they could not end the bloodshed in the Balkan conflict ; we needed our American friends to do it for us .
Why was that ?
At that time there were not yet any common decision-making structures in the EU to enable the implementation of such operations .
Another of the main reasons for the inefficiency of European defence is the lack of a common defence market .
One of the reasons for this is Article 296 .
I am convinced that this Article will be retained in future .
The reason that no common European defence market has developed is the excessive application of this Article in the past .
First of all , the Commission issued its communication clarifying what is and what is not covered by Article 296 : I think this communication is helpful .
Then the European Defence Agency took action : in my opinion , the Code of Conduct it adopted was an important step in the right direction .
We now also need EU legislation in this field , however - which is why I welcome the fact that this Directive is now envisaged .
As MEPs , we keep hearing a great deal of criticism of the EU rules on the award of public contracts , particularly from local authorities .
Therefore , we MEPs shall take very great care that the rules established here are indeed tailored towards the defence field , and that they improve rather than worsen the situation in that field .
Our assent will be conditional on this .
In addition , we keep hearing that we Europeans are spending too little on defence .
If we continue working on this field and create a common market , we shall at least achieve more security for the same money .



Mr President , in response to comments by Mr Harbour , Mr Lambsdorff and Mr Schwab , I can confirm that the very aim of a dedicated directive on defence procurement is to take account of the specificity of the defence market .
We recognise that the existing framework is ill-adapted to the defence market .
Clearly , the fundamental principles of public procurement rules will have to apply , but defence presents specific requirements in terms of security of supply , security of information or the need to have negotiated procedure .
Mr Harbour also raised the question about offsets , which is a very complex issue .
Offsets are economic compensations , which most Member States require from non-national suppliers when they buy military equipment abroad .
They are legally problematic , politically controversial and economically questionable .
Direct offsets are directly related to the subject of the procurement contract , they can sometimes be covered by Article 296 , if the procurement contract itself is exempted on the basis of that article .
However , the huge majority of offsets are indirect and non-military in nature .
From the Commission 's viewpoint , these offsets are not covered by Article 296 .
They must respect Community law , even if they are related to defence contracts exempted on the basis of Article 296 .
In other words , offsets are a problem in themselves , even in the area covered by Article 296 .
Addressing this problem via the Defence Directive would only cover the Community part of the defence market and would leave indirect offsets for contracts exempted on the basis of Article 296 untouched .
In conclusion , as I said earlier , the opening-up of national defence markets will lead to important economic gains and will ultimately benefit all taxpayers .
In order to achieve this we need to create a new legal framework , which adapts certain Community procurement rules to the specificities of defence .
This new directive will give national authorities greater flexibility when they make sensitive procurements .
The debate is closed .
The banning of exports and the safe storage of metallic mercury ( debate )
The next item is the report by Dimitrios Papadimoulis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council on the banning of exports and the safe storage of metallic mercury - C6-0363 / 2006 - .
Mr President , I am pleased to open this debate on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council on the banning of exports and the safe storage of metallic mercury .
I should like to thank the draftsman and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for their efforts so far .
I should also like to thank the Committee on International Trade and its rapporteur , Mr Holm , for their contribution to this file .
Mercury is internationally recognised as highly toxic to humans , ecosystems and wildlife .
Initially seen as an acute local problem , mercury pollution is now also understood to be global , diffuse and chronic .
High doses can be fatal to humans and even relatively low doses can have serious adverse neuro-developmental impacts .
Against this background , the Commission developed a comprehensive Community strategy concerning mercury , which was adopted in January 2005 .
Its key aim is to reduce mercury levels in the environment and human exposure through a number of actions that address all aspects of the mercury lifecycle .
The European Parliament welcomed the strategy and its overall approach in the resolution adopted in March 2006 .
The proposal that is now before you implements two key actions identified in the strategy , namely Action 5 ( by banning the export of metallic mercury from the Community ) and Action 9 ( by requiring the safe storage of mercury that is no longer needed in the chlor-alkali industry ) .
The primary production of mercury came to an end within the Community four years ago when the last active mine in Almadén in Spain stopped its activities .
The environmentally desirable phasing-out of mercury-cell technology into chlor-alkali industry results , however , in a new source of mercury supplies : some 12 000 tonnes of surplus mercury will come out of the sector over the next number of years until its transition to mercury-free technologies is completed .
Most mercury is currently exported from the Community , and exports of up to 800 tonnes per year end up , at least partly , in unregulated and uncontrolled uses like artisanal gold mining .
This is how EU mercury is adding to global mercury exposure .
The basic aim of the proposed regulation is to stop these exports and to ensure that mercury no longer used in the chlor-alkali industry is safely stored and cannot re-enter the environment .
On the basis of the impact assessment , the Commission also proposes to apply the safe storage requirement to two other industrial sources of mercury - natural gas cleaning and mercury resulting as a byproduct of non-ferrous metal mining .
The storage obligation is a logical development from the export ban , as the small remaining internal market for mercury will be unable to absorb the quantities at stake .
Recycling and recovery will ensure that mercury is still available for remaining legitimate uses .
Storage operations will fall under the legal framework of the Waste Landfill Directive , with additional safety requirements reflecting the specific properties of metallic mercury .
The Commission aimed at proposing a straightforward , simple legislative proposal that is backed by a sound knowledge base and avoids , in line with the principles of better regulation , any excessive administrative burden for industry or for public administration .
The proposal refrains from taking legislative action in fields where the impact assessment did not provide any solid justification for such action or any clear view on its possible impact .
I should also like to underline that the industry concerned , namely the chlor-alkali sector , signalled its support for this proposal and is willing to sign up to a voluntary commitment .
This commitment engages industry to select highly qualified storage operators and ensures that key data on mercury flows will be made available .
The Commission intends to acknowledge this commitment , in line with the principles and procedures set out in the communication on the environmental agreements adopted in 2002 .
It is not the purpose of the proposal to implement the whole of the mercury strategy : its scope is deliberately more concise .
Work on other actions of the strategy is ongoing .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , mercury and mercury compounds are highly toxic substances .
Even in low doses , they have an adverse impact on our cardiovascular , immune and reproductive systems .
In the environment , mercury can change into methylmercury and concentrate in the food chain , especially in the aquatic environment .
In the city of Mina-Mata in Japan in 1956 , 8 000 people died because they ate fish with a high mercury content .
Mercury is a global problem and needs coordinated international action to resolve it .
The European Union cannot argue persuasively for a reduction in the supply and demand of mercury and , at the same time , continue to be one of the main suppliers in the world .
The Commission proposal for a regulation is a unique opportunity to break the cycle of exports of this dangerous substance .
I am extremely satisfied that both the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the Committee on Legal Affairs rejected the double legal basis and opted for Article 175 as the only basis , given that the objective of the regulation is to protect the environment and public health .
As far as the starting date for banning exports is concerned , I am calling for something fair and simple : we in the European Parliament need to remain consistent with the resolution we ourselves adopted by a very large majority in March 2006 on the Community Strategy Concerning Mercury .
That is why I call on you to vote in favour of Amendment 43 , so that we are consistent with these stated positions of the European Parliament .
I think that the compounds and mercury products already subject to restricted use and marketing in the European Union should also be included in the export ban , as we agreed in March last year .
What message are we sending to third countries if we export to them the mercury products banned in the European Union because they are dangerous ?
Will we remember the well-known phrase ' bon pour l 'orient ' ?
As far as the ban on mercury imports is concerned , there is no sense in storing mercury from the European Union on the one hand and in importing mercury for use within the European Union on the other .
We are calling for common sense .
Besides , supply currently exceeds demand , according to the Commission figures , and this situation looks likely to continue in the future .
As regards the storage obligation for metallic mercury no longer used in the chlor-alkali industry , again my views are based on the resolution adopted by the European Parliament .
I am calling , until such time as there are appropriate techniques for the final disposal of mercury , preferably in solidified form , for temporary storage in a recoverable form , either in underground salt mines or in surface installations used exclusively and equipped for temporary storage .
Otherwise , the storage site for this toxic substance will be the human body itself .
Anyway , we are not talking about millions of tonnes .
In all , the surplus quantities of mercury in the chlor-alkali industry are estimated at approximately 12 000 tonnes , the volume of which - due to its high density - is approximately 1 000 cubic metres .

At the same time , I am calling for the adoption of a basic framework of preconditions for storage ensuring continuous monitoring , safety specifications , regular reporting , exchange of information and penalties in accordance with the ' polluter pays ' principle in the event of non-compliance .
Responsibility during temporary storage should remain with the owner of the storage installation , while the Member States should assume administrative and financial responsibility for safe final disposal .
I am therefore calling on the Member States to create a fund on the basis of financial contributions from the chlor-alkali industry which will provide the necessary resources .
I am also calling for a register of buyers , sellers and traders of mercury to allow regular monitoring of movements of imports and exports .
Let us stand against a watered down regulation which will not provide the level of protection of public health and the environment wanted by the citizens .
The call for a ban on exports and the problem of storage must be addressed on the basis of these criteria .
The relative cost - for such an investment in the future - is comparatively very low in the face of the exponential benefits it will generate .
The European Union , the European Parliament can and must stand at the vanguard of global efforts to withdraw mercury .
I hope that our decisions tomorrow will contribute towards this .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( SV ) It is high time that we took this important decision concerning a ban on exports of metallic mercury .
There are probably not many people who are aware of this , but the EU is in actual fact the world 's largest exporter of the substance .
More than 1 000 metric tons are exported each year from the EU to other countries .
That is almost a third of the entire world trade in metallic mercury .
Mercury , which is dangerous , ends up almost exclusively in developing countries , where it causes a very great deal of harm .
I am pleased to adopt a position on a well thought-out report by my colleague , Mr Papadimoulis .
This report is not only about banning exports of metallic mercury .
It is also about obtaining safe storage of this dangerous substance , something that I think is very positive .
I am particularly pleased that Mr Papadimoulis has contributed a number of considerable improvements to the Commission 's proposal .
These improvements include the following :
extension of this regulation to include products and mercury compounds ,
extension of the ban to include imports ,
entry into force of the ban on a date earlier than that desired by the Commission , that is to say 2010 instead of 2011 ,
setting up of a tracking system for the mercury trade in order to obtain increased monitoring of mercury ,
support for developing countries as they convert to modern , mercury-free technology .
These changes are precisely in line with what I proposed as draftsman of the Committee on International Trade , and I am very grateful for them .
All that worries me is the demand by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe for a split vote .
A split vote would threaten to undermine important parts of this otherwise excellent report .
Stick , therefore , to the rapporteur 's approach designed to safeguard the environment and public health and do not adopt the ALDE Group 's market-based approach .
Tomorrow the EU shall , then , assume its responsibilities and stop dumping lethal mercury in developing countries .
It is really high time it did so .
With our changes and improvements , the EU will also assume its historic responsibility to support countries in the South as they change over from using mercury to using cleaner technologies .
This will safeguard the health of thousands of people and of our common environment .
That would be no bad thing .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( ES ) Mr President , we had no difficulty in the Committee on Legal Affairs in dealing with the issue of the legal basis , because the aim of this measure is not the implementation of commercial policy - and Article 133 is not therefore applicable - but the protection of health - and Article 175 is therefore applicable .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has therefore proposed that the sole legal basis be Article 175 , with all of the consequences of that from a procedural point of view .
Having said that , Mr President , as an MEP from a country that has very close historical links to mercury activities , I would like to point out that Mr Callanan 's Amendment 40 on the storage of mercury is much more precise than the text that the Commission had proposed with regard to Article 3 ( 1a ) .

Having proposed this legal basis , therefore , Mr President , I would also call for support for Mr Callanan 's Amendment 40 .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , as this House is well aware , this proposed regulation on the banning of exports and storage of metallic mercury is in line with the commitments contained in the Mercury Strategy which we passed in March 2006 .
The PPE-DE Group supports the broad aims of the regulation .
Mercury must be disposed of and stored safely in order to protect human health and the environment .
Mercury cell technology is being gradually replaced by the environmentally superior and energy efficient membrane cell technology and this conversion is releasing surplus mercury across the European Union .
The aim of this regulation is to prevent this decommissioned mercury from entering the world market .
In my view the Commission 's proposal is broadly acceptable and the most workable approach .
With regard to the date for the entry into force of the export ban , amendments have been tabled to bring that date forward .
We do not support those amendments .
The timing of the ban was debated at length prior to the Environmental Council in June 2005 , and the 2011 date was agreed in the Council conclusions as contained in the Commission 's proposal .
In my view , nothing has changed since the Council took that decision and I would not wish to have those very difficult decisions reopened .
This could only delay the introduction of the ban , especially if it encouraged the re-examination of whether an export ban is in fact the best way to achieve the EU 's aims .
The date that has been chosen is the date that appears to gain the most support from a majority of Member States and of course , equally importantly , from the many other stakeholders involved .
That date has been set by the Commission with the agreement of the Spanish authorities and Minas de Almadén in order to leave enough time to reorganise and restructure that company , and I think it deserves all of our support .
I am not in favour of the proposals to introduce a ban on the import of mercury and mercury compounds .
Given the quantities of mercury rising from the decommissioned chlor-alkali plants within the Community , there would appear to be absolutely no commercial incentive for imports and thus no necessity for including an import ban at this stage .
The market is quite capable of regulating itself .
Similarly , we are also not in favour of extending the scope of the export ban .
We accept the Commission 's view that metallic mercury is by far the most relevant substance in terms of quantity , as compared to mercury compounds and products containing mercury , and that extending the export ban would be very premature at this stage .
Furthermore , companies would simply relocate and continue producing .
Is it really up to us to regulate what other countries in the world get up to ?
I personally think not .
Both extensions to the Commission 's proposal require deeper analysis of better regulation principles and the cost and impact of existing business .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for you , mercury is just a toxic metal which we need to get rid of and which you have only seen in thermometers when you have had a fever .
To me , mercury also brings to mind a place in my province , Almadén , whose mines were one of the birthplaces of the workers ' movement in Spain .
Mercury brings to mind thousands of men and women who lived from it for centuries , hundreds of names and faces , friends with whom I have worked as a Socialist Member of Parliament over the last 30 years , explaining to them , persuading them and supporting them with alternatives in order to overcome the paradox that human progress , which was getting rid of mercury , appeared to be heralding their disappearance .
These people have appreciated our efforts and just the other day confirmed their faith in us by voting for Socialist Party candidates in their local councils .
Today , thinking of those friends and re-stating my commitment to them , I would like to thank the honourable Members for their understanding , enshrined in the text approved in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and which we will improve tomorrow by means of certain amendments .
There are three favourable pieces of information which will be received in Almadén with gratitude , interest and hope .
Firstly , it is recommended that specific Community economic compensation be granted for the socio-economic progress of Almadén and its surrounding area .
Secondly , it is recommended that we prioritise the study of Almadén as the location for the mercury store intended for the safe storage of all of the metal in existence in Europe .
Thirdly , given the existing experience and familiarity in Almadén with treating mercury , common sense dictates that the store should be located where more than 80 % of the European Union 's mercury is already being stored in complete safety .
Someone from my region told me that taking mercury from Almadén to anywhere else would be like taking the piano to the piano stool rather than taking the stool to the piano in order to play a concert .
Finally , we are grateful for the consistency of those people who propose that exporting and other operations with mercury should be able to be carried out - as we had stated in the Matsakis report - until 2010 , and indicating the date of 1 December , thereby allowing mercury to be in circulation for rather longer .
I am sure that , with the resolution that we will approve tomorrow , Parliament will be in a good position to take on its codecision duties within the relevant negotiation with the Council .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to express my sincere congratulations to Mr Papadimoulis for his excellent report , and I wish to thank him for cooperating with the shadow rapporteurs .
In general terms , the rapporteur has sought to make the Commission 's proposal somewhat more strict , rightly so in some aspects .
However , in two areas , such a position seems neither entirely wise nor realistic .
The first area relates to bringing the proposed deadline date forward to 2009 .
In our view , this is impractical and unobtainable .
We feel that we should keep to the 1 January 2010 deadline , as we previously decided in the Mercury Strategy .
The second area is more controversial , that of the storage of metallic mercury .
In my view , the controversy arises largely because of the confusion as to what temporary and permanent storage really mean in practice .
The line I support is that if storage can be achieved in local salt mines or other approved suitable places , under strict conditions with complete monitoring and safety guarantees for thousands of years , then this is good enough for me .
There is no need to specifically stipulate in this piece of legislation the obligation to retrieve this mercury and transport it across Europe to a new , more permanent storage facility .
If the legislators of the future take into consideration any new technological advancements which make it safe for stored mercury to be treated in a particular way or moved to a new location , then I am sure this can and will be done whatever we put in this legislation now .
In conclusion , let us use common sense and keep things simple and in perspective .
Until recently , mercury was and , in many cases , still is in every household and in every doctor 's and dentist 's surgery , as well as in every hospital in the form of thermometers , barometers , sphygmomanometers , tooth fillings , etc .
We need to get rid of mercury , but it is neither a highly contagious lethal virus nor a nerve gas compound which is deadly on near touch .
Therefore , in dealing with the amendments to this report , let us try not to exaggerate and not to go over the top with our demands .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the European Parliament and Council regulation on the banning of exports and the safe storage of mercury is a document that restricts the occurrence of mercury in the environment and its effect on people and animals .
Between 1990 and 2000 , the countries of the European Union reduced global mercury emissions by 60 % .
In the meantime , these emissions have risen by 20 % across the world .
In the 1940s , my friends and I found some mercury and were pleased when the coins we dipped in it became a silvery colour .
Today , society 's attitude towards mercury has changed dramatically , and the industrial sector is moving away from processes that use mercury due to its toxicity .
Although I find this draft regulation to be positive , I do have a few comments to make .
First of all , permanent storage facilities should be found for mercury waste as soon as possible , thus limiting temporary storage .
Secondly , the storage facilities should be as close as possible to avoid transporting mercury waste around Europe .
Thirdly , we cannot introduce new ways of using mercury waste without properly planning and testing them .
We should be aware that , in view of the dangers of mercury , the industrial sector itself is trying to move away from processes that involve mercury .
Amendments 11 , 12 , 15 , 23-27 to the Commission 's proposal are not justified .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Metallic mercury is a danger to public health and to the environment , and we now have 12 000 metric tons of mercury that have to be stored .
Perhaps that sounds a lot , but it is a volume that could easily fit into half of this Chamber .
It would therefore be odd if we were to send this mercury here , there and everywhere and store it in a host of different places and in stores that were unsafe .
That is why I am opposed to the attempt by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe to get rid of mercury , because it would only be a temporary solution .
A permanent solution needs to be completely safe .
The only completely safe solution is to stabilise the mercury once and for all .
Mercury sulphide is almost completely insoluble , which means that it can be stored safely .
If it is not stabilised , we cannot have a whole lot of different , badly supervised stores .
I am therefore opposed to Amendment 40 , because it would undermine safety at work .
It is important for us to agree on one and the same date : 1 January 2010 , as stated in Amendment 43 , proposed by my group .
This prohibits both imports and exports of all products containing mercury , so creating a holistic view of the matter .
Anything else would amount to the cynical export of mercury .
We know that the chlor-alkali industry must cease exports .
If it gets the chance to continue exporting one year after the ban enters into force , it will empty its stores of metallic mercury and be paid for doing so .
The mercury will then be used by gold-washers in the Amazon basin and destroy huge river areas by contaminating them with mercury .
It is important for the ban to be introduced on 1 January 2010 . Otherwise , we would undermine the whole idea of the export ban .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , mercury is considered a heavy metal , and is very dangerous in the food chain .
A number of other heavy metals , such as chrome , nickel , uranium and plutonium can also be classified in the same category .
It is true that not only heavy metals but also a number of lighter elements in the periodic table can , in large quantities , be harmful to health .
For example , beryllium is known to cause berylliosis .
Mercury is not just a metal that can cause serious harm after consumption in its metallic state , it is also an important substance in the field of technology .
In the past , electrolysis , dentistry and jewellery could not do without it .
The instrumental method of chemical analysis using mercury drop electrodes is well known , and in 1959 , the Czech academic Heyrovský won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry for this process , which he termed polarography .
One important issue revolves around the potential uses of mercury and its compounds in industry , although this must , of course , involve the highest environmental standards .
I am not sure whether storing mercury and its compounds in one place is the best solution .
The same goes for how long the transitional period should be before the regulation enters into force .
It is my impression that for some Member States the period laid down in Amendment 8 is too short .
This is why I have reservations about the proposal , although in most Member States mercury and its compounds , including stockpiles , are strictly monitored by the relevant state bodies .
I feel it is unacceptable to enshrine the role of unspecified NGOs in the regulation , regardless of any issues of tolerance and openness to the public , this does not belong in a regulation on the banning of exports and the safe storage of metallic mercury .
The involvement of citizens in monitoring activities is covered in other areas of EU legislation .
I fail to understand why salt mines or the mines in Almadén in Spain would be the best place to store mercury and its compounds .
It is obvious that the end of operations in any given mine leads to social problems for the miners .
In the Czech Republic and other Member States of Central and Eastern Europe , dozens of large mines have been shut down , without anyone drawing up EU regulations to deal with the massive unemployment that that has caused .
It strikes me that the bottom of mineral mines might be a better storage place than salt mines .
I strongly support the solution of addressing the issue of substances with less than 5 % mercury content .
Furthermore , heavy metals in rocks throughout Europe are at normal levels , and in the course of weathering , they - including mercury - find their way into European water supplies .
This is why , for example , in the River Elbe concentrations of mercury and other heavy metals are always detected .
This is of course a natural occurrence .
There is also the issue of water from old mines , the extraction of mercury from old dumps and waste sludge , which is a potentially massive source of environmental pollution .
This regulation cannot , however , cover this issue , of course .
To conclude , I should like to thank all those who contributed to drawing up this regulation , a process that was conducted in a positive atmosphere of cooperation .
Mercury and its compounds have a future in science and technology , as this regulation shows , and that is why we support it .

( SK ) First of all , allow me to thank the rapporteur , Mr Papadimoulis , for highlighting in the report the need for banning exports of mercury , mercury compounds and mercury-containing products .
This is very important to us in the European Union , since the EU is one of the world 's biggest mercury exporters .
Since this substance is extremely toxic , especially for children , we should take an interest in protection not only in connection with mercury production or use , but also during the storage or handling of mercury waste .
High mercury doses are lethal to humans ; smaller amounts of mercury accumulated in the body may cause severe diseases of the immune , cardiovascular and reproductive systems .
Industry generates excessive quantities of mercury , for example , in the form of by-products in the chemical industry , in connection with the cleaning of natural gas , or in the extraction of non-ferrous metals and smelting in the metallurgical industry .
One should consider whether , by exporting surplus mercury to third , notably developing , countries , which are the main mercury consumers , we will indeed dispose of mercury .
Many developing countries lack funds to deploy modern environmentally friendly technologies , and their supervision is less stringent .
I agree with the rapporteur and support his stance that the European Union should not be using double standards - that is , a product which may not be used in the European Union should not be exported to countries which have no legislation on the use of mercury .
We should bear this in mind not only because of the need for environmental protection and nature conservation ; we should also remember that this mercury might return in the form of residues in food or by way of polluted rivers , not to mention the risk of exposure for local workers and populations .
With regard to mercury and mercury-containing products , the European Union must ensure that mercury supplies are consistent with needs and demand .
Surplus mercury must be disposed of in an environmentally sustainable way in accordance with the Hazardous Waste Directive which we have adopted .
At the same time , it is necessary to strengthen monitoring and to penalise strictly any instances of non-compliance .
I agree with the rapporteur that manufacturers who produce mercury in the production process should be responsible for its safe storage or environmentally sustainable disposal .
This is also important in ensuring continued growth in the industry and encouraging transition to new alternative technologies that are not dependent on mercury .
As part of our aid to developing countries , we should put more emphasis on implementing such technologies where the environment has been devastated by this hazardous chemical .
( FI ) Mr President , the regulation before us is part of a whole based on the Community 's strategy concerning mercury .
EU environmental legislation has been brought up-to-date in line with that strategy this session .
I am satisfied that we have now reached a stage where our attitudes towards the export of mercury are being reviewed .
The EU is , after all , the world 's biggest exporter of the substance .
It is undisputable that mercury and its many compounds are toxic to humans and environment , and the cost to society for public health and environmental damage is much higher than had previously been thought .
The bans under the regulation and the criteria for storage will also be a clear message to the world outside the EU .
We are taking responsibility for this damage .
Crucial to environmental legislation is the notion that the means selected are not only environmentally effective , but also socially sustainable .
Environmental considerations mean the export ban on mercury should take effect quickly , as Mr Papadimoulis rightly says .
We cannot , however , rush , in the light of other realities .
The danger is , actually , that a solution made over here creates a set of new problems over there .
The export ban in the Community should take effect at a time which is in harmony with other international measures on restrictions being sought .
As it may still take several years to reach international agreement , it seems right to support the Commission in the scheduling of the export ban .
The export of mercury , according to that , would be banned as from 1 July 2011 .
This has had the support of virtually every Member State .
The same goes for the proposal to include mercury compounds in the export ban .
We can ask the Commission for a proposal to extend its scope , when we know enough about its wide-ranging effects .
It is at present unnecessary to force a move .
Let us continue with the policy we have chosen and solve one problem at a time relating to mercury .
Mr President , mercury is not only a metal but also an ancient part of our culture and civilisation .
People have always admired it and believed in its magic powers .
For many centuries , mercury had a crucial role in alchemy and the secret sciences .
Mercury , the only liquid metal , is a beautiful material , and one can admire it as a unique piece of nature .
However , according to new information , mercury is also a dangerous material and we should protect ourselves and future generations against its toxic effects .
The workers in the traditional mercury mines , mostly in Spain , lead a hard and honest life but know that their former profession is over .
We should respect the miners ' traditions , but the need for a ban must be understood .
The European Union has already banned the use of mercury and materials containing mercury on its territory .
Now we want to ban the export of mercury as well .
We do so because we also care about the health of other countries and continents .
Hopefully , our decision will encourage other countries to reduce their use of mercury as well .
As the shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group , I had consultations with our Spanish colleagues in the spirit of solidarity .
Their understanding was crucial for me .
My other guideline was Parliament 's resolution of March 2006 .
Our decision should balance environmental concerns and the interests of the industry .
As far as the date of the ban is concerned , different proposals were tabled : 2011 by the Commission , 2009 by the rapporteur and 2008 by the NGOs .
I decided to suggest 1 December 2010 as an acceptable compromise , in accordance with Parliament 's resolution of last year .
Other dates and deadlines should correspond with this basic date .
If we voluntarily ban the export of mercury , it is more than logical to ban its import as well .
As far as storage is concerned , there were different proposals : Almadén by Spain , a salt mine by Germany and solidification by others .
As we have not yet settled on a solution , we should not support amendments excluding specific potential solutions .
We should support our Spanish Socialist colleagues ' proposal calling for compensation for Almadén , the largest European mercury mine .
The scope of the ban should cover every material with a mercury concentration of 5 % or more .
We have to close loopholes , as it is very cheap to convert mercury into calomel .
It is very important to each of us to aid agreement by means of a simplified compromise package , otherwise we will run into chaos and , most probably , there will be no regulation before the next Parliamentary elections .
As shadow rapporteur , I worked for a compromise .
A good compromise serves our citizens better than postponed debates that do not lead to any kind of regulation .
( DE ) Mr President , mercury must be banned comprehensively and quickly .
It is nothing short of cynical to take hazardous products out of circulation here but continue to permit their export to other countries .
We know that mercury spreads worldwide via water and air .
Ultimately , the mercury would also end up and harm people here .
It is nothing short of absurd for us to issue warnings , as the Commission has done , that pregnant women and children should eat no more than 100 grams of tuna per week since it is so contaminated with mercury .
We know - and a study published in The Lancet has demonstrated this once more - that heavy metals cause damage to the nervous system and also lasting , irreparable brain damage , particularly in children .
It must be our primary objective to enforce this export ban , therefore , as we would lose credibility in the eyes of the international community if we were to say : we want to protect ourselves , but exports are allowed .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , mercury is everywhere : for example , it crosses the placental barrier .
Mercury is a metal that is liquid at room temperature and readily evaporates .
The limit value for metallic , inorganic mercury in blood is 25 micrograms , and that for organic mercury compounds is 100 micrograms .
I shall not go into the effects of mercury poisoning here .
I am sure you are all familiar with Minamoto in Japan .
The issue here is not only the economic pros and cons for our Community , therefore , but also the protection of the health of our fellow citizens and the protection of an intact environment .
The report by Mr Papadimoulis , whom I thank for this work , will mean that there is an end to the export of mercury compounds from Europe and that the EU starts work on the safe storage of the existing material .
At the same time , it makes sense for all mercury compounds to be covered by the export ban where a substitute is available , which is the case for almost all uses .
In addition , as far as we know , we as exporters of a hazardous substance are not able - and , pursuant to our WTO commitments , not entitled - to demand that the recipients make the mercury traceable , which means that the whereabouts of the mercury are unclear and that there is a very definite possibility that it could return to the Community .
I consider Article 175 of the common treaties applicable to this Regulation .
The tightening of the rules , the shortening of the deadlines and the inclusion of mercury compounds in the export and import provisions are both appropriate and toxicologically consistent .
I am sure there is still room for negotiation to reach agreement on the deadlines .
With regard to the final storage of mercury , attention is being paid to research , as it has not proved possible thus far to find a reliable storage method for this in use on an industrial scale anywhere in the world .
The quantities involved run into the thousands of tonnes .
I endorse the report in the original version presented by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
( SV ) I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Papadimoulis , for his excellent work .
Last autumn I took part in a study in which a sample of my hair was taken and investigated for its mercury content .
Amazingly enough , I in actual fact had a relatively high quantity of mercury in my body , a state of affairs that is extremely worrying .
I am pregnant and have high mercury levels which are now in danger of harming the child I am carrying and which may lead to the child having difficulty concentrating as an adult .
The high mercury levels are also worrying because I come from a country that has come a very long way when it comes to abolishing mercury .
We no longer use thermometers containing mercury , and amalgam is generally not used for repairing our teeth .
Nonetheless , I have high mercury levels in my body .
There are alternatives to mercury .
In view of the serious health effects of mercury , we could phase it out , and not only here in Europe but also globally .
This very evening , we are concerned with imposing an export ban and finding ways of storing used mercury safely , so ensuring that we do not contribute to spreading mercury around the world .
So that the export ban cannot be circumvented , my efforts have been directed at ensuring that it enters into force as quickly as possible and that it is extended to include other mercury products .
They have also been directed towards our not today committing ourselves irrevocably to any particular form of terminal storage , because we do not in actual fact know at present what is the optimum technology for terminal storage .
In the present situation , mercury should , then , be stored in safe but temporary stores .
I particularly hope that , in the future , it will be possible for all women throughout the world to eat fish from the water close to them , without being in danger of damaging their children 's development .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , this is a battle that should have all of us rallying to the flag .
It is a matter of public health and even of public safety .
We know the dangers , the ravages of mercury on the health of those who come into contact with it .
Since the start of the industrial age , the problems have only worsened to assume alarming proportions .
Since Minamata and the chain of horrors emanating from that disastrous saga of industrial pollution , we have been even more clearly aware that mercury is dreadfully dangerous .
Nevertheless , we have carried on regardless , almost as if nothing had ever happened .
Throughout the intervening period , the God Mercury has continued to exact a heavy tribute from native populations in gold-washing areas , such as French Guyana , and the same applies to those on the other side of the globe who , in unimaginable conditions , recycle our industrial , electronic and other waste , not to mention the workers in Europe who operate in battery-recycling plants .
Yes , it is high time we got rid of this poison , and the only solution is a pure and simple ban here in Europe and throughout the rest of the world , because this poison is everywhere , even in the organs of polar bears , for example , which live where it is neither produced nor used .
I regret that my group 's proposals for a more rapid prohibition were not adopted and that underground storage was not rejected .
Be that as it may , this is no longer the time for regrets but for securing the largest possible majority in support of a definitive ban on this dangerous metal .

( ES ) Mr President , this proposal for a Regulation proposes banning exports of metallic mercury from 1 July 2011 at the latest , and in parallel includes provisions on the safe storage of the surpluses of mercury that are going to be produced above all as a result of the withdrawal of mercury cells from chlor-alkali factories ; it is calculated that , throughout Europe , these cells contain approximately 12 000 tonnes of mercury .

Bringing forward the time limit for the ban on metallic mercury exports goes against the consensus achieved both by Parliament when we debated the Community strategy on mercury and by the agreement that the Commission has signed with Euro Chlor , the European Federation of Chlor-Alkali Producers .
The latter has accepted putting an end to mercury exports from 1 July 2011 , and I believe that these agreements must be respected and under no circumstances must the date for banning mercury exports be brought forward .
The surpluses from the chlor-alkali industry must be stored , because that storage is necessary .
The resolution on the Community strategy on mercury , approved in March 2006 , states that ' consideration should be given to the possibility of using Almadén for the safe storage of the existing metallic mercury stocks or metallic mercury sub-produced by industry all over Europe but not mercury-containing articles that have become waste , thus making use of the infrastructures , local manpower and technological expertise existing there ' .
I would also like to point out that the text of the Community strategy clearly acknowledges the historic importance of mercury to Almadén and the need for it to be compensated for all of this .
I would like to end by saying that I am against the amendments that propose that only solid , rather than liquid , mercury should be stored .
Given the current state of research , we are not in a position to solidify mercury , and liquid mercury will therefore have to be stored .
Furthermore , it can be stored very safely , without creating any vapour , the vapour being the pollutant .
Mr President , let me now turn to some of the key amendments in detail .
Amendments 1 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 20 , 21 , 22 and 44 imply a significant extension of the scope of the proposal through the introduction of an export ban for cinnabar ore , calomel , mercury compounds and some mercury-containing products , as well as through the addition of an import ban .
The Commission considers these amendments to be either unnecessary or not sufficiently justified .
In the absence of mercury mining activities in the Community , there is no need for an export ban on cinnabar ore .
In a similar way , the Community has been a massive exporter of mercury , but not an importer .
The impact assessment concluded that secondary sources of mercury - recycling and recovery - will cover the remaining demand within the Community .
As mercury compounds and mercury-containing products are concerned , we would need a much more developed information base to justify such an extension . For the time being , it is not possible to estimate in a reliable way the possible impact of such a measure on industry and society , within the Community as well as in third countries .
Using legislation to prevent a hypothetical problem would not be considered good practice in terms of better regulation .
Several amendments - numbers 12 , 25 , 27 , 28 , 29 and 45 - exclude the long-term storage or final disposal of metallic mercury , allowing for temporary storage only .
It is worth noting that no environmentally and economically sound solution for the stabilisation of mercury prior to its disposal exists at present .
Amendments 6 , 24 and 36 imply that preference should be given to the former mining site of Almadén for the storage of mercury .
The Commission is well aware of the economic and social implications of the mine closure and the end of trading activities on the site . It does not , however , want to prescribe a single storage site to economic operators .
Amendments 8 , 10 , 13 , 30 and 32 increase the administrative burden for industry , as well as for Member States and the Commission .
The Commission has strong doubts about the potential effectiveness and benefits of these very detailed requirements as compared to their costs .
As regards the legal basis referred to in Amendment 2 , the Commission proposal follows the line given by the European Court of Justice in its judgments in cases C-94 / 03 and C-178 / 03 concerning the Rotterdam Convention on prior informed consent for imports of chemicals .
Our proposal is very similar in character , as it proposes trade-related measures as an environmental policy instrument .
We cannot , therefore , support the amendment to the legal basis .
Amendments 17 and 34 calling for the introduction of an article on penalties are , however , acceptable to the Commission .
In summary , the Commission can support eight of the proposed 50 amendments fully , in part , or in principle .
I shall give Parliament 's secretariat a list detailing the Commission 's position on the amendments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - It is clear that mercury is a substance that needs to be dealt with in a cautious and secure manner .
This report deals with the important broad issue of handling mercury in import , export and the storage of the substance , while giving a timeline for export and import bans .
I support the Commission 's proposals for regulation on this issue and believe , broadly-speaking , that it is a good thing .
I would like to echo the Commission 's comment that this report follows the Mercury Strategy which was passed in March of last year , and want to encourage the Commission in its ongoing work on the Mercury Strategy .
This is only one report of many that will deal with other issues such as the use of small amounts of mercury in the dental industry .
I am sure work on other strategic issues is ongoing .
Annex - Position of the Commission
Papadimoulis report
The Commission can support fully , in part , or in principle 8 amendments : 3 , 4 , 5 , 14 , 17 , 23 , 31 , 34 .
The amendments which the Commission cannot support are : 1 , 2 , 6 to 13 , 15 , 16 , 18 to 22 , 24 to 30 , 32 , 33 , 35 to 50 .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.00 a.m. )
Improving the method for consulting Parliament in procedures relating to enlargement of the euro area - Adoption by Cyprus of the single currency on 1 January 2008 - Adoption by Malta of the single currency on 1 January 2008 ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the Council and Commission statements on improving the method for consulting Parliament in procedures relating to enlargement of the euro area ,
the report by Werner Langen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision in accordance with Article 122 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the adoption by Cyprus of the single currency on 1 January 2008 - C6-0151 / 2007 - , and
the report by Werner Langen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision in accordance with Article 122 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the adoption by Malta of the single currency on 1 January 2008 - C6-0150 / 2007 - .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we begin this debate , which is about procedural issues , we should firstly not forget the pleasing conclusions of the Convergence Reports published by the Commission and the European Central Bank on Cyprus and Malta .
The Presidency is delighted that the Commission was able to establish that Cyprus and Malta have reached a high level of durable convergence and that , on this basis , it has been able to table proposals for the euro to be introduced in these two countries .
At the meeting of the Economic and Financial Council on 5 June 2007 , ministers endorsed the Commission 's assessment that Cyprus and Malta meet the conditions for the euro to be introduced .
The Presidency would therefore be very glad if Cyprus and Malta 's success were not overshadowed by procedural issues and if the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council could reach an amicable solution .
It is in all of our interests to avoid delaying or creating any uncertainty about the technical and legal preparations that Cyprus and Malta need to make for the introduction of the euro .
I should particularly like to thank the European Parliament for its willingness to cooperate .
The Presidency has sympathy for the European Parliament 's concerns and understands why it wants to have more time to examine the Convergence Reports and the Commission 's proposals for Council decisions on the introduction of the euro .
However , the Council and the Presidency are bound by the procedure laid down in the EC Treaty .
The timetable is essentially determined by the rules laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact , including the Maastricht reporting regulation .
The Council 's obligation to consult the European Parliament on proposals for the euro to be introduced in Member States is laid down in Article 122 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty .
The Presidency believes that the Council has respected this provision of the EC Treaty in the cases of Cyprus and Malta .
The Council received both Commission proposals for Council decisions on 21 and 22 May 2007 , each in three language versions .
The remaining language versions were transmitted to the Council in the course of the subsequent two weeks .
On 25 May the Council consulted the European Parliament on the two Commission proposals .
In its request for consultation , the Council referred to the fact that it would be helpful if the European Parliament could adopt its opinions on the Commission proposals at its plenary session from 18 to 21 June .
These opinions could then be made available to the Council , meeting at the level of Heads of State or Government , on 21 June 2007 .
Although it is not a legal requirement , the Presidency would be pleased if the discussion of the Heads of State or Government could also take into account the European Parliament 's position .
In any case , the Council cannot adopt its two decisions on the introduction of the euro until the European Parliament 's opinions have been provided .
In principle , the Presidency supports the proposals made by President Barroso in his letter of 13 June 2007 in response to President Pöttering 's letter .
The Presidency believes - as the Council President , Mrs Angela Merkel , explained in a letter to the President of the European Parliament on 19 June - that this matter primarily concerns the Commission and the European Parliament .
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking this Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the rapporteur , Mr Langen , for the speed with which they have examined the convergence reports on Cyprus and Malta approved on 16 May by the European Commission and by the European Central Bank .
Tomorrow in Brussels , the European Council will debate the enlargement of the euro zone to these two countries and we all trust that on 10 July , following the positive agreement of the European Council tomorrow , Ecofin will take the final legal decision to enlarge the euro zone to these two countries .
Both this Parliament and the Ecofin Council of 5 June agree with the analysis of the Commission and the Central Bank with regard to Cyprus and Malta 's compliance with the convergence criteria laid down in the Treaty .
At the meeting held with the coordinators of Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on 7 June , I had the opportunity to explain to you that we in the Commission have been provided with full and reliable information on these two countries for the purposes of drawing up the convergence reports .
There is confusion in certain documents accompanying the draft resolution between data relating to the quarterly financial accounts and the data that is notified twice a year by the countries under the excessive deficit procedure , data relating to deficit and to debt .
I must say once again to this plenary of Parliament that , with regard to the information necessary in order to take decisions on excessive deficit procedures , the Commission has no reservations in terms of the quality of the data provided by Malta and Cyprus . No reservations of any kind .
With regard to Malta , the Commission issued an opinion on the criterion on the sustainability of public finances , conditional upon the Ecofin Council 's approval of the abrogation of the excessive deficit procedure which had been opened up for this country in 2004 and the Ecofin of 5 June has confirmed this point , bringing an end to the excessive deficit procedure with regard to Malta .
There are also precedents with regard to an approval in the convergence report conditional upon fulfilling conditions , either in terms of the stability of the exchange rate or the declaration of excessive deficit .
With regard to Malta 's compliance with this criterion , therefore , there is no kind of particular situation or exception .
The general procedure applied has been the one applied in many other previous cases to many other countries .
Over the coming weeks and once the Council 's positive decision has been confirmed with regard to the enlargement of the euro zone to Cyprus and Malta , the Commission will issue the two reports on each country 's state of preparedness for joining the euro .
I am also aware of certain honourable Members ' concerns in this regard .
That report on the degree of preparedness for the change of notes and coins is not the same as the convergence reports .
It is not a convergence criterion and the Commission regularly publishes , as we will do over the coming weeks , reports and communications focussing on this issue .
Under these circumstances , ladies and gentlemen , we are able to predict that on 1 January 2008 the euro zone will have fifteen Member States with the accession of Cyprus and Malta .
This is an extremely positive step for those two countries , for the euro zone and for the whole of the European Union .
The euro is undoubtedly one of the greatest achievements of European integration and the greater the number of citizens enjoying its advantages , the more the Union 's capacity to offer all of its citizens greater guarantees of prosperity and social wellbeing will be recognised .
Ladies and gentlemen , with this debate on Cyprus and Malta 's request to join the euro zone , this is the fourth time that the European institutions have given their opinion on the membership of the zone .
The first of them took place in 1998 and it was aimed at identifying which countries would initially make up the euro zone on 1 January 1999 .
On that occasion it was decided that eleven Member States would join the zone .
Two years later , in 2000 , Greece 's request was analysed and it was agreed that Greece could join the euro zone from 1 January 2001 .
Last year , all of the European institutions debated and agreed that Slovenia would join the euro zone on 1 January 2007 .
Finally , we have this request from Cyprus and Malta , which I hope will be definitively approved by the European Council and Ecofin on 10 July .
In no way can it be said , therefore , that the euro zone is a closed club , as has sometimes been claimed .
It is a club that is entirely open to all members that wish to join it and which are prepared and fulfil the conditions for reaching that stage .
Following these four procedures for setting up and enlarging the euro zone , from next year it will have fifteen Member States , another two have an opt-out clause ( the United Kingdom and Denmark ) and a further ten Member States do not yet belong to the zone and I hope that they will join over the next few years .
Without making any prediction as to when all of the conditions for joining the euro zone may be met , I believe that over the next few years , practically every year we European institutions are going to have to give our opinion on new memberships of the zone in accordance with the Treaty , which declares the euro the official currency of the Member States of the Union .
In Articles 121 and 122 the Treaty also stipulates which criteria determine whether a Member State meets the conditions for adopting the single currency and establishes the procedure to be followed by the European institutions .
With regard to the motion for a resolution that the honourable Members have prepared on these procedures for consulting Parliament with a view to the enlargement of the zone , I would like to refer to this aspect in the second part of my speech .
According to the Treaty , the procedure must involve five actors : the Commission , the European Central Bank , Parliament , the European Council and the Ecofin Council .
However , the Treaty does not contain any specific provision regarding the time limits for each of the institutions to issue their opinion .
On the four occasions on which we have given our opinion , a similar timetable has been followed : firstly , the request for entry into the zone by the Member State or States , which is usually presented at the beginning of the year prior to the year in which they wish to join the euro zone ; secondly , the Commission and the European Central Bank 's assessment of whether or not the conditions are met , which is carried out in spring ; thirdly , the Council 's definitive decision , which takes account of the opinion of Parliament and the debate in the European Council , which normally takes place in the middle of the year prior to the introduction ; and finally the adoption of the euro by the Member State or States on 1 January of the following year .
There are a series of determining factors in these steps , and I would like to refer to them because they affect all of the institutions .
Firstly , why is the euro introduced on 1 January ?
In view of the enormous legal , economic , fiscal , accounting and practical implications of changing currency it would be extremely unwise to consider a date other than 1 January to adopt the euro and I believe that there is general agreement amongst everybody on that .
Secondly , the Member State should be allowed a period of time to carry out the preparations for joining the euro in an orderly and effective manner and , on the basis of our experience of previous enlargements , we can state that , in the interest of the citizens of the country in question , who would suffer most from the consequences of a badly-prepared adoption of the euro , it is desirable for the process of decision-making by the European institutions to be completed several months in advance of the 1 January on which notes and coins are introduced and the irrevocable exchange rate in the country joining the euro takes effect .
These are the determining factors in practice and neither of them are in the hands of the Commission , of course .
What does fall to the Commission , however , in cooperation with the European Central Bank , is the adoption of the convergence report on whether or not the criteria have been fulfilled .
The date on which the Commission must adopt the convergence report is determined , firstly , by when the Member State presents its request - the Commission cannot decide when a Member State is to present that request - and , secondly , by when the Commission has the reliable and rigorous data that it needs in order to carry out an appropriate , rigorous and accurate assessment of whether or not the convergence criteria have been fulfilled .
The date of the Commission 's convergence report therefore depends , on the one hand , on when the Member State presents the request and , on the other , on when the Commission can be provided with the appropriate , rigorous and accurate data required in order to carry out the assessment .
In 1998 and 2000 , the Commission generally adopted the convergence reports at the beginning of May .
In 2006 and 2007 , the approval took place in the middle of May because , since 2005 , the time limit for the Member States to communicate the data on their budgetary situation has been put back by a month , from 1 March to 1 April .
This has been done in order to acquire accurate and rigorous information on the budgetary execution for the previous year of the Member State applying to join the euro zone .
Experience indicated that the notifications of 1 March did not include all of the accurate data required in order to provide a sufficient picture of how the previous budgetary year had been concluded .
Under these circumstances , if we bear in mind that Cyprus and Malta fulfilled the exchange rate stability criterion on 2 May of this year , the Commission has had two weeks , as happened last year in the case of Slovenia , to draw up and adopt the convergence reports .
The point I wish to make through this perhaps overly detailed explanation , is that all of the institutions have tight deadlines within which to take decisions in this procedure .
The time limit available to Parliament is determined , on the one hand , by the approval of the convergence report by the Commission and the Central Bank , but also , on the other , by the dates decided upon by the Council for its decision-making procedure , both in the European Council and in the meeting of the Ecofin Council , and that is clearly not in the hands of the Commission .

In any event , the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , has written a letter to President Poettering indicating that the Commission is willing to explore ways for each institution to be able to exercise the competences assigned to it by the Treaty in the best possible way within this procedure , and the Commission and I personally would like to say to you once again , in response to this Parliament 's motion for a resolution , that we are willing to seek an agreement amongst the three institutions on a procedure that will improve the way in which we work , in view of the objective limitations we face when making decisions in this area .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is perfectly aware , and all of you should be aware , that the Commission and myself are of course entirely at your service when it comes to providing any information available before these time periods elapse - with regard to the economic situation of the candidate countries and the degree of compliance with the convergence criteria - even before the Member States present their requests .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Minister of State , Commissioner , before I turn to Malta , Cyprus and the procedure , I should like with your permission to make a few preliminary remarks about the euro .
There is no doubt that the euro is a very successful project .
It is stable internally and externally .
We should not forget this in today 's debate .
Internally , we have low inflation rates ; externally , the euro has become the second most important currency in the world and is very stable against the dollar .
None of this has happened by accident . It is the result of a construction in which the Member States and the Commission bear the main responsibility : the Maastricht criteria in the Stability and Growth Pact - which has of course already been watered down under Commissioner Almunia 's leadership - the deficit procedure , the clear statistical data and the independence of the European Central Bank .
Only if all of these factors coincide will the euro remain a stable currency in the long term .
I am saying this as a preliminary remark , because I still need to address the procedure .
Of course the Treaty is clear , but the Treaty also states that the European Parliament has to be listened to .
Commissioner , I will be quite frank : we will not allow our role to be reduced to that of an optional extra !
The Commission - so I have just heard - has done everything to the letter , and Parliament has to create its own window .
If that is the case - and that is what we say in the motion - then , should an interinstitutional agreement not be concluded containing the points that we will subsequently be adopting by a large majority , next time we will break off our consultations , as we also do for agriculture policy .
We will not adopt these opinions as quickly as we have been asked to do so now for the third time .
Let me make it quite clear : Parliament will not be treated as an optional extra , not by anyone !
I will now turn to Cyprus and Malta .
I am glad that we can support an enlargement from 13 to 15 participating countries .
In February , Malta and Cyprus requested a Convergence Report pursuant to Article 121 with the aim of obtaining membership .
Examination of the data available - the Commissioner has described the undeniable problems in this respect - tells us the following : Cyprus has participated in ERM II for a long time ; as of 5 May it meets the requirements in respect of long-term interest rates ; per-capita GDP is good , at 85 % of the EU average , and its economy shows substantial convergence .
Nevertheless , it had a problem with the data , and specifically with the quarterly financial accounts .
This was also discussed on 3 May .
We should also examine the clarity of the data from the point of view of the Commission 's responsibility .
It is not enough for the Commission to say that we are dependent on the data and that the Member States have to supply it .
The Commission is also responsible for these data being correct .
We saw this in the case of Greece , where the Commission did not carry out a sufficiently thorough examination and six months ' later we had a nasty surprise .
Cyprus meets the conditions and Cyprus - and it had been criticised on this score - has also brought its Central Bank law into line , although it only did so some time after requesting the Convergence Report , namely on 15 March , that is over a month later .
However , the law has now been amended , inflation is low , and although government debt is still over 60 % it is heading in the right direction .
We can therefore say today that we unreservedly support Cyprus 's accession to the euro zone .
I am sure that the European Parliament will do so .
In Malta 's case the picture is similar , but with one exception .
We support Malta 's accession .
On Monday , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs voted in favour of the accession of both States by a large majority , almost unanimously - for Malta with 39 votes in favour and for Cyprus with 38 votes in favour and one abstention .
With Malta , however , we had the problem that at the time that the Convergence Report was tabled the deficit procedure had not yet been closed .
The Commission therefore tabled a Convergence Report that did not comply with Article 2 of the Protocol on the Convergence Criteria .
This states that at the time of the examination the deficit procedure must be closed .
That is a fact .
We accepted the report nonetheless , but the Commission should not say here that it has done everything to the letter and that it is just this interfering Parliament that is disrupting its consultations with the Council .
Turning finally to our motion for a resolution , we have received the reports and letters from the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , and Angela Merkel .
Mrs Merkel has a difficult procedure to complete , as she has to listen to all 26 other Member States .
Mr Barroso only needs one Commission decision .
I agree that we should take a decision , despite the fact that many of our requests have not been met , but that is why we are now calling for an interinstitutional agreement .
In this agreement , which should be adopted by the end of 2007 , we call on the Council and the Commission to be more accommodating on the timing .
Otherwise next time round - and it will probably be Slovakia - we will insist on our right to a period of at least two months for consultation .
Next time we will not tolerate the schedule that we have gone along with now for the third time .
With this in mind we welcome the fact that Cyprus and Malta can become Members , but we demand reasonable consultation conditions from the Commission and the Council for the European Parliament .
on behalf of PPE-DE . - ( MT ) Mr President , I cannot begin without first expressing my appreciation towards the Maltese and Gozitan population for the great strides they have managed to take in these three years since Malta became a member of the European Union .
These were three difficult years that presented numerous challenges .
In these three years the Maltese have shown themselves capable of adjusting to the future .
It has been an extremely interesting time for my country , and I can say outright that the results have begun to show .
The introduction of the euro this January confirms this .
Malta has clearly shown itself capable of fulfilling all the necessary criteria so as to ensure that this important transition occurs smoothly .
This transition will strengthen the country 's economy and , in turn , competitiveness .
Change is never easy .
However , I believe that Malta is fully prepared to face up to this new challenge in January .
We must keep in mind that Malta was given a restricted time period in which to conform to , and adopt , the measures required for this changeover to take place .
In less than three years , Malta has reduced its inflation rate to 2.2 % , and the ratio of national debt compared to the Gross Domestic Product is decreasing towards the reference rate of 60 % .
There has been a sustainable reduction in the budget deficit , which now stands at less than 3 % , and one must also consider the fact that , as from Malta 's entry into the ERM2 programme , the Maltese lira did not undergo any devaluation and at no point was there ever an air of uncertainty in the country .
As Commissioner Almunia said , Malta has achieved a high level of sustainability and convergence .
Malta and the Maltese are used to facing and overcoming their challenges , challenges that , in the past , were far from small and that nonetheless led to a string of successes throughout history .
This is an historical moment for the European Union because it will lead to a larger eurozone , one that incorporates more countries and more people .
It is also an historical moment for Malta because it will contribute to the further integration of its citizens with the European Union .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur for his work in this area , which proved to be very useful .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to say that I welcome the fact that , on 1 January 2008 , the eurozone will have two new members , namely Cyprus and Malta .
Both countries have fulfilled the convergence criteria stipulated in the Treaty .
I would like to warmly congratulate our Cypriot and Maltese colleagues .
Expanding the eurozone is an important process which fosters deeper integration in the European Union .
This process also has a positive effect on candidate countries and the eurozone 's economic position .
Countries preparing to join the eurozone are developing at a much faster rate than those in the zone .
Their macroeconomic situation is also better , especially in terms of public debt and budget deficits .
The new members will strengthen the whole zone and the single currency .
At the same time , I would also like to state that I do not welcome the fact that a great deal of time pressure is being placed on Parliament in its work to assess these new countries ' eurozone membership .
Our current work schedule does not allow Parliament to properly prepare an opinion .
This is why the resolution which I hope we will adopt today , aims to initiate a debate on an interinstitutional agreement which will , in the future , facilitate the efficient and effective analysis of convergence reports .
I welcome the open and constructive position that President Barroso and Commissioner Almunia have just declared , on behalf of the Commission .
Minister Gloser , I hope that the Council 's position will also be constructive .
I am counting on the creation of an efficient mechanism for a problem-free expansion of the eurozone in the future .
In the debate on the expansion of the eurozone , it should be stressed that certain compulsory Maastricht convergence criteria do not apply to the current situation .
This is particularly the case for inflation .
First of all , it does not seem appropriate for the eurozone membership criteria to be defined according to the average inflation rate in countries which do not belong to the eurozone .
Secondly , the current criterion does not take into consideration the fact that rapid economic growth in the new Member States naturally translates into a higher inflation rate , which is by no means a sign of economic weakness .
In fact , quite the opposite is the case .
It reflects the fact that the new Member States are catching up with the developed economies of the old Union .
Thirdly , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the definition of stability applied by the Commission and the European Central Bank in convergence reports is different to the definition of price stability used by the European Central Bank in the field of monetary policy .
Meanwhile , the Treaty text only contains one definition of price stability and we cannot have two different interpretations of this term .
The inflation criteria currently means that some of the new Member States may not be able to join the eurozone for many years .
This permanently divides the Member States into two categories , namely the eurozone countries and those which remain outside the eurozone .
This situation threatens the cohesion of the Union and is at odds with the spirit of the Treaty .
The convergence criteria were drawn up 16 years ago , in entirely different circumstances .
They should be adapted to the current situation .
I appeal for an in-depth debate on this subject .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank Mr Langen , the rapporteur , for the excellent work he has achieved despite the short length of time available .
In fact , on 16 May 2007 the Commission adopted its convergence report on the criteria for Malta and Cyprus to join the single currency and on 25 May the European Parliament was invited to express its view on the proposal for a Council decision on the adoption by Cyprus and Malta of the single currency on 1 January 2008 .
Because of the short time available Parliament was not able to make a thorough assessment of the situation of these countries and the reports put forward by the Commission .
I would nonetheless express a favourable opinion on the adoption by Cyprus and Malta of the single currency , since the convergence criteria have been met .
In fact , with regard to Malta , in the last 12 months the inflation rate has been 2.2 % , which is less than the reference value of 3 % .
The excessive deficit has been corrected through a sustained reduction in the budget deficit under the threshold of 3 % of GDP and the debt rate is falling , coming close to the reference value of 60 % of GDP .
Until March 2007 Malta 's average long-term interest rate was at 4.3 % , which is below the reference value of 6.4 % .
The Maltese economy is highly integrated into the European Union and the balance of payments deficit fell to 6.3 % in 2006 , partly thanks to direct foreign investments .
With regard to Cyprus , in the last 12 months the inflation rate has been 2 % , which is lower than the reference value of 3 % .
For 2007 the forecasts made by the Commission in spring this year are for an unchanged deficit of 1.4 % of GDP .
Since its entry into ERM II , the European exchange rate mechanism , the Cypriot pound has been exchanged in a stable manner at a satisfactory exchange rate .
In the last 12 months the average long-term interest rate has been 4.2 % , which is below the reference value of 6.4 % .
The Cypriot economy is highly integrated into the European Union 's economy .
The Commission considers that economic integration has been achieved , despite the increase in the balance of payments deficit .
In order to avoid problems arising again in the future on procedural timetables , it is necessary to improve the method for consulting the European Parliament , by setting up interinstitutional cooperation between Parliament and the Commission .
This will make it possible to have the time necessary to make a proper assessment of the proposals by the Commission and the European Central Bank .
On this point , I believe that the exchange of views with Commissioner Almunia and the reply by Mr Barroso , President of the Commission , to the letter sent to him by Mr Pöttering , President of Parliament , were fairly positive .
The Commission ought to notify Parliament very early of all requests for convergence reports submitted by the Member States and should decide together with Parliament and the Council on the timetable for the procedure .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , by taking the floor in the debate on expanding the eurozone to include Cyprus and Malta , I would like to draw your attention to the following issues .
First of all , the Commission is once again reminding us of the need for the new Member States to meet all the Maastricht criteria before joining the eurozone .
At the same time , it is turning a blind eye to the fact that , when the euro was introduced , many of the old Member States did not meet these criteria .
Secondly , despite the revision of the Stability and Growth Pact , the Commission has remained lenient towards the biggest Member States in terms of their adherence to the Maastricht criteria .
In the past , the Commission has tolerated , and appears to still tolerate , significant budget deficits and a level of public debt in particular , which often exceeds 60 % of GDP .
Statistics confirm this .
In 2006 , public debt in the countries of the old European Union was as high as 63.3 % of GDP and , in as many as half of the eurozone countries this debt exceeded 60 % of GDP .
Thirdly , the Commission 's attitude towards countries wishing to join the eurozone varies greatly .
Very recently , Lithuania 's application to join the zone was rejected , in spite of the fact that it had met the Maastricht criteria , and its inflation rate barely exceeded 0.1 % of the reference value .
Therefore , the Commission 's quick approval of Cyprus and Malta 's membership of the eurozone might seem surprising in view of the fact that both countries ' public debt clearly exceeds 60 % of GDP .
In 2006 , Cyprus ' public debt amounted to as much as 65.3 % and Malta 's debt stood at 66.5 % of GDP .
Moreover , both countries are finding it difficult to provide Eurostat with statistics pertaining to their financial situation .
In spite of the doubts I have just expressed , I would still like to congratulate both Cyprus and Malta on joining the eurozone .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , both Malta and the Greek part of Cyprus meet the Maastricht criteria .
It is therefore logical to enlarge the euro zone to include both countries .
If it were up to me and my group , more Member States of the European Union would be welcome to join the euro zone , provided that they met the criteria .
That can only be good for the European Union .
This event is , however , tinged with sadness and I should like to explain why : unfortunately , in Cyprus an opportunity has been missed to involve both parts of Cyprus in the euro zone and to blaze the trail for a reunification of the island of Cyprus on the basis of a bicommunal and bizonal solution .
That is very regrettable , because as a result the wall in Cyprus will be reinforced rather than weakened .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , economic experts seem to agree that the euro zone is enjoying a general economic upturn .
They are even talking about a sustained rise in employment .
It is my belief , however , that all too often it is only a rise in part-time employment - or the new forms of work , as they are euphemistically known - that has been recorded , which can hardly compensate for the full-time jobs that have been lost .
Under these conditions the dwindling birth rate should come as no surprise .
You cannot feed a family on a McJob !
Enthusing about an upturn is a slap in the face for every single one of the millions-strong army of jobless in the EU .
It mocks all of those millions of people who are labelled as the working poor .
We are facing a problem that should not be underestimated : the fact that existing differences within the euro zone are widening , for example the southern European countries are seeing a continual worsening of their competitive position .
The fact that the euro is not a universal remedy is proved by the example of the United Kingdom alone .
As we know , the British economy is in good shape , even without the euro .
The United Kingdom has the sixth largest manufacturing sector in the world and the eighth largest services sector .
For this reason alone , no EU Member States should , in my opinion , be forced to introduce the euro .
Fears about , for example , handing over sovereignty to the European Central Bank should be treated just as seriously as the price rises feared by consumers .
Many millions of citizens have in fact found the euro to have inflationary powers , since it has been a decisive factor in the increased price of everyday necessities .
Neither official statistics showing the contrary nor image campaigns will do anything to change that .
Any EU country that is considering introducing the euro should as a general rule , in my view , always let the sovereign power , that is the people , decide .

( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Langen , and the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , for their positive report on the integration of my country , Cyprus , and of course of Malta into the eurozone .
I also wish to thank Mr Almunia for the assistance he has given Cyprus all this time in achieving this objective .
Despite the tight timeframe which the Commission allowed Parliament and despite the reactions voiced , Mr Langen has demonstrated a huge sense of responsibility , has circumvented procedural issues and , I repeat , has demonstrated his ability to get to the heart of the matter in his positive report .
My thanks once again to Mr Langen .
The European Parliament is today rewarding Cyprus 's long-term efforts to put its economy in order and converge with the indicators of the European Union . The European Parliament is giving the third institutional green light to the adoption of the euro in Cyprus .
The adoption of the euro in Cyprus will bring the euro to the Middle East and forge a monetary link between Europe and Arabia via Cyprus .
The monetary area of the European Union will extend from Brussels to the far end of the Eastern Mediterranean .
Cyprus has always had a strong economy ; even during the difficult years after the military invasion and the occupation of the north of Cyprus by Turkey and the loss of its basic economic resources , it has managed to develop a strong economy .
Thus , everything that needs to be done by 1 January 2008 on the part of Cyprus for full economy integration and convergence will have to be done and you can be sure that it will be done .
As far as Eurostat 's comment on the provision of imperfect data is concerned , Mr Almunia 's clarification satisfies us .
I trust that by 1 January 2008 the necessary basis will be in place for a proper resolution of the Cyprus problem and for Cyprus to reunite politically , socially and economically , so that the euro becomes the currency of all Cypriots , both Greek and Turkish alike .
The European Union has an obligation to take an initiative in this direction .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr Gloser , Commissioner , this is actually the fourth time that the European Parliament has been called upon to make a decision on the euro area , in its initial setting up or on the occasion of its enlargements .
The issue of the euro is no small matter for our fellow citizens : it is , in their hands , one of the European Union 's most valuable assets .
Since last year , however , since the opening of the debate on the accession of Lithuania , we have had the impression that it has become a debate from which any political issue must be removed and where only purely technical arguments can be raised .
In this debate , the European Parliament is asking to be able to come to a decision of this kind in the normal way .
For that to happen , like any other institution , it needs time .
That is the spirit of the letter that our President sent to the Presidents of the other two institutions .
The answer we have received from the President of the Commission springs from a spirit of cooperation and conciliation , we appreciate that .
On the Council 's part , it is a work in progress .
We need to go beyond that , Mr Gloser .
We need you to show the same spirit of consultation and conciliation as the Commission , otherwise we shall find it difficult to carry on in this way .
Beyond the technical arguments , I should not want the whole of the discussion to take place without at any time our raising the problems of governance of the euro area .
What situation are we in today , after all , with two countries that have a permanent opt-out clause and countries that have to sign up and belong to this area , without at any time our questioning the governance of the area ?
We are approaching the time when rotation of the authorities of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) takes place .
It is a mechanism that we have criticised here , in this Parliament , and that , I think , we continue to criticise .
We think also that the functioning of the Eurogroup is not quite satisfactory and that we must do even better .
Tomorrow we shall have the accession of Slovakia and then after that , until 2012 , our timetable will be noticeably lighter .
Let us take advantage of this time to improve the governance of the euro area , otherwise our fellow citizens will no longer have confidence in their own currency , the geographical extent of which is being enlarged without first of all improving its functioning .
With your permission , Mr President , I shall say a word finally about the inflation criterion .
I know that this criterion was defined in 1992 , at a time when Europe was very different from what it is now .
If , however , we want to revise the Maastricht criteria on a strictly economic basis , independently of any political conditions which would allow this debate to be reopened , then there are other aspects of the Maastricht criteria that ought to be revised .
Mr President , the eurozone is another important institution , bringing European nations closer to each other and further connecting our people 's wellbeing and prospects in the common future of a united Europe .
For this reason , the citizens I represent as a Cypriot MEP rejoice at the decision of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs to approve the Commission 's proposal to proceed with the adoption of the euro by Cyprus on 1 January 2008 .
I of course note with regret that paragraph 7b of the report 's explanatory statement somewhat erroneously states that the Cypriot Government has infringed the provisions of Regulation ( EC ) No 501 / 2004 of 10 March 2004 on providing Eurostat with full information on quarterly accounts for general government .
Yesterday , I wrote to the Cypriot Finance Minister and to the Commission on this subject .
I welcome the speedy correction made by Commissioner Almunia , both to me in writing and here this morning .
I wonder whether it would also be possible for a suitable correction and clarification to be made in the report , even at this late stage .
I should appreciate the assistance of the rapporteur in doing this .
Cyprus 's adoption of the euro will , in addition to everything else , have two further beneficial effects .
Firstly , it will bring Turkey closer to Europe as , on a practical level , the euro will replace the Turkish lira as the currency used in the Turkish-occupied northern part of Cyprus .
Secondly , it will bring Europe closer to the United Kingdom , as the euro will be the currency used by the civilian population living in the two British colonies in Cyprus , Akrotiri and Dhekelia .
In these areas , the pound - albeit the Cyprus pound , a colonial version of the mighty British pound - will be replaced by the euro .
These colonies will be the first official British territory on which the euro will be the currency of general use .
In the future , the euro may even gradually extend from the colonies to the British mainland , undoubtedly to the joy of all the British MEPs in this House , of whom , incidentally , I do not see many .
In conclusion , I call on all my colleagues to support this report and I take this opportunity to extend an invitation to you all to visit Cyprus in 2008 , to enjoy Cypriot hospitality and to spend your euros freely in the sun .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will confine my remarks today to the procedure and will not comment on the many other points that have been addressed .
In terms of substance I can quite frankly echo Mr Langen 's assessment of Malta and Cyprus and his comments on Parliament 's approval .
I will therefore concentrate on the procedure .
Here I will simply take the words of the Minister of State , Mr Glosar , as my starting point .
He said that we should not primarily consider the procedure .
There was talk of sympathy , requests and considering . For the next procedure I should like to say : we will sympathetically consider Council and the Commission 's requests to make our decisions quickly .
Next time , however , we will also use the procedure that Parliament provides for such matters .
We fully understand the Council 's constraints with its meeting schedule .
The Commission 's constraints too , and the 1 January deadline : all of these things are well understood in Parliament .
However , if there is no understanding the other way round , that we in Parliament also have a particular procedure and that we are now unable , and not for the first time , to observe one of the basic rules of that procedure properly , for example the translation deadlines , then next time round there will be consequences .
We can therefore only press for an appropriate agreement to be adopted between the institutions .
Otherwise the Council would have to see to it that Parliament were no longer consulted in the future .
It has of course been mentioned that this is enshrined in the relevant Treaty , and if it is enshrined in the Treaty then it has to be respected .
The German Foreign Office and all European foreign ministries have made repeated attempts to stop Parliament becoming too powerful .
This , however , applies to other fields .
Nevertheless , one area that is very important to me is data provision .
That is why we in Parliament want to have sufficient time to deal with this .
We have seen what happened with Greece and Hungary .
We hold the Commission responsible for guaranteeing that the data on which the decision for an accession is based is also scrutinised as thoroughly as possible , so that we can assume that it is correct .
I need only refer to the comments of the Hungarian Finance Minister , who , following what happened in Hungary , publicly philosophised about the various possibilities that are actually open to a finance minister when supplying data to Brussels .
The ECB President , Mr Trichet , has also pointed out that collecting data in the European Union is problematic .
For us it is crucial that the Commission does not pass the buck to Eurostat in such cases but that it takes responsibility itself .
However , we should also like to strengthen the Commission vis-à-vis the Member States .
It is unacceptable that the Commission should have to comply with such requests when the Member States continue to use all of the means at their disposal to restrict the Commission 's supervisory powers in areas where they really do need to be exercised .

( MT ) Thank you Mr President , today 's vote is a significant one for Malta , because aside from the important and legitimate arguments that have been put forward regarding when would have been the best time to adopt the euro , there is , notwithstanding , a political consensus and a commitment to ensuring that the changeover happens on 1 January 2008 .
Once the European Commission has accepted the statistics and methodology put forward by the Maltese authorities , then these will be accepted by all European authorities when the same basis is used by successive governments .
In the next few years , considerable work will have to be carried out on the sustainability of the public finances if the Maastricht criteria are to be complied with .
As both the Commission and the European Central Bank have stated , the Maltese Government has , until now , resorted to the one-off sale of public assets , while continuing to add fiscal pressure , mainly on the workers and the middle class .
This is not sustainable .
The National Committee is doing a good job in preparing for the changeover to the euro , but more has to be done to directly involve consumer representatives in fighting the perception that the euro will lead to a higher cost of living .
More basic information needs to be given , including information on interest rates .
The ' FAIR ' initiative , which allows individual businesses to enter into agreement on dual pricing , should be praised .
However , currently little more than half of Maltese and Gozitan enterprises have taken part in this scheme .
I strongly urge those other businesses that have not as yet joined this initiative to do so , without delay .
Let us make a success of the changeover to the euro , although one must not be fooled into thinking that this will solve the country 's economic problems .
The solution to these is to be found within ourselves .
In recent years , Malta 's Gross Domestic Product has fallen from 78 % to 71 % of the European average .
The progress registered in this period came mostly from large bank profits and government projects with direct expenditure .
This kind of policy will become extremely limited in view of the convergence criteria .
Meanwhile , the sectors that ought to be drivers of our economy , such as tourism and manufacturing , have gone downhill .
This was clearly proven by the economic and social shock that hit our country yesterday , when 570 persons lost their job in one day , due to the closing down of the VF factory .
This is why a national effort is needed that genuinely favours competition in these areas .
Mr President , I also have to apologise to my Cypriot and Maltese colleagues for spoiling this historical moment of accession to the eurozone with this debate on our institutional problems with dealing with accession issues .
However , it does not take anything away from our support for their adoption of the euro and for both Mr Langen 's reports .
We did not want to burden the accession of these two countries with the issue of the future procedure , but I hope that we can come to an agreement with the Commission and the Council today to ensure that , in future , there is a better procedure and a more serious opportunity for Parliament to give its opinion on this issue .
That is why we have drawn up this non-legislative motion for a resolution on the procedure .
We would like to be invited to meet with the other two institutions to produce an interinstitutional agreement on several issues , which are listed in our motion for a resolution .
This text calls for a pre-announcement system , whereby those Member States wishing to accede notify us in advance so that we can begin studying the situation , and concerns the assessment of the quality of the statistics and data provided .
My last point concerns the scheduling of the dates for the formal procedure .
We recognise that everything has to take place in a very short period of time .
However , if we are better prepared then we will have a better opportunity for serious discussion .
The Commissioner said that he was willing to sit together with us to conclude an interinstitutional agreement of this kind .
I would like to ask Mr Gloser to give us that commitment as well , on behalf of the Council , the German Presidency and future presidencies .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Cyprus and Malta 's request that its degree of convergence be assessed was presented less than two years after it joined the exchange rate mechanism , on 2 May 2005 , and the reports of the European Central Bank and the Commission have been presented according to the same pattern as the reports requested by Greece , Lithuania and Slovenia .
Though it is always useful to improve the processes for enlarging the euro zone and improve the European Parliament 's involvement , my central message is addressed to our fellow citizens from Cyprus and Malta , so that they may hear our view that Cyprus and Malta can join the euro zone and must be able to enjoy all the advantages of the monetary union from the beginning of next year .
This enlargement of the euro zone will be a significant step in the process of European integration .
For the first time since reunification , the majority of Member States of the European Union will be part of the euro zone .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me express my warm thanks to you , Mr Langen , for the two parts of your contribution as rapporteur .
You recommended the entry of Malta and Cyprus into the eurozone in spite of the reservations about the time factor which you expressed in the second part of your remarks .
It is important that we should be able to achieve this within the various time limits , as Commissioner Almunia said before .
Both countries need a certain amount of time to prepare for this step so as to ensure that the people of Malta and Cyprus do not ultimately bear the brunt of an excessively long drawn-out preparation process .
I would like to re-emphasise that the European Council indicated to the President of the European Parliament that a difficult situation obtained and that time might be too short .
Let me also deal with the question of what is feasible , of what can still be done before particular official deadlines .
The timetables have been laid down .
We cannot deviate from them , because provisions of the EC Treaty are involved .
The other question is to what extent , in the consultations between Ecofin and your committee , you are receiving the information you need in order to monitor the situation continuously and thus to be prepared .
Another question concerns the extent to which you are being given advance copies of reports from the countries that have applied for membership .
May I also say this in response to various questions that have been asked in the course of the debate here : on the one hand , many things are prescribed , but in areas where changes may be possible - and this was explained by Mrs Merkel in her letter to Mr Poettering and was also referred to by the President of the Commission - if we are to recognise these possibilities we must remain engaged in the discussion through appropriate proposals from the Commission .
In all other respects , it is a matter of awaiting developments .
I therefore hope you will appreciate that I cannot make any promises today on behalf of the Council in respect of this item .
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , in this final speech in the debate I would like once again , on my own behalf and on behalf of the Commission , to congratulate Cyprus and Malta on the efforts they have made to bring us this far and on the efforts they are making to introduce the euro successfully , both for their economy and for their citizens .
I believe that this demonstrates once again that the euro zone is not a closed club and that joining the euro is not just an obligation for the Member States , but an excellent opportunity for those who wish to share the single currency with 318 million other Europeans and for the countries that already belong to the Economic and Monetary Union .
I therefore believe that it is a good decision to support the entry of Cyprus and Malta into the euro , as Mr Langen 's report does .
I would like to make two comments on compliance with the criteria .
In his speech , Mr Langen called into question the way in which Cyprus and Malta fulfil the criteria or the way in which the Commission 's convergence report has assessed the compliance with those criteria .
I must say that the abrogation of the excessive deficit procedure for Malta , which took place at the last Ecofin Council on the proposal of the Commission , is a necessary condition in order for Malta to fulfil the Maastricht criterion on this point and the Commission 's convergence report of 16 May said that , if the Ecofin Council approved the abrogation of the excessive deficit procedure , Malta would comply .
We have done that in order not to delay the convergence report , because if not we would have had to wait until 5 June in order to publish the convergence report and you would have had even less time to debate it .
The assessment of compliance conditional upon definitive approval is therefore intended to help the work of Parliament and the Council , not to hinder it .
So to the figures : Cyprus and Malta 's deficit and debt figures notified within the context of the excessive deficit notification procedures that take place twice a year , on 1 April and 1 October , are as reliable - having been analysed by Eurostat , which published its opinion on 23 April - as those of the other Member States .
Eurostat has no reservations regarding the deficit and debt figures notified .
There is no foundation for calling into question the figures for Cyprus and Malta and not calling into question the figures for France , Italy , Spain , Portugal , Germany , Sweden , Denmark or any other Member State .
No foundation whatsoever .
There are difficulties with other figures : there are difficulties with the quarterly financial account figures in the national accounts , with the unemployment figures at this time of the enquiry into the German workforce and with the French figures , but that is everyday statistical work , and if Parliament wants to give Eurostat more resources , they will be welcome .
If Parliament wants to support the work of Eurostat , the honourable Members know that I , as the Commissioner responsible for Eurostat , am always grateful for Parliament 's support of the Commission and of Eurostat , but I do not wish there to be any doubt about the validity and the quality of the figures on the basis of which we are assessing whether Cyprus and Malta fulfil the convergence criteria .
With regard to the procedures , I wish to address you directly , Mr Langen .
The Commission is not marginalising Parliament or hindering its work in this debate in any way , and it has no desire or reason to do so .
Quite the opposite , and I have expressed , and President Barroso has also done so in his letter , the Commission 's and the Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs ' total willingness to work with you .

I would like you to listen to me , Mr Langen , because I am telling you and I am repeating what the President of the Commission said in the letter to Mr Poettering and what I said on 7 June in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in your presence - we are entirely willing to share information with you and to forward any information available .
But what you cannot ask of the Commission is that it take the view that a country has definitively fulfilled the deficit criterion when the Council has not yet abrogated the excessive deficit procedure .
Next year , if Slovakia presents a request , we are going to have that problem again , because Slovakia is currently under an excessive deficit procedure that can only be abrogated - in the event that that abrogation is appropriate once the definitive figures for the 2007 budget have been validated by Eurostat .
We are not therefore going to be able to anticipate , and nor is the Ecofin Council , the decisions on abrogation of the excessive deficit procedure for Slovakia before the time of year that Malta 's excessive deficit procedure has been abrogated .
We can anticipate the convergence report by saying that , if the Ecofin Council approves the derogation , Slovakia will fulfil the criterion .
That is a hypothesis .
We cannot say in February that Slovakia fulfils the deficit criterion , however , when the abrogation can only be approved in May or June of next year .
Likewise , we cannot carry out a rigorous assessment - and you are right to demand that we carry out a rigorous assessment - of whether countries fulfil the Maastricht criteria , the convergence criteria , before we know the spring economic forecasts in May 2008 , which cannot be approved or published beforehand by the Commission and its services , because if we anticipate the spring forecasts they will be winter forecasts and they will not provide a view of the economic situation and the economic data for the spring .
I therefore wish to make it clear to this Parliament that next year 's convergence report cannot be anticipated before May .
The Commission , Parliament and the Council must therefore talk and agree on a way in which we can work rigorously , coherently and cooperatively in order to come to correct decisions that enable all of us to work rigorously and take decisions at the appropriate time so that the citizens of the next countries to join the 13 current members of the euro zone do not suffer the consequences of a belated decision and of a lack of preparation for the introduction of euro notes and coins .
This is the Commission 's attitude and conviction .
There should be an agreement amongst the three institutions .
That is desirable .
It makes no sense that , for each enlargement of the euro zone , we should be discussing the procedures rather than the countries that are entering and the beneficial consequences for their citizens .
We must resolve this problem , but we will only resolve it by maintaining an attitude of cooperation amongst the three institutions and taking account of the objective limitations with which the institutions must take this decision .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I must come back to Commissioner Almunia 's last remarks .
I am rather disappointed at the way he interpreted rather than faithfully representing what I said .
Firstly , I did not say that the data from Cyprus and Malta were worse than those from the other countries .
Indeed , in the cases of Portugal , Hungary and Greece , the Commission sold us bad data as good .
That is a fact .
Secondly , it is not a matter of us attacking specific countries but of the Commission taking responsibility .
Thirdly , on 3 May 2007 , the Commission presented to the European Parliament and the Council document COM ( 2007 ) 230 - the quality report on quarterly financial accounts for general government .
That document found fault with Slovenia , Malta and Cyprus .
No more and no less than this is set out in the explanatory statement of my report .
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , Mr Langen , with regard to the last aspect , I would say once again that it is clear that , with regard to these quarterly accounts , the Commission and Eurostat are asking a number of countries , including Cyprus and Malta , to supply information , to improve it and to supplement it .
I would repeat , however , that these statistics are not relevant in terms of assessing whether or not a country fulfils the convergence criteria .
There are thousands of statistics , many series of statistics that the countries have to send to Eurostat , which make up the statistical apparatus of the European system of statistics .
Those statistics , however , which are incomplete and deficient in the case of Cyprus and Malta , are not the statistics which we have used and which we must use in order to assess the convergence criteria .
They are different statistics .
With regard to your previous comment , Portugal , Italy , France , Greece , Hungary and many other countries have received revisions from Eurostat of the GDP figures , deficit figures , debt figures and many other factors .
We are clearly talking in particular about deficit and debt , however .
You , Mr Langen , and all of the honourable Members , know that these revisions have taken place and you know that the figures that we are using thanks to the work of Eurostat and of the Commission , work that has improved considerably over the last three years , are now more realistic and more in tune with reality .
Together with the Council you have approved a Regulation that provides for better instruments and more capacities for revising the figures that Eurostat receives from each Member State .
We thank you for the support that Eurostat has received and which is enabling it to produce work of a higher quality than it previously produced , and if I , as Commissioner responsible for Eurostat , need new legislative instruments for improving the quality of its work , I shall ask you for it .
I can tell you today that , if I compare the credibility and quality of the Member States ' budget , deficit and debt figures with which I had to work three years ago , then things have clearly improved in that respect , and that is something we should all welcome .
Please do not blame the Commission for doing its work properly by offering you and everybody else better deficit and debt figures .

( FR ) Mr President , I invite Mr Langen and all his colleagues to take part as actively as today in the discussion in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , when we apply ourselves to improving , in the scope of the discussion currently in progress , for example , the way that Eurostat functions , and when we adopt texts about which the Commissioner has just spoken , which should make it possible to improve the governance of Eurostat .
At these times I do not see you .
I should like to ask Mr Gloser if he is willing to commit himself , on behalf of the Council and in the spirit of Mr Barroso 's reply to Mr Poettering , to sitting round a table with us in order to reach an agreement on a common timetable for all three institutions when the time comes to consider a new request for accession to the euro area .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) We have heard in the debate what options exist .
The Commissioner and Mr Barroso have made proposals .
The task now is to sit down together and clarify what is still possible within the existing Treaty provisions .
We should use the available time for that purpose .
in writing . - The Maltese public 's support will also be influenced by the impact of eurozone membership on ordinary citizens , the business community and the economy itself .
Three major factors stand out .
The first is the success of the transition .
After perhaps a low start , preparations seem to be gathering pace and no doubt it is imperative that consumers and operators keep tight control of the process .
So far we have tended to hear only about the pros , in terms of the benefits to Maltese consumers when they travel abroad , the improved competitiveness of Destination Malta for tourists , lower transaction costs for businesses engaged in intra-EU trade , and so forth .
But we have heard very little about the potential disadvantages .
On the one hand , Malta needs to adapt to policies , adjustment mechanisms , and measures taken by the European Central Bank , such as on interest rates and monetary aggregates , that will strongly influence our destiny .
On the other , our fulfilment of the membership criteria cannot rely on the results of a crash economic diet but must be based on sustainable economic policies that ensure that we do not infringe the rules .
in writing . - I am interested to see that more countries , the latest now being Cyprus and Malta , are choosing the join the euro , which makes Britain 's position look increasingly conspicuous .
Bearing in mind that the euro is rapidly establishing itself as the world 's strongest currency and has now displaced the US dollar as the main denomination for world trade , accounting for 45 % of the global market compared to 37 % for the dollar , it is becoming increasingly clear that for the UK , staying out means missing out .
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
( IT ) Mr President , Rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure provides that questions related to the work of the Bureau shall receive a reply within 30 days of being submitted .
About three months ago , on 28 March , I submitted a question on the statements made , in the presence of the President of our Parliament , by Cardinal Angelo Scola , who said that it was not appropriate for the current European Parliament to make continual pronouncements on issues such as marriage , family and life .
In the face of such an attack on this Parliament I decided to submit the question I have mentioned , and I think it is important for Parliament 's Bureau to defend this House and its deliberations against attacks by a foreign State such as the Vatican City State .
Mr Cappato , if what you say is true - and I do not doubt that it is - you must , of course , be given an answer .
The capable ladies and gentlemen next to me will look into the matter and then you will get an answer .
1 .
Residence permits : uniform format ( vote )
- Coelho report
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , in 2003 , Parliament rejected two Commission initiatives on this issue .
I congratulate the Commission on accepting Parliament 's idea of separating the issue of residence permits from that of visas .
Quite apart from technical issues involved in radio collisions between the different chips used , these are indeed separate issues .
It is one thing to have an identity document to be used within the Schengen area , but having a travel document to be used outside the Schengen area is quite another .
This will enable all third-country nationals living legally in the Schengen area to be identified in the same way .
I should therefore like to congratulate the Commission on proposing to us the introduction of biometric identifiers containing an image and fingerprints in interoperable formats .
The use of these biometric data is the best way of preventing the use of false identities and identity theft .
I should like to draw the Commission 's attention , however , to the need for such changes of residence to meet the same high levels of security required for the issuing of national identity cards .
I also wish to draw the Commission 's attention to the gaps regarding the way in which data are gathered , especially in the case of children , or people who are unable to provide fingerprints due to various forms of incapacity .
Lastly , let me draw the Commission 's attention to data protection standards and to the need to draw up a detailed list of the authorities that will have access to those data , and of the authorities permitted to carry out checks on residence permits , in order to prevent the misuse of the most sensitive data .
2 .
The banning of exports and the safe storage of metallic mercury ( vote )
- Papadimoulis report
3 .
Operation of taxation systems : Fiscalis 2013 ( vote )
- Hans-Peter Martin report
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I shall only take up your attention very briefly .
The report before us on the Community programme Fiscalis , a legislative programme , has been disgracefully censored .
The chairwoman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the Socialist Member Pervenche Berès , inexplicably censored the explanatory statement of my report on her own authority .
This is unworthy of a parliament that calls itself democratic .
You will find the censored passages at the end of a lengthy exposé on money-wasting and on scrutiny of the European Commission in an addendum - perhaps you could call the House to order , Mr President - in an addendum which is attached for those who are interested .
( Mixed reactions )
You were the cause of the disorder .
I reject your accusations against Mrs Berès .
That is no way to behave here in Parliament .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , the explanatory statement accompanying this report happens to have been completely contradicted by the vote on the resolution in committee , a resolution which this Parliament is now about to be asked to vote on .
Consequently , applying our Rules of Procedure , I asked our rapporteur to kindly withdraw the terms of the explanatory statement since it did not correspond with the resolution as it had been adopted in committee .
These terms were added to the explanatory statement in the form of a minority opinion , in accordance with strict application of our Rules of Procedure .
I thank you , Mr President , for having allowed me to inform the House about the reality of democratic life within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mrs Berès .
I did not doubt that .
4 .
Portability of supplementary pension rights ( vote )
- Oomen-Ruijten report
5 .
Adoption by Cyprus of the single currency on 1 January 2008 ( vote )
- Langen report
6 .
Adoption by Malta of the single currency on 1 January 2008 ( vote )
- Langen report
7 .
Galileo ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution : Galileo
8 .
The transposition and implementation of public procurement legislation ( vote )
- McCarthy report
9 .
MDGs at the Midway Point ( vote )
- Kinnock report
- Before the vote on paragraph 9 :
( IT ) Mr President , I propose adding the following text to the end of paragraph 9 : ' deplores that the Italian Government has not yet paid the EUR 260 million it owes for the 2006-2007 quota to the Global Fund To Fight AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria and invites the Italian Government to settle this debt shortly ' .
( The oral amendments were accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 45 :
( NL ) Mr President , I will read the text in English :
' Calls on the EU to increase funding to ensure that progress in basic science and biomedicine results in new and affordable drugs , vaccine and diagnostics for neglected diseases , to support the development phases of R [ amp ] D , and to secure the use of new products by neglected populations whilst respecting the TRIPS provisions ; '
( NL ) ... and then a section will be deleted .
The section that is going to be deleted reads as follows :
and will be replaced by :
' whilst respecting international patent rights , without which pharmaceutical R [ amp ] D would collapse ; '
( The oral amendments were accepted )
10 .
ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( vote )
- Cornillet report
- Before the vote on paragraph 9 :

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , our fellow Member , Mrs Morgantini , has also tabled an oral amendment and I suggest combining the two . It would , therefore , be a matter of accepting Mrs Morgantini 's oral amendment and completing it with the following part sentence : ' and to call upon the international community to ensure the actual implementation of this multinational force ' .
The two amendments would complete each other to make just one only .

( IT ) Mr President , I would like to say that I am willing to accept Mr Cornillet 's proposal .
( The oral amendments were accepted )
11 .
Improving the method for consulting Parliament in procedures relating to enlargement of the euro zone ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution : euro zone
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote , see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PT ) As our group says , this proposal , which introduces biometric data information into the uniform format for residence permits for third-country nationals , ' raises several concerns as regards its technical feasibility , financial costs and risk of its abuse ' .
As we have highlighted , it is highly debatable whether the introduction of biometric identifiers really does increase security , or whether it is rather a threat to security through the risks of abuse , technological flaws and lack of transparency and sound data protection
This is a disproportionate measure that forms part of a supranational dynamic , a measure that is aimed at setting up EU-level monitoring and control instruments . It is not in any way accompanied by ' particularly consistent and serious safeguards , especially regarding the way they are collected and used ' and it is completely impossible to guarantee its use in a ' relatively safe environment ' .
This proposal is both a consequence and an integral part of the trend towards excessive preoccupation with security pursued by the EU institutions , and as such we reject it .
in writing .
The second modified proposal introducing biometric data information into Regulation 1030 / 2002 laying down a uniform format for residence permits for third country nationals raises several concerns as regards its technical feasibility , financial costs and the risk of its abuse .
It is still not clear whether the introduction of biometric identifiers really does increase security or whether it is rather a threat to security through the risks of abuse , technological flaws and lack of transparency and sound data protection .
The original Commission proposal has also turned out to be technically impossible and the financial resources destined for its development have been partly wasted .
Due to these reasons , we cannot support the Commission 's modified proposal , which would again only raise the financial costs and technical difficulties and would be entirely inadequate to the aim of added value in security .
in writing . ( DE ) Thanks to the visions of some multi-cultural dreamers , a situation has arisen which is becoming increasingly difficult for the native population to endure .
In many cases , immigrants and their children have no consideration for the native population ; on the contrary , they demand more and more rights for themselves and seem bent on eradicating our Western Christian heritage ; conversely , they simply turn a deaf ear when it comes to civic duties or to obligations of any incomer , such as willingness to integrate .
The widespread provision of social housing for nationals of non-EU countries and for neo-citizens of the Union who are not integrated has not only created a profound sense of insecurity among the indigenous population but also led to a massive deterioration in people 's housing conditions and quality of life , a situation in which outbreaks of violence are almost a daily occurrence .
In the light of these realities , a general tightening of the right of immigration is needed .
The Coelho report does not offer a basis for such action , which is precisely why I voted against it .
( SK ) My formal background is that of a dentist .
Mercury is used in dentistry for amalgam fillings , and I have been watching with interest the EU strategy concerning mercury and the elimination of mercury from all areas of life where there is an appropriate alternative .
In principle , I agree with many of the measures the Commission has been submitting in the form of draft legislation in line with the mercury strategy .
However , I am anxiously waiting to see how we deal with the opinion that mercury should also be banished from dentistry , where mercury amalgams have been used for 150 years now and quite successfully at that .
There are no conclusive indications or evidence of the toxic effects of amalgams if used appropriately .
At the same time , there is no clear opinion on whether there are appropriate alternative filling materials .
I believe that if amalgam waste is properly separated in dentistry departments and if we dispose of it properly , safely and on a permanent basis , as proposed in the report , there will be no need for the time being to do away with amalgam as a filling material .
( DE ) Mr President , I wish to give the report my firm backing , and I have voted in favour of it .
It is important that we should have a European strategy for mercury , because it is one of the most toxic environmental pollutants , and Europe must certainly lead the way here .
I did vote against some proposals designed to tighten the rules , because I believe it is necessary to provide incremental arrangements for businesses and to allow for a smooth transition so as not to jeopardise the general level of competitiveness .
I am also wary of creating too much red tape , and a steady hand is needed if we are avoid that risk .
On the whole , this is a very encouraging report .
in writing . We have voted against amendments suggesting that liquid mercury should be stored in above-ground facilities .
No impact assessments have been carried out by the Commission on the safety of such storage and there is no technology available to solidify liquid mercury .
Storage of mercury in an above-ground facility is therefore questionable in terms of safety and in terms of time ( the amendments suggest that this storage would be temporary ) .
Without new technology , storage would not be temporary .
On the other hand , impact assessments have been undertaken by the Commission for the storage of liquid mercury in salt mines and deep underground hard rock formations and has been confirmed safe .
We are very much aware that technology could be developed in the near future .
We very much welcome the Council 's agreement to a European Parliament request to include in the proposed regulation a review on extension of the scope of the regulation and a review of other options available for the storage of mercury in 2010 .
in writing . - ( PT ) In 1990 the Oslo-Paris Commission ( OSPAR ) recommended that all mercury cell chlor-alkali plants ( MCCAPs ) be converted to mercury-free technology by 2010 .
Parliament 's March 2006 resolution on the Community strategy concerning mercury urged the Commission to take action to implement OSPAR .
Apart from ongoing mercury emissions from MCCAPs , when these plants convert to mercury-free technologies , the vast quantities of mercury in their cells need to be managed in an environmentally appropriate manner .
To prevent this surplus mercury from flooding the world mercury commodity market , a proposal for a Regulation banning exports of metallic mercury by 1 July , 2011 , was adopted in October 2006 , and attempts have been made to bring that date forward .
The proposal includes parallel provisions on safe storage of the excess mercury which will mainly be coming from decommissioned MCCAPs , to prevent its re-sale . Currently there are around 12 000 tonnes of mercury sitting in mercury cells in Europe .
To that end Euro Chlor ( the EU chlor-alkali industry federation ) has been asked by the European Commission and has agreed to develop a Voluntary Agreement for the storage of surplus chlor-alkali mercury .
in writing . - ( FR ) The management of mercury is an important issue for the conservation of the environment .
If Europe has more waste mercury to store , it is because our industries did not foresee the risks involved in the use of this metal , in particular for the production of chlorine .
First lesson : we must very quickly rethink our production methods in order to be prepared for a vital ecological revolution .
Next , it is necessary to constantly monitor the storage of waste , by setting up regular checks .
That is why I voted in favour of Amendment 25 which rules out permanent storage above-ground and underground .
Alas , it did not receive a majority of votes .
Nonetheless , the other improvements in the text justify a vote in favour of the final report .
Even though it recognises that there is currently no absolutely safe method of storing metallic mercury , the report endeavours to legalise a special type of territorial ' racism ' , by imposing the choice of the Spanish province of Almaden as the site for permanent landfill of the most toxic element on the planet .
The worst thing is that it endeavours to justify the imposition of this specific area with the existence there of infrastructures and ' manpower ' .
In other words , it is using unemployment as a means of blatant coercion of the workers , so that they agree to turn their area into a landfill for toxic mercury waste from the entire EU , with incalculable risks to the health of the inhabitants and the environment .
The proposal in the report for the involvement and funding of all sorts of NGOs in the crucial question of the application of mercury-free technologies in developing countries and in so-called ' economies in transition ' comes under the same dangerous policy by circumventing the rules which derive from binding bilateral agreements in this sector .
That is why the Greek Communist Party abstained from the vote .
The Greek Communist Party maintains that the question of where metallic mercury should be stored and managed is a subject for science and the application of its conclusions and not of choices that reflect the interests and profits of business .
( SK ) Supplementary pension schemes , collectively referred to as the ' second pillar of the social insurance system ' , are an inseparable part of modern society .
We have witnessed in the past the reform of labour markets and social insurance systems in several Member States , and these have included pension system reforms .
Let me use Slovakia as an example of a country which introduced supplementary pension schemes within the context of reforming the social security system .
A large number of Slovak nationals have already joined the second pillar .
Savings generated in the second pillar are privately owned .
They are more secure than the promises of the state to pay out pensions from public coffers .
An advantage of the second pillar is that pension benefits no longer depend on the country 's demographics but on savings accumulated in one 's own account .
For these reasons and in the spirit of encouraging worker mobility in Member States , I have welcomed the draft directive designed to improve the portability of supplementary pension rights , and I believe that this will make it possible to reduce the number of problems associated with eligibility for pension rights , retaining suspended pension rights and with the portability of acquired rights .
( DE ) Mr President , the single market and mobility depend on social security , which must extend beyond a person 's working life .
It is important in this respect to maintain the balance between employers and employees on which the acquisition of pension rights depends .
This was the first reading , and we still have numerous discussions ahead of us .
The delegation from the Austrian People 's Party has given the Oomen-Ruijten report its unreserved support , because we believe that this is the right way to continue developing mobility and the single market .
( LT ) Mr President , first I would like to thank the rapporteur Ria Oomen-Ruijten and other colleagues who prepared this report concerning the improvement of portability of the right to a supplementary pension .
I voted for this document , as I believe it will positively affect most European Union Member States , especially the newest EU members .
In the Baltic countries , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary and Malta , supplementary pensions have not yet been legislated , whereas in the Scandinavian countries and Slovenia , by contrast , the majority of workers participate in such pension schemes .
Our Parliament 's urging to oblige EU countries to gradually seek easier portability of pension rights should provide a new impulse above all to the new Member States , and likewise to Greece , Italy and Portugal , to amend their legislation in such a way that the mobility of people in the European Union be encouraged , not penalised .
( IT ) Mr President , it is with pleasure that I take the floor to say to Europe : ' if you are there , let us see some action ' .
Europe must show greater courage , it must have the heart of a lion and not be a chicken .
The Directive on the transferability of pension rights is absolutely crucial for all European citizens and workers .
By approving this proposal we are doing something for workers , but we will not really succeed in obtaining a result for which European citizens can applaud Europe .
Therefore , Mr President , let us not mourn over the referendums in France and the Netherlands that rejected the Constitution .
Europe must be more courageous .
in writing . ( SV ) As a Liberal , I find it difficult to vote against a proposal aimed at improving Europeans ' opportunities to move around more freely .
It is not made any the easier when the proposal is also aimed at encouraging people to take more active responsibility for saving for their pensions , this being one of the genuinely key issues for the future .
Nonetheless , I was unable to vote in favour of the original proposal .
The problem is twofold .
Firstly , it is debatable whether this complicated issue is suited to being raised at European level , given the various Member States ' very different systems for pension savings .
Secondly , I could not help but note that Sweden , in common with Germany , has systems particularly ill-suited to this type of changeover .
The Swedish model , in which the social partners decide about the issue , is incompatible with the rapporteur 's proposal .
Considerable problems could also arise if huge sums by way of invested funds could suddenly be released in a short period in order to guarantee the ability to transfer pensions .
I am , in the long run , in favour of a system in which people can change jobs and move from one country to another and still not need to worry about how doing so might affect their pensions .
I therefore in the end voted in favour of this House 's amended version of the report in which national derogations are permitted .
in writing . - ( PT ) On the issue of the transferability of pension rights , there are at least two key aspects that must be taken into account : ensuring workers ' rights and guaranteeing the sustainability of public social security systems .
The issue before us is specifically supplementary pension schemes and not public social security schemes .
With regard to these two aspects , we are opposed to the amendments tabled in the report amending the Commission 's original proposal . These amendments propose , for example , to increase from 21 to 25 the age of access to supplementary pension schemes and to make the acquisition of pension rights conditional on a minimum five-year period .
Supplementary pension schemes must not , however , replace public schemes .
Public social security schemes based on solidarity and universality are among the cornerstones of any state and something that must be guaranteed in a fairer and more egalitarian society .
Lastly , we are very disappointed at the rejection of the amendments we tabled , including the proposal to combine the Commission 's original position on the minimum age of 21 with a two-year period of acquisition of rights , which would have been more favourable to the workers .
Hence our final vote against .
in writing . ( SV ) We have chosen to vote against this report .
The June List wholeheartedly supports an efficient internal market .
We thus support the principle whereby an employee must be able without difficulty to transfer earned pension points between the Member States .
We do not , however , believe that the EU should have views on the form to be taken by the Member States ' respective pension systems , provided that all EU citizens are treated equally within the system in force .
We are thus critical of quite a few individual proposals in the report , such as the views on vesting conditions for policyholders in supplementary pension schemes , the views on minimum ages for earning pension rights or EU rules on the qualifying period for entry into a pension scheme .
How the Member States choose to design their respective pension systems needs to be an entirely national matter , provided that all EU citizens are treated equally within the system in force .
in writing.- ( PL ) I am voting in favour of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on improving the portability of supplementary pension rights - C6 0331 / 2005 -
Demographic changes and an ageing population have made us aware of the need for supplementary pension and social security insurance systems , which will ensure dignified living conditions .
The new directive and Mrs Ria Oomen-Ruijten 's report both aim to improve the mobility of workers , within and between the Member States of the European Union , by establishing minimum requirements concerning the acquisition and retention of supplementary pension rights .
The report aptly highlights the role of the Member States in providing consistent support for the transfer of acquired pension rights , especially in the event that new , supplementary pension systems are established .
Over the five years following the implementation of the directive , the European Commission will draw up a report which will take into account the conditions governing transfers of capital corresponding to employees ' supplementary pension or social security entitlements .
in writing . ( DE ) I voted against the report on the portability directive .
The report goes well wide of the real target of increased cross-border mobility of labour between Member States .
On average , only 10 % of all employees in the EU receive company pensions .
Because of the cost increase of at least 20 % that can be expected to result from the high minimum standards which have just been adopted , there will scarcely be any interest in the creation or expansion of company pension schemes .
My fear is that what employers and employees have achieved to their mutual advantage in the national context over several decades is now being put at risk .
The minimum age for the acquisition of company-pension rights has been entirely scrapped .
The five-year vesting period has been abolished .
The minimum standards are to be applicable retroactively , which is in outright contradiction to the principle of safeguarding legitimate expectations .
I also voted for the deletion of index-linking , which would most probably be interpreted by the European Court of Justice as ' equitable adjustment ' and as an obligation .
The German Bundesrat has calculated that treating employees who have changed companies on equal terms with those who have not will increase the cost of supplementary pension schemes by 30 % .
European Commissioner Vladimír Špidla has announced the presentation of a new proposal .
Following the failure to reach agreement in the Council , the proposal will be largely based on today 's parliamentary resolution and will thus jeopardise company pension schemes - and not only in Germany .
Directive 98 / 49 / EEC guarantees the rights to supplementary pension for workers and the self-employed who move within the EU , but provides no guarantees in the area of portability of supplementary pensions and flexibility of the acquisition conditions .
This is something which the Commission proposal addresses .
It lays down terms and puts forward three minimum rules regarding the portability of rights : either they remain within the business ( dormant rights ) , they are transferred within a certain period of time , or they are paid in cash ( up to a certain threshold ) .
According to the Commission , the new directive must apply to all supplementary pensions that are work-related .
I particularly regret the fact that the Oomen-Ruijten report excludes the proposal of portability of pension rights from the directive .
As it stands now , it only deals with dormant rights .
As I see it , the new directive should do everything in its power to support workers who invest in supplementary pension rights .
Accordingly , nobody should be excluded by imposing minimum conditions in terms of age or period of time .
I can only endorse the report if the directive retains the broad scope proposed by the Commission .
If not , I will be voting against .
The proposal for a Commission directive , as formulated with the anti-labour changes voted jointly by the Christian Democrats , the socialists and the liberals , supported by the New Democracy and PASOK MEPs , blows national supplementary insurance schemes sky high throughout the EU .
It marks a deterioration in the terms of insurance and retirement of the workers , a reduction in pensions and an increase in the retirement age .
It speeds up procedures for private insurance companies to increase their share of this sector .
The basic direction of these reactionary changes is the so-called ' three-axis ' system of main state pension , with a supplementary and occupational pension from private companies .
The blow to the workers ' rights in the supplementary pension sector is linked to the ambition of the monopolies to use the reserves in these insurance funds to fund their investments , while at the same time legalising the acceptance of the ' investment risk ' or possible loss of the workers ' money .
New Democracy and PASOK vote in favour of all the anti-grassroots measures in the European Parliament , on the one hand , and harangue and deceive the workers in our country , on the other hand , by endeavouring to show the people a supposedly friendly mask .
The Greek Communist Party calls on the workers to step up their fight against the anti-labour , anti-grassroots EU policy , to defend state social insurance schemes and to demand satisfaction of their contemporary needs , higher pensions and a lower retirement age .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted against the portability directive , because it misses the real target of increased cross-border mobility of labour between Member States .
The rules on the transfer of company-pension rights only have the force of a recommendation for the Member States .
For this reason I had repeatedly advised outright rejection of the directive , since it has become superfluous .
( DE ) Mr President , even though the introduction of the euro has made life easier in many respects , as in the case of cross-border trade , it would be wrong to overlook its less savoury aspects , such as the surrender of sovereignty and price increases .
As in the case of any enlargement of the EU , the introduction of the euro in new Member States will ultimately affect the fragile stability of the entire system .
This is why I believe it is imperative to ensure that the overall balance is not upset by the inclusion of weak national economies .
Now it may well be that Cyprus and Malta are ready .
In the past , however , governments have all too often played with marked cards in order to qualify for the euro club .
In my opinion , such an important decision must on no account be taken over the heads of the population , and that is why I have abstained in this instance .
in writing . - ( PT ) We abstained from the vote on account of the fact that it is entirely up to each Member State to make the sovereign decision on whether or not it wants to join the Eurozone .
Our opposition to the creation of Economic and Monetary Union and to the Eurozone is well known . The example of Portugal has amply demonstrated how the euro is a tool for promoting wage moderation and flexibility in the labour market .
By sustaining nominal and not real convergence , it has been to the detriment of growth , employment and living standards , and to the benefit of the large European multinationals and financial groups .
I wish to point out that the issue of speeding up the enlargement of the Eurozone is also based on the political criteria of strengthening both political integration and the Eurozone itself .
With two new Member States - Malta and Cyprus - the Eurozone will boast over half of EU Member States .
This is a significant psychological barrier , when dissatisfaction among the workers and the people as a whole in the Eurozone is on the increase and when the future Constitutional Treaty is under discussion .
The majority therefore accept the idea of joining , even though Malta does not fulfil all the nominal convergence criteria .
As in the past , this is not an ' economic ' decision , but a political one .
in writing . ( DE ) On the basis of economic criteria , the decision is no doubt justified .
From a political point of view , it is nevertheless a regrettable decision .
It squanders an opportunity to let both parts of the island of Cyprus enter the eurozone .
Instead of bringing North and South closer together through a single currency , it will only deepen the divide between the two parts of the island .
( MT ) Thank you , Mr President .
The government has adopted as its policy the target of introducing the euro by 1 January 2008 .
In order to do so a number of criteria had to be reached , for example regarding deficit and inflation .
Obviously these had a negative impact on the government 's financial policies , as well as on the more vulnerable section of society .
Indeed , we believed that there was an alternative , which still entailed adopting the euro , but adopting it at a slower pace .
Obviously , our entry into the eurozone will have a number of positive effects , yet it will also have adverse effects in other areas .
However , in view of national interests , the Maltese Labour Party delegation has voted in favour .
( PL ) Mr President , today we debated and voted on the expansion of the eurozone and Malta and Cyprus ' membership of this zone .
I leave the sovereign decision on the abolition of the national currency in Cyprus and Malta to the citizens of these countries .
However , as a representative of the League of Polish Families in the European Parliament , I am opposed to Poland 's membership of the eurozone and the negative economic and social impact this would have on Poles .
All current public opinion polls confirm that the majority of Poles do not want the euro .
I think that we should not only avoid acting hastily , but we should also not introduce the euro in Poland at all .
I also disagree with the opinions expressed today that the Member States have a duty to join the eurozone .
Poles should decide on this issue in a national referendum and I hope that the Polish zloty will remain a national currency in Europe , alongside the British pound and the Danish and Swedish currencies .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is well known that we opposed the creation of European Economic and Monetary Union and the euro . Indeed , we voted against Parliament 's resolution of 2 May 1998 establishing the Eurozone , which was originally made up of 12 countries , including Portugal .
We feel that monetary policy , and the prerogative of issuing currency , lies exclusively with the Member States , and therefore reject this transfer of sovereignty , which will make it impossible to address the economic and social problems in each country , including Portugal .
At this time , the enlargement of the Eurozone is based on political criteria - for example the strengthening of political integration and of the Eurozone itself - as this issue amply demonstrates , given that Malta does not fulfil all of the nominal convergence criteria .
However , with two new Member States - Malta and Cyprus - the Eurozone will boast over half of EU Member States .
This is a significant psychological barrier , when dissatisfaction among the workers and the people as a whole in the Eurozone is on the increase and when the future Constitutional Treaty is being discussed .
In our view , it is entirely up to each Member State to make the sovereign decision on whether or not it wants to join the Eurozone , and this is why we abstained from the vote .
in writing . British Conservatives have always opposed the entry of the UK into the euro zone .
Nevertheless , we have never opposed the right of other sovereign nations to form a common monetary system .
Our abstention reflects our belief that it is for the members of the euro zone to decide how best to conduct monetary policy in the interests of a stable currency .
in writing . - ( FR ) Our vote concerning the adoption of the euro by Malta and Cyprus will be identical to the one for Slovenia : we shall abstain .
We will not go against what we hope will be the conscious will of sovereign peoples .
We must , however , recognise that a threshold has been crossed : it is not at their express request , but because they almost fulfil the ' stupid ' Maastricht criteria , as Mr Prodi would have said , that these countries have to adopt the euro .
Have their citizens been told about it ?
At least one of these countries does not meet these famous criteria and neither of the two , it seems , has supplied the statistics necessary for a proper assessment of their state of preparation .
Why rush ?
The practical and technical measures for actual transition to the single currency are a great unknown .
Also , the euro zone 's capacity for absorption , which at another time was a matter of concern for Mr Langen , has disappeared from the picture and from the analysis .
Here we are again faced with the bicycle syndrome , from which European construction appears to suffer : if it does not go forward , it falls down .
The euro zone must be enlarged at all costs .
Full stop !
The truth is that it is the citizens of Europe who will have to pay the price !
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to abstain in the final vote on these reports .
It is up to the people of Cyprus and Malta to decide , preferably through a referendum , whether they want the country to be part of EMU .
We do not believe that Sweden should be part of the currency union . Nor do we recommend other countries to participate in it .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the introduction of the euro in Malta and Cyprus , because it is a matter of supporting strengthened integration of these countries in the sense given by the European Union .
Nonetheless , this decision ought to have been accompanied by measures enabling more democratic control of the single currency ( establishment of real economic government of the euro zone capable of balancing the power of the European Central bank ( ECB ) , changing the Central Bank 's objectives so as to include research for growth and full employment , changing the criteria of the Stability Pact so as not to penalise public investment policy in the future ) .
Let us take care not to pursue endless enlargement of the euro zone without any new perspectives .
in writing . The British Conservative delegation supports the Committee on Budgets resolution calling on the Commission to resubmit its proposals for financing the Galileo project .
However , we have grave reservations about proposals to fund it through the existing European budget .
in writing . - ( PT ) We are very disappointed at the significant rejection by the majority in Parliament of the amendments tabled by our group , which were aimed at ensuring that ' the Galileo programme must not , under any circumstances , by used for military purposes ' , and that ' safeguards must be put in place to prevent the programme from being privatised ' thereby guaranteeing that its implementation is funded entirely with public money .
Does this rejection mean that , following much-vaunted public investment , the unacceptable option of tendering the programme out to the private sector is already being considered ?
Our position is clear .
We feel that the Galileo programme ( European programme of satellite radionavigation ) will be able to contribute towards cooperation , scientific and technical advancement and to foster the exchange of , and access to , information .
This is a project that should be based on a strategy of public investment and public control , so that a public service can be provided . That way , there can be equal access and the free use of available information for all users .
It is a project in which the citizens ' rights , guarantees and freedoms must be guaranteed . It must also be ensured that it is not used for military purposes and / or as part of the trend towards an excessive preoccupation with security .
in writing . In order to conclude GALILEO , the European satellite navigation system , EU member states are asked to pay another € 2 400 000 000 .
For many years it has been argued that this project would bring technological innovation , satisfaction of consumers ' needs , employment , and independence from the United States .
These assets could justify the spending of community funds , instead of leaving it solemnly to profit-orientated multinationals or the American war industry .
As long as GALILEO remains a peaceful process , we do not principally reject it .
Unfortunately , GALILEO will be developed 10 to 20 years too late , and in the meantime GPS , the American counterpart , has conquered the world market .
This makes GALILEO into a costly prestige project .
Spending a lot of community money on this , might sound attractive to big business , but voters and consumers will increasingly regard this as a scandalous waste of money .
European companies refuse to participate in Public Private Partnerships , because they do not expect any profit due to the arrears with GPS .
They do hope to receive a large community investment in 2012 for free .
Consequently , we do not want to spend even more money on GALILEO .
If there are no real perspectives , we should dare to stop .
in writing . ( SV ) EU Member States will be technologically dependent on current and future military superpowers , such as the United States , Russia and China , if we cannot develop our own satellite-based radio navigation .
Galileo is undoubtedly needed , but this expensive project should for the most part be funded by private actors with political support .
Paragraph 6 of the resolution states that , in the European Parliament 's view , the Galileo programme should be funded entirely from the European Union budget .
I am not prepared to go so far and therefore choose to vote against the resolution as a whole .
in writing . - ( FR ) We support the Galileo project , even if we had a few reservations about supporting it .
We cannot , however , support this resolution .
It is deplorable that , after the predictable failure of the public-private partnership , this Parliament should be saying it is prepared to give up an independent GPS system if it ceases to be purely a Community project to include direct funding by Member States .
Galileo is useful !
By whatever means , it must be financed .
The Commission cannot find EUR 2.4 billion , from the hundreds of billions that it intends spending , not always usefully , by 2013 ?
Then what ?
Why should the Member States be pushed aside ?
Galileo is not a toy , nor is it the exclusive , symbolic project of Brussels ' Europe that wants us to believe that it is not concerned only for itself , its competences and its sustainability .
Just for once , leave aside dogma .
Put into this industrial venture a quarter of the political willingness that a handful of Member States put , a few years ago , into building a European aeronautical and space industry , and prove what you refuse to admit : intergovernmental cooperation works .
In Brussels , on the other hand , it is at a standstill .
in writing . The clear intention of the resolution is for Galileo to be financed with a blank cheque from public funds to further EU political ambitions .
Collaborative technological projects have a dubious track record .
They do not require EU involvement and should only be undertaken for clear economic , strategic and industrial motives - not to further EU ambitions to be a global actor .
British Conservatives want opportunities for British industry and British R [ amp ] D , but this resolution does not guarantee that .
It supports the Commission 's proposal to use public funds - through the EU budget - for the entire Galileo project .
This course of action will be another drain on taxpayers in the United Kingdom and other EU Member States , and one in which they have had absolutely no say .
Whereas , in the past , there was reluctance by the EU to admit military applications , this coyness has now been dropped .
In the Commission 's Communication on European Space Policy ( 26 April 2007 ) the aim of meeting ' Europe 's security and defence needs as regards space ' is one of the key objectives .
As long-standing opponents of ESDP , the British Conservatives oppose proposals that extend the Commission 's hand into the defence arena .
in writing . - ( PT ) All it took for us to decide to vote against this report was the first recital .
Community law on public procurement aims to open - liberalise would be a better word - public markets in the Member States to cross-border competition , in order to support the development of the internal market , in keeping with the liberalising agenda contained in the Lisbon Strategy .
We are of course in favour of national rules on the transparency of tendering , provided they do not block opportunities to use public markets to boost the economic fabric and national SMEs , bearing in mind their size and importance .
There is a substantial difference in this case , however , leading us to vote against , which is that responsibility for this issue should continue to rest with the Member States .
Public procurement is also an important instrument in promoting social and environmental policy , given that it may contain criteria relating to social and environmental issues involved in awarding contracts .
It cannot be restricted to supranational level , with rules on non-discrimination or on other economic interests used as a pretext .
in writing . We voted in favour of part one of paragraph 40 and against part 2 of paragraph 40 .
Similarly , we voted in favour of the first part of paragraph 41 and against the second part . We abstained on the vote for the resolution as a whole .
The reason for this is that we did not wish to indicate that we support any interpretation of the word ' rights ' as indicating a support for abortion .
We do , of course , support the general thrust of the Millennium Goals and therefore did not vote against the resolution as a whole .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Kinnock report ' On the Millennium Development Goals - the midway point ' because I feel that we need a broad partnership in order to be able to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
It is therefore desirable for the national parliaments and civil society in all the interested countries to become involved .
One of the key factors in achieving the Goals is that of a 50 % reduction in poverty by 2015 , with special focus on issues such as HIV / Aids , tuberculosis and malaria .
Gender inequality and discrimination against women are further points that must be taken into account in development programmes .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the fact that the report acknowledges the seriousness of the world situation .
As the UN report on the Millennium Development Goals revealed , progress in the fight to reduce hunger has been too slow . Indeed , the figures have worsened in recent years : 854 million people ( 17 % of the world 's population ) per day suffer from hunger and almost 16 000 children die every day due to hunger-related causes .
Nevertheless , once again the report glosses over the causes at the root of this intolerable situation .
It is important to highlight the fact that , at the same time as 16 000 children die every day :
The US Administration has earmarked USD 600 billion for military spending in its budget ;
The 691 richest people in the world have a net fortune equivalent to USD 2.2 billion , which is equal to the combined wealth of the 145 poorest countries ;
The 500 richest people have a combined income higher than that of the 416 million poorest ;
The 8 million richest people in the world have a net fortune equivalent to 80 % of the GDP of all the countries in the world .
This is the root of the problem .
in writing . The rapporteur 's approach to this highly important subject is to be commended .
There is urgent need for efforts to reach the MDGs to be redoubled .
This means wholesale debt relief and scaled-up , better coordinated and better targeted aid .
in writing . - ( PT ) In the space available in an explanation of vote , there are two points that deserve to be highlighted .
The first paragraph of the resolution says : ' the overarching aim of development cooperation is and must be the fight against poverty ; stresses , however , that this fight is not limited to material growth and therefore , democracy-building and the promotion of basic human rights , rule of law and the principles of justice , equity , transparency and accountability must always be central themes of any such cooperation . '
I did not oppose this resolution because I understand that these concerns require us to contribute as much as we can , but I feel that the idea must be stressed that the fight against poverty cannot be effective unless the causes of poverty are combated .
Among the structural causes of poverty is always bad governance .
It is for this reason , and not out of a desire to impose some sort of model , that it is so important to fight on these two fronts at the same time .
Otherwise , we will be resolving a problem today only for it to come back tomorrow .
Lastly , the report tells us that ' Portugal , which is due to host the EU-Africa Summit during its Presidency , achieved only 0.21 % ODA / GNI in 2006 ' , which is terrible .
in writing . ( PL ) I was forced to vote against the report on ' MDGs at the Midway Point ' .
Including proposals to fund abortion using EU budget aid will inevitably lead to divisions concerning the aid strategy for Africa .
This will undermine the effectiveness of our actions .
From both a moral and a medical point of view , abortion does not hold the key to solving the problem of maternal deaths during childbirth .
Using European Union resources to fund abortion in Africa is contrary to the principle of providing support .
It forces all European Union citizens to become indirectly implicated in this matter .
It also represents a kind of moral imperialism towards Africa .
The consistent support of this House for funding abortion in developing countries is the biggest mistake we have made in terms of shaping humanitarian aid policy .
in writing . The UKIP does not recognise the legitimacy of the ACP-EU JPA and therefore cannot support this amendment .
However , we agree with the spirit of the text and sincerely hope that the international community as a whole will ensure that the international travel bans on key figures in the Zimbabwean regime are fully respected .
in writing . The UKIP does not recognise the legitimacy of the ACP-EU JPA and therefore cannot support this amendment .
However , we agree with the spirit of the text and sincerely hope that the international community as a whole will ensure that the international travel bans on key figures in the Zimbabwean regime are fully respected .
in writing . The work of the ACP-EU JPA is vital when we consider the large number of least developed countries within that grouping and the volume of development assistance the EU targets at the ACP countries .
I support many of the demands made in the report , such as those calling for national parliaments and civil society to become more involved in the process of national aid programming in the ACP .
in writing . - ( PT ) The report clearly reveals how the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly - both in 2006 and before - is an excellent instrument for creating the crucial structures , relationships and dialogue necessary for the creation of sound foundations for good relations between both sides and for the development of genuinely useful projects .
That being said , although it should be noted that whilst progress so far has been laudable , our concerns should be based on what lies ahead .
We have an obligation - one that is , on the one hand , both moral and ethical and , on the other , in our own interests - to support development in associated countries , to help them develop mechanisms to open up their economies and together to turn globalisation into a virtuous movement ; it is up to us to circumvent , reduce and remove the potential pitfalls involved in this movement .
Against this backdrop , in relation to some of these partners , it is vital that the forthcoming EU-Africa summit , set to take place during the Portuguese Presidency , yields results .
Realism with results is preferable to utopian ideals without history .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Towards an arms trade treaty ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements - Towards an arms trade treaty .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , illicit arms trading and the irresponsible export-control policies of some states are fuelling conflicts worldwide , undermining respect for human rights and encouraging crime and terrorism .
Moreover , they are hampering the sustainable economic development of entire regions .
It is against this backdrop that the idea of enshrining binding principles for arms dealing in an international agreement was conceived a few years ago .
The concept of an arms-trade treaty was born .
The Member States of the European Union campaigned for such an agreement from the outset , and the current Presidency of the Council also attaches great importance to this process .
At a meeting on 18 June the General Affairs and External Relations Council re-emphasised the importance of an arms-trade treaty .

I was very pleased that Mr Romeva i Rueda , the European Parliament 's rapporteur on the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports , accepted the invitation to attend the informal seminar for the members of the Conventional Arms Exports Working Party COARM Group in Berlin at the beginning of January , where he explained in detail the views of the European Parliament on a global arms-trade treaty .
The Presidency shares Mr Romeva 's view that such a treaty would serve the extremely important purpose of subjecting the global arms trade to legally binding and responsible rules .
An important step was taken with the adoption of resolution 61 / 89 by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 6 December 2006 .
The resolution asks the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States of the United Nations and to appoint a group of experts by 2008 .
It will be the task of that group to assess the feasibility , scope and draft parameters of such a treaty .
In the lead-up to the session of the General Assembly , numerous Member States of the EU were involved in the drafting of the resolution and in canvassing other states to approve it .
About 80 states , including all Member States of the EU , have so far answered the UN Secretary-General 's call .
In a separate EU opinion submitted to the Secretary-General , the Presidency of the Council cited the EU Code of Conduct as a good example of international cooperation in the control of arms exports and made the case for an arms-trade treaty .
Together with other EU Member States , the Presidency also continues to press for the submission of country papers .
A large number of favourable opinions will be of paramount importance in demonstrating the strong worldwide support that exists for the project .
The success of such a treaty will be crucially dependent on whether it binds not only all the major arms exporters but also the countries that import arms .
The United Nations is therefore the right forum for these negotiations .
Let me cite two examples of issues to which the group of experts must devote particular attention in order to pave the way for an effective treaty . First of all , the scope of the treaty must be spelled out in detail .
To this end a separate checklist will be necessary .
This must not be confined to the categories used in the UN arms register but must also apply to materiel such as small and light arms , ammunition and man-portable air-defence systems ( MANPADS ) .
Manufacturing equipment and technology should also be included in an appropriate form .
Secondly , the treaty must contain a comprehensive catalogue of criteria to be applied when decisions are taken on arms exports .
Among these criteria are compliance with arms embargos , respect for human rights in the country of destination , preservation of regional stability , prevention of internal or regional conflicts , promotion of sustainable development and prevention of any undesirable redirection of the goods .
Numerous regional organisations around the world have already been examining these issues .
The European Union 's Code of Conduct on Arms Exports is the most fully developed international instrument for the control of arms exports .
Thanks to its experience with the Code of Conduct , the European Union can make a special contribution to the discussion of these issues .
At the same time , however , it must avoid creating the impression that it seeks to impose the EU Code of Conduct on other Members of the United Nations .
The fact is that support for this project in all parts of the world is remarkably strong at the present time .
Nevertheless , an important role in this process devolves on the European Union , to which several major exporting nations belong .
Let me also pay particular tribute to the role of civil society , for non-governmental organisations , scientists and scholars and the media have played a significant part in persuading hesitant governments of the need for an arms-trade treaty .
From the very start they have made valuable suggestions and contributions , and I urge non-governmental organisations to maintain their active involvement in this process .
The Presidency is pleased to note that the European Parliament has expressed itself on various occasions in favour of the conclusion of a global arms-trade treaty and that it is using its interparliamentary contacts for that purpose .
I read the latest draft resolution with great interest and warmly welcome the persuasive proposals it contains .
I very much hope that we can continue and intensify our vigorous dialogue with the European Parliament on this important issue too .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I would just like to add a few words to those of the President-in-Office of the Council .
Over the last few years , the fight against the illicit spread of weapons has been the focus of much political and public attention and the issue remains of great importance to all of us .
Let me commend the honourable Members on the leadership they are showing on the legally binding arms trade treaty to regulate the international trade in conventional arms .
It is an ambitious approach proposing common international standards .
I understand your motion for a resolution has already been submitted .
The Commission also welcomes the Council conclusions of two days ago ; I need not go into those in detail , because they have already been mentioned .
We all recognise the negative impact of irresponsible exports of military equipment on regional security , economic development and human safety in some of the most vulnerable parts of the world .
An arms trade treaty would be of great value , for instance in reducing the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons .
These weapons result in considerable human misery and , in making the world less safe , they affect our own security and prosperity .
The illicit trade in conventional weapons also has global consequences , which means we must enhance the coherence between EU security policy and Community development assistance .
Development and security are linked more closely than ever , and the threat these illicit weapons present goes beyond the immediate violence they cause .
In this globalised world of ours , lost GDP and reduced foreign investment , for instance , represent failed opportunities few countries can afford .
Even with an arms trade treaty , countless illicit weapons would remain in circulation around the world .
In addition to the Union 's strong political engagement , we are therefore providing practical support for legislative and administrative capacity-building , giving the EU a significant role in the fight against the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons .
We are fully engaged in the implementation of the 2005 EU strategy against the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons .
This area , as you know , is not new to us .
The Commission has been fully involved in it for many years and has also gained experience working with international organisations , academia , NGOs and civil society in dealing with the consequences of inappropriate or illegal arms sales .
Much remains to be done , both through the treaty and outside it .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) In recent years , there has been little cheer for those in favour of arms control and disarmament rooted in multilateral legal instruments .
Last December 's decision by the UN General Assembly officially to launch the process of drawing up a global arms trade Treaty ( ATT ) gives rare cause for celebration .
Although it came as no surprise , the solitary vote against the resolution that launched the process , by the United States , was sad .
The Treaty is aimed at finding a common legal denominator for the import , export and transfer of arms , at offering a global response to a completely globalised trade and at creating uniform criteria that make the arms trade subject to the imperatives of human rights , stability and sustainable development .
It is also intended to mobilise public opinion in developed countries against the opacity that characterises the millionaire legal contracts governing arms sales to allied countries .
The United Kingdom 's scandalous decision to block the latest investigation into the country 's arms sales to Saudi Arabia , and into the accompanying high-level corruption , is a perfect example of the true nature of the arms trade .
Only in this field would a European government dare to block a serious investigation in the national interest .
It is because of special treatment that governments the world over have taken special measures to control the arms trade . The EU can and must take the lead in this area .
It must fight for the lessons learnt from the interpretation and implementation of its code of conduct - in particular as regards the criteria of sustainable development and human rights - to be applied to the new Treaty , because these two aspects are especially pertinent , as Mrs Ferrero-Waldner pointed out .
In this regard , I welcome the conclusions of the last ' General Affairs Council ' , which highlighted the importance of joining forces with other countries and regional organisations to draw up a new Treaty .
All that remains is for the EU to transform this good will into a diplomatic strategy , properly rooted in a Council common position , in relation to the ATT .
While reason and scruples are not around to dignify the White House with their presence , European leadership in this area is particularly urgently needed .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it is truly shameful that , despite the perils brought to humanity by the numerous irresponsible arms transfers carried out for so many years , we still do not have a legally binding UN treaty on international arms trade .
However , even if we had , I doubt if we would have had the means , or that those who matter would have had the will , to closely monitor and implement it properly , but we should concern ourselves with this once we have a UN Treaty in place .
Today , the most unscrupulous and murderous worldwide may easily possess arms .
With enough money and the right connections , anything may be purchased , from a hand gun to a jet fighter plane .
It is probably only a matter of time before even nuclear weapons may be purchased on the open market .
Why , you may ask , should there be such a despicable state of affairs in our 21st century society ?
The answer is quite simple : there will always be deranged individuals in this world who want to inflict their pathologically criminal plans on others and , similarly , there will always be evil traders who supply the means for death and destruction to anybody , as long as they are able to make a handsome profit .
I must be mentioned here that the arms industry 's highly lucrative enterprises continuously produce more advanced killing machines in greater numbers and at an ever-increasing pace .
I know that we cannot change the world overnight and the forces of evil will always have their share of determining the fate of our fellow human beings .
However , one must at least try to make a start to change things to some extent .
In this way , I support this motion for a resolution which calls for the establishment of common international standards for the import , export and transfer of conventional weapons .
After all , it is better than nothing , and let us hope that one day human beings will have enough common sense to realise that there is no need to produce weapons at all .
In conclusion , I find it noteworthy to mention that , of the 17 leading arms exporters , more than half are EU Member States .
Let this statistic be food for thought for all of us .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , this House has spoken out in favour of an international treaty on the transfer of weapons on many previous occasions .
What makes this debate and the resolution that we have presented special , however , is that the United Nations are now getting to work .
A resolution that was approved in December 2006 with the support of 153 countries has been the departure point for our debate today .
It is right that we should remember that 153 countries signed it , because that gives the process genuine legitimacy .
Within this context , we must stress certain points of the resolution that we are presenting today .
Firstly , the 153 countries are being asked to forward their reports to the Secretary-General of the United Nations indicating what they believe the treaty should contain , its scope and , in particular , their opinion with regard to its viability .
Secondly , those reports should be based on current international legislation , particularly with regard to international humanitarian law and human rights in general .
There are important existing treaties that must be taken into account .
Thirdly , the governments of the States must commit themselves to carrying out a thorough study of the degree of compliance and , above all , of non-compliance with the current rules , international embargos and , in the case of Europe , strict application of the Code of Conduct on arms exports .
One of the cases that deserves to be highlighted in particular is that of arms exports to Sudan , an issue that we will discuss specifically during the July part-session .
Fourthly , the governments must also pay attention and give every possible support to the setting up of a group of experts that will have to be created in 2008 with a view to defining the content of the treaty .
Finally , we must be aware that , although the process of drawing up an international treaty on the transfer of weapons is already under way , it will be a slow process , and in the mean time arms sales in the world are still increasing .
According to the SIP , in 2005 , sales , around a third of which come from the European Union , rose to USD 290 000 million .
In the mean time , therefore , we must be particularly rigorous and demanding with regard to the existing control mechanisms and pay particular attention to the control of intermediaries , compliance with embargos and increasing the transparency and parliamentary control of those exports .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I warmly welcome the fact that we have this joint motion for a resolution on an international arms-trade treaty , because time is running out , as arms expenditure and arms exports spiral throughout the world .
According to the study conducted by SIPRI , the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute , the equivalent of EUR 900 billion was devoted to military spending last year , which represents EUR 137 for every man , woman and child on the planet .
That was three and a half per cent more than in 2005 .
Over the past ten years , global arms expenditure has increased by 37 % .
As for the international arms trade , in its new Yearbook of Armaments , Disarmament and International Security , SIPRI reports a 50 % increase in the volume of trade since 2002 .
Once again , the United States and Russia have been far and away the top arms exporters .
Germany , with USD 9.2 billion - EUR 6.9 billion - between 2002 and 2006 , has pushed past France into third place .
Member States of the EU are up there among the global leaders when it comes to arms exports .
Last year alone , Germany 's arms exports were worth USD 3.9 billion , more than double the 2005 amount of USD 1.5 billion .
France has armed Sudan , and Belgium is supplying weapons to the autocrat Joseph Kabila in the Democratic Republic of the Congo , partly so that he can massacre the opposition .
Once a conflict has been fuelled , along comes the EU with its military missions in Africa - in the Congo , Sudan and so on .
The fire-fighters are dousing the flames with petrol .
It is high time the EU and its Member States put a stop to these deals .
Arms exports are violating human rights all over the world .
Arms exports are killing people all over the world .
Let us finally put an end to this traffic in death .
( LT ) Mr President , the European Union , which always speaks for conflict resolution by negotiation rather than by force , is interested in muzzling the unrestricted growth of business in trading instruments of death .
Last year , as has been mentioned , EUR 900 billion was spent for military purposes .
This is EUR 137 per capita for the total population of the world .
On the basis of military spending , we are back in the Cold War .
Almost half of this enormous sum is made up by the United States ' expenditure on military armaments .
The scope of spending on weaponry is growing dangerously , having reached almost EUR 40 billion last year .
The largest exporters in recent years have been the United States and Russia , each one accounting for 30 % of the global arms trade , with the EU not far behind at 20 % .
The greatest concern is caused by the flow of ultra-modern weapons to conflict-torn regions in unpredictable countries .
Last year 153 countries supported a United Nations resolution on a process to create a treaty on Trade in Arms .
For the moment it is difficult for all countries to agree on a legally binding document that would provide for the international regulation of imports and exports of weapons ; however , steps in that direction in the United Nations are essential .
At the same time , it must be stressed that individual countries are the first-line combatants against irresponsible arms trading and the damage it wreaks on peace , security , development and human rights .
The international community , and likewise the public of any country that uses arms trade for dealings in dangerous and corrupt ventures , has a duty to bring appropriate pressure on such governments and parliaments .
( NL ) Mr President , every year , approximately one million people are wounded by hand-guns , machine guns or grenade launchers .
The extent of firearm violence globally is enormous , as is the human suffering .
In recent armed conflicts , small lightweight firearms are often the only weapons that are used .
In southern Africa alone , some 30 million light firearms are in circulation ; in the Middle East , estimates range from 60 to 110 million .
The majority of these weapons are produced and sold legally .
For dozens of years , international Treaties have been in place to control biological , chemical and nuclear weapons and their spread , but despite the enormous number of fatalities , this is not yet the case for the sale of and trade in conventional weapons .
This results in human rights violations , long-term wars and countries that are becoming more impoverished .
The large majority of these weapons are produced by five rich countries .
In 2005 Russia , the US , France , Germany and Great Britain jointly accounted for 81 % of the worldwide arms trade .
More than two thirds of these weapons are intended for Africa , Asia , the Middle East and Latin America .
Not only human lives are being destroyed , also economies , infrastructure , health care and education .
In Northern Uganda alone , 2 500 children have not attended school during the last 20 years of armed violence .
The UN resolution of 6 December 2006 sets the scene for a treaty against this free circulation and in favour of control of the trade as a whole .
This is , of course , of the utmost importance if we want to curb conventional weapons .
I would therefore urge the Council - and I gather from the acting Chairman , Mr Gloser , that something is being done - to get a massive , rapid and positive response from Europe and , for our part , to tackle the serious shortcomings in the application of the European code of conduct from 1998 .
EU weapons still wheedle their way into countries such as Sudan , China and Sierra Leone .
It is high time we made this code legally binding , as this would give the UN process an enormous shot in the arm .
Mr President , last year I spent two weeks in the Democratic Republic of Congo on behalf of this Parliament .
Four million people died in their civil war and , of course , an international arms embargo on that country failed to prevent arms from all over the world - including from Germany and France , for which there is clear evidence - getting into that country and contributing to the strife that took place .
There cannot be a more graphic example of why the international community needs to do more to enforce its will and its values in this area .
As we say in our resolution , we want to see a comprehensive , rigorous and fully implemented arms trade treaty .
The European Union can play a pivotal role in the international community to make sure that the text achieves just that .
I am very proud that the European Parliament text put before us today refers to the arms trade causing ' unacceptable human suffering and exacerbating conflict , instability and terrorism ' .
I thank Mr Gloser , the German Presidency and the Council for taking a similarly tough line in their resolution and speaking of ' an undesirable and irresponsible proliferation of conventional arms ' .
Let us carry those words through so that we really can influence what is happening in the United Nations .
The next stage must be to engage civil society .
I think we are in our present position as a result of those NGO campaigns of the mid-1990s that were finally successful in working with us to get the EU Code of Conduct .
I am very proud that experts at the Lauterpacht Centre at Cambridge University in my own constituency drew up the first draft of this treaty to be put forward to the international community .
I appeal to parliamentarians to sign the declaration in favour of the Treaty on the controlarms.org website .
Our work with civil society to engage the people of this world for a strong treaty is essential .
Finally , I am very proud that my own country , the UK , together with Finland , proposed this in the United Nations and that every single EU Member State has submitted its willing support to the UN .
We should be proud of Europe too .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Presidency of the Council I would like to express my sincere thanks to you for your contributions and suggestions but also for the initiatives you have taken on this very important matter as well as for the warnings that were sounded by some speakers .
Let me just respond to two points .
Firstly , unless human rights and international humanitarian law are being respected in the recipient country , arms exports can never be licensed .
I have stressed that we are engaged worldwide at various levels in promoting respect for human rights .
That is another matter which has often been on the agenda of this Parliament .
The right to life , the prohibition of slavery , political and social participatory rights , equality before the law , freedom of speech and assembly and the prohibition of discrimination continue to be flouted in too many countries of this world .
It is therefore our duty to ensure that these violations of fundamental values are not fostered by the supply of armaments .
Secondly , there is the issue of embargos .
The United Nations Security Council , the OECD and the European Union have imposed embargos on a number of countries , and the present draft resolution of the European Parliament places special emphasis on the need to uphold the embargo against Sudan .
It is absolutely essential that observance of embargos be made one of the key criteria for export licensing in an arms-trade treaty .
It is no coincidence that this criteria is listed at the very start of the catalogue of criteria in the EU Code of Conduct .
I can assure you that we shall continue to make every effort during our presidency to secure an effective arms-trade treaty .
The key role that the European Parliament is playing in this discussion has also been a great source of help and support .
I hope we shall be able to maintain this cooperative approach throughout the subsequent presidencies .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I thank Parliament for its support , for its initiative and for its motion for a resolution .
As I mentioned before , the Commission , as part of wider EU efforts , strongly supports the opening of negotiations on a legally binding arms trade treaty , within the UN framework - this is important to highlight .
An international instrument promoting high standards of responsibility is clearly desirable and , for this enterprise to be successful , we need to build the broadest possible consensus and encourage all states to support this initiative .
We would wish it to be a legally binding , separate and self-standing initiative that would cover all conventional arms transfers , set out the principles defining illegal transfers , include monitoring and be broadly based .
We know that it will not be easy to persuade all suppliers worldwide , and it will therefore be very important for all the major arms producers to avoid having a situation such as we had with the ICC or with the mine ban treaty .
We will , therefore , seek the broadest possible consensus .
I have received a motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 21 June 2007 .
MEDA and financial support to Palestine - evaluation , implementation and control ( debate )
The next item is the report by Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on MEDA and financial support to Palestine - evaluation , implementation and control .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are many reasons at present which make the report we are debating today highly important and topical .
The poor results of the Euro-Mediterranean process and , at the same time , the huge challenges in this area are forcing us to take serious stock and adopt serious policies and financial commitments .
The tragic situation in the Palestinian territories is getting worse and developments are sounding the alarm for a deterioration in the situation and calling on us to take stock of our actions and become aware of our responsibilities for the future .
We also have to give convincing answers to the concerns of European citizens about the management of resources in areas which are lagging behind in democratic commitments and management and evaluation mechanisms .
I should like to remind the House that the MEDA programme is our principal financial instrument for the implementation of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership supporting measures for the political chapter and the economic chapter , in the aim of creating a free trade zone , and for the cultural and social chapter which forms the third pillar .
MEDA II , which is the most recent MEDA programme we have applied , was scheduled to provide the sum of EUR 5.3 billion from 2000 to 2006 .
The MEDA regulation came to an end in 2006 and today we have a new European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument which entered into effect in 2007 and we believe that our experience from MEDA will be very useful for the new instrument .
I should like to remind the House that annual commitments under MEDA ΙΙ , to which most of our report is devoted , varied between EUR 569 million in 2000 and EUR 697 million in 2004 .
In other words , there was a steady increase , although we need to bear in mind that between MEDA Ι and MEDA ΙΙ our commitments increased for Palestine , Syria , Algeria and Morocco and for the regional activities , but decreased for Egypt , Jordan , Lebanon and Tunisia .
Similarly , increases varied according to implementation sector .
There was a marked increase in funding for actions which include education , training and economic institutional support , while less funds were committed for other sectors , such as agriculture , local development and private reforms under MEDA IΙ than under MEDA Ι .
In light of our experience in the European Parliament and the information received and the report by the Court of Auditors , the Commission 's management of the MEDA programme has clearly improved since the early years and we can say that , given the political circumstances that play their role in the area , the evaluation is satisfactory and a great deal of effort was made , gradually resulting in an even allocation of resources , with shorter preparation times and faster disbursement .
We might urge the European Commission to take account in future activities of the fact that there is a steady increase in the number of projects and programmes , that there is an even larger share of budget support in the total programme , that the role played by our offices and the apportionment of responsibilities at local level has been judged satisfactory and important and must be increased and that cooperation with the local authorities played a role and we must enhance this .
We must also do whatever we can to enhance cooperation between the Mediterranean countries ( South-South partners ) in order to achieve the much sought-after objective of regional cooperation and integration .
As far as the funding sectors are concerned , we take the view that the economic aspect of the partnership must be directed towards social cohesion and sustainable economic development , not forgetting that overall monitoring and enhanced action in all sectors are needed if we are to achieve our objectives .
The question of funding for Palestine is an important part of our report and was the subject of increased interest on the part of our honourable friends .
From 1994 to 2006 the Commission provided about EUR 2 300 million to the Palestinian people .
Payments to Palestinian areas have been quite stable at between EUR 232 and 260 million from 2002 to 2005 .
In 2006 alone , EUR 700 million was provided , which is our record so far .
As we know from the decision by the Quartet on 9 May 2006 , we have the temporary international mechanism and the European Commission used this mechanism to deliver the sum of EUR 107.5 million to its three windows , one for emergencies , one for infrastructure and one for payments to the poorest , vulnerable social groups .
Our committee has considered our relations with the Palestinian Authority and the best way of addressing requirements , both for political and economic aid to the Palestinian Authority per se and for channelling humanitarian aid and , in order to update the report , I have proposed two oral amendments , one to paragraph 38 , which is now out of date and can be deleted or radically amended and one new paragraph referring to the Council decisions both on support for the new government and on the commitment through the international mechanism to take the action needed for humanitarian aid to Gaza .
I wish to state that our political group supports our undertaking and I believe that I also have the support of the rest of the House on this new paragraph .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , let me express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur .
We have analysed the recommendations and largely agree with Parliament 's assessment of the MEDA programme and , of course , with its conclusions .
The report concludes that the support provided by the MEDA programme served its intended purpose and rendered an important contribution to the achievement of the MEDA objectives .
It also recognises that the aid was consistent with the development plans and needs of the recipient countries .
I want to be quite emphatic about that , because I still recall certain discussions .
The Council acknowledges the Commission 's efforts , which have led to perceptible improvements in the speed and efficiency of planning within the MEDA II framework .
The MEDA programme has now been completed , and the first of January 2007 marked the switch to the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
The ENPI is a tailor-made instrument for the implementation of the European neighbourhood policy .
The European Parliament has called for the development of cooperation among Europe 's partner countries in the Mediterranean region , and this is being done through the ENPI Southern regional programme , to which EUR 343.3 million is being allocated by 2010 .
We share your view that the continued pursuit of the Barcelona process is of vital importance to the whole region .
The fact that we have managed , in spite of the tensions in the region , to address substantive issues and make further progress together shows that the Barcelona process , our Euro-Mediterranean dialogue , is still the right framework for the pursuit of change in the Mediterranean region .
The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly makes an important contribution to closer North-South relations through its interparliamentary dialogue .
All of us , whether in civil society , government or parliament and in spite of our diverse structures and responsibilities , have the aim of nurturing our partnership with the Mediterranean region and the will to work together to that end .
Let me now move on to the part of the report that deals with financial assistance for the Palestinians .
Before discussing the report , however , I would like to mention that we have been following the latest developments in the Palestinian territories , and especially in the Gaza Strip , with deep concern .
The violent clashes between Fatah and the radical Islamist movement Hamas in the past week have claimed more than 100 lives and left many people with serious injuries .
The Hamas militias have effectively taken control of the territory , using brute force against the legitimate national security forces , civilians and aid workers .
In this situation , President Mahmoud Abbas has been compelled to dissolve the Unity Government , declare a state of emergency and appoint an emergency government .
The deal that was struck between the Palestinian factions with Saudi Arabian help in Mecca in February has thus collapsed , and the involvement of Hamas in the government of the country has been ended .
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip , which was difficult enough before , has further deteriorated .
The hospitals are completely overcrowded and are short of medical supplies .
The vast majority of the population of Gaza are dependent on food aid .
Aid organisations have had to suspend some of their activities because they fear for the safety of their staff - and rightly so , I am sorry to say , as was shown by the deaths of two UNRWA workers caught in crossfire during gun battles .
At Monday 's meeting of the General Affairs Council , the Foreign Ministers of the European Union called for an immediate end to the violence and assured President Abbas of their full support for his decisions .
They decided to resume normal relations immediately with the new government under Prime Minister Salam Fayyad and declared their intention to create conditions in which the provision of direct financial and practical assistance could also be resumed .
The Foreign Ministers also reaffirmed that they did not wish to leave the people of the Gaza Strip without humanitarian assistance in their present distress .
Other conclusions that may have to be drawn in the light of the new situation are currently being discussed .
The introduction by the European Union of the temporary international funding mechanism TIM in June 2006 has played a significant part in meeting the most urgent needs of the beleaguered Palestinian population .
The structure of TIM is transparent , and the mechanism has proved to be a flexible and effective instrument .
Last year alone , the European Commission and the Member States provided more than 300 million euros ' worth of direct aid to the Palestinian population through TIM and are continuing to make their payments in the present situation , in which these funds have become even more crucial .
This needs to be underlined and emphasised time and again , because a different picture is occasionally painted , even in the media .
For this reason we also welcome the decision of the Middle East Quartet to extend the TIM mandate for another three months until the end of September .
In your report you rightly call on Israel to release the tax and customs revenue it has been withholding from the Palestinians .
The European Union has also made repeated calls to this effect , most recently in the conclusions adopted by the General Affairs Council at its meeting on 18 June .
The Israeli Government has announced - as you know , we had talks with the Israeli Foreign Minister , Tzipi Livni - that it is now ready to release the funds .
We very much hope that this will give the Palestinian economy a desperately needed boost too .
This is another area in which the prospect of a political solution depends on a perceptible improvement .
The European Union is already active in another area to which you referred , namely the essential reform of public finances , including financial control and auditing .
The Commission is assisting the Palestinian Ministry of Finance in the ongoing development of transparent structures for the Palestinian budget .
The aim of the European Union is , and will remain , two states - Israel and Palestine - living side by side in peace with each other and with their neighbours in the region .
We want to help in the long-term creation of better living conditions for the Palestinians instead of engaging in crisis management .
The last few weeks have made it crystal-clear why this is an urgent necessity .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou for her excellent report .
It comes at a key moment as it concerns cooperation with the southern Mediterranean area , whilst the strengthened Neighbourhood Policy is also being implemented .
I shall speak first about the main findings before turning to the current situation in the Palestinian Territories and our response to that .
Firstly , with regard to the performance of MEDA over the last 10 years , I am pleased about Parliament 's positive appreciation of how this programme has contributed to realising the objectives of the Barcelona Declaration .
Further progress can and should still be achieved , but I share Parliament 's view that the Barcelona Process remains the most appropriate framework for the Mediterranean policy .
This process is now supported by the Neighbourhood Policy which will help to develop bilateral relations and put into practice many of the aspirations of the Barcelona agenda .
In terms of effectiveness and thoroughness , the findings of Parliament and those of the Court of Auditors encourage the Commission to continue further improving its performance .
It is clear that we will also take into account the different suggestions from the two institutions .
I undertake to continue the efforts of the Commission in this regard , and we have already launched a final evaluation of the MEDA Regulation .
The results should be available in early 2008 .
All our efforts need to be seen in the context of the ongoing and progressive management improvements which have been introduced by the Commission since 2001 .
I entirely share Parliament 's view on the issues of fostering greater social cohesion and sustainable economic development .
Equally , I share your willingness to pursue the objectives of the Barcelona Process as identified in the report .
We have taken numerous initiatives in this regard through thematic support , for instance in the areas of good governance , democracy and gender .
Lastly , as regards visibility , I have made a great personal priority of visibility , on which we are making progress .
Your report , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , clearly analyses the strengths and weaknesses of the MEDA programme .
It acknowledges the improvements that have been achieved , but also points out where it is still necessary to make further progress .
The new ENPI regulation , in force since the beginning of this year , offers enormous new opportunities .
Therefore , we are looking forward to continued dialogue and your constructive support .
Turning to the current situation in the Palestinian Territories , we are more than ever at a critical juncture .
We are following the situation day to day , even hour to hour , and for the moment we are addressing the urgent needs and will probably have to continue doing so .
As our Council President said at the General Affairs and External Relations Council on Monday , we had a long and intensive discussion on the Middle East .
There was broad agreement on the need to support President Abbas and his new government led by Prime Minister Fayyad .
This has also been the line taken by the Quartet .
It has already been said that the EU will resume normal relations with this government immediately .
At the same time , we cannot abandon the humanitarian needs of the population in Gaza , and we will never let the Palestinian population down .
With regard to assistance , there was a strong wish to develop the conditions for urgent , practical and financial support .
That includes : extending the emergency relief under the Temporary International Mechanism for another three months , this time with the complete cooperation of Salam Fayyad ; continuing humanitarian assistance , including to Gaza ; exploring options to relaunch direct financial support , including the building of institutions ; supporting the Palestinian civilian police through the resumption of the EUPOL COPPS ; and hopefully resuming the EU Border Assistance Mission , EU BAM Rafah .
I made it clear to the Council and to Prime Minister Fayyad that resuming direct assistance to the Palestinian Authority implies certain technical conditions - that means controlling conditions - in terms of audit control and verification .
I can tell you that we are already in touch with Prime Minister Fayyad and his staff on how this can be achieved .
Indeed , a meeting took place yesterday with my head of delegation and the Prime Minister .
As a first step , we intend to pay EUR 22 million directly from a reserve to help towards clearing the arrears of the Palestinian Authority , particularly to the private sector so that it sees there is some movement .
The TIM will also continue for the moment to channel funds vital for the Palestinians in both an accountable and transparent way .
It will operate , as I say , in support of the Fayyad Government as of now .
In this regard , let me thank you and welcome the political agreement on the extra EUR 90 million for the TIM .
I also hope that the procedures for adoption can be accelerated .
As the President-in-Office of the Council has already said , the most important thing is that the withheld Palestinian funds , for which we have called so often on the Israelis to release , will hopefully finally be sent to the government of Mahmoud Abbas .
Finally , let me take this occasion to thank Parliament once again for its support , which has been , and will continue to be , essential .
Under the TIM , a European initiative , we have provided high levels of support reaching more than one million Palestinians - medicines , hospital supplies , fuel for essential public services , allowances both for the poor and the public sector .
That would not have been possible without your support , and now for the future we also need your support for all the items I have just mentioned .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( FR ) Mr President , this excellent report by Mrs Kratsa , whom I thank for her work , contains two important statements .
Firstly , the aid given to Palestine since 2003 has been well managed and without fraud .
That is an essential element , which will silence the persistent and groundless rumours about corruption in the executive team .
Secondly , the temporary aid mechanism put in place after the sanctions in 2006 against the Hamas government has not , alas , despite the sums invested , succeeded in preventing a humanitarian tragedy with an increase in infant mortality , the appearance of new diseases and extreme poverty in the occupied territories .
Having said that , since the emergency government was set up and the National Unity Government was dissolved , aid seems miraculously to have been reestablished and even the taxes withheld by the Israelis could be paid back to the new government .
I am delighted .
While the country , however , plunged in civil war , is divided in two , this spectacular turnaround demands that we look at things differently .
The European Union has been responsible for its policy in the Middle East since January 2006 .
This policy is aimed at isolating Hamas and depriving it of its electoral victory .
It has ignored the advances of its political platform , on which the National Unity Government was built ; it has refused to condemn Israel for taking and imprisoning 45 Palestinian Members of Parliament .
Today , the extremists have won and a no-go area has been established in the region .
Any faith in justice and democracy is dead for Palestinians and the image of the European Union tarnished for a long time .
No , of course , we do not support today the activities of Hamas .
We condemn them .
When chaos takes over , however , when civil war breaks out , it is the time of bloodshed and outrage and I would say that we have contributed to bringing about this chaos .
Months ago the European Parliament raised cries of alarm that the NGOs were calling for help .
Even the UN is no longer silent . Read the do Santos report .
We are accountable for this disaster in the eyes of international opinion , and if the United States has had the courage of a Baker-Hamilton Commission to examine their policy in Iraq , I am asking today for the setting up of a Parliamentary commission to assess our European policy in the Middle East and its consequences today .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , may I express our sincere thanks to the rapporteur .
It is rather a pity for your report that it is now entirely overshadowed by a single issue , namely whether or not it is reasonable to keep putting money into this difficult region now that the whole focus is on Palestine .
I would like to thank you for your sterling work , because we believe that we still have far more to learn from past experiences for our future programmes .
Commissioner , one of my requests would be that we do not let major disruptions occur in our programmes in future .
The EU specialises in complete makeovers after seven years .
I believe the budgetary controllers could achieve far more progress in the long term if we could rely on greater continuity in our programmes .
We can see today that our rapporteur 's report was overtaken by events several times .
She took a lot of trouble with this difficult issue , particularly as regards Palestine , with visits to the region and an investigative report by OLAF as well as hours of discussion on what is surely the most troublesome area of the world .
For the third time , we are confronted by the question whether it is reasonable to put EU money into that area .
In spite of the reservations of many of my fellow members of the Committee on Budgetary Control , we decided in committee that it was reasonable , chiefly on humanitarian grounds , because we were aware of the good that had been done locally with this money , and we knew that the funds would be sorely missed if they were no longer available .
Two days ago the Council also answered this question once again .
We would like to issue a reminder that , as the budgetary legislator and the discharging authority , the European Parliament is sitting in the same boat .
We do want to support the lawful Palestinian Government , and we naturally have no wish to turn our backs on the humanitarian crisis in Gaza , but precisely because a civil war is taking place there , the European Commission has a special duty of accountability to us and must come to terms with its obligation to give us this account of its stewardship , particularly in view of the fact that budgetary aid is the riskiest form of support .
I was pleased to hear Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner 's assurances that EU funds would be increasingly linked to successful reform policies in that part of the world too , for there is one thing we find inexcusable : for humanitarian and political as well as economic reasons , we cannot tolerate our assistance being systematically undone time and again .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , Mrs De Keyser , ladies and gentlemen , we are here to discuss the report by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou on the European Court of Auditors ' report on MEDA , the European programme on the countries of the Southern Mediterranean .
The report before us focuses in particular on Community aid granted to Palestine .
The Court of Auditors ' report did not cover aid to Palestine .
The only European institution to have carried out a thorough analysis of this financial mechanism , the Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) , has refused to reveal its report . The members of the Committee on Budgetary Control have not been shown the report , not even confidentially .
That being the case , we cannot make any guarantees on the proper use of Community funds in the country .
Politically , however , we are faced with a serious dilemma ; on the one hand , to provide development cooperation and humanitarian aid to people who are victims of leaders who have little or no regard for their well-being , and , on the other , to ensure that Community funds are not diverted for the purpose of purchasing arms , terrorism , propaganda , indoctrinating children in particular , racism , xenophobia and hate , and suicide bombings , as has come to light in the case of funds granted to Lebanon .
This is a question of the highest importance that requires a robust political response , based on the humanitarian conviction that all human beings are entitled to life , regardless of the religion or ethnicity to which they or their forebears belong ; that is to say , a policy that is able to stand up to demagogy and hypocrisy .
I therefore wish to applaud most warmly this morning 's gesture by the Israeli authorities to grant free passage to the West Bank to hundreds of Palestinian refugees who spent several days blocked in the Eretz tunnels , having escaped from the wave of terror sweeping Gaza .
I should also like to make a sincere , fraternal call to the Israeli and Egyptian authorities to make as much effort as possible to work together with international forces and with the new Palestinian Government appointed by President Abbas to rescue the Palestinians escaping persecution in Gaza , which has already cost the lives of many Gaza inhabitants .
I hope we can count , as on many occasions before , on the collaboration of the European Community Humanitarian Office ( ECHO ) to help alleviate the suffering in Gaza , provided this does not stop ECHO from carrying out no less urgent humanitarian actions to help Iraqi refugees not only in Syria and Jordan but also in Egypt , Lebanon and various Gulf countries .
Palestine is at the moment being targeted by a fanatical ideology that uses religion to conceal its greed for power and that is currently laying waste to Lebanon and Iraq .
Anyone who still refuses to grasp this reality will once again have to face facts that it was impossible to predict .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Gloser , Commissioner , let me begin by warmly thanking the rapporteur , Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , for her report .
The section on MEDA in particular has been very well formulated and highlights all the steps that will have to be taken .
Congratulations on a truly solid piece of work !
In the light of events and since time is short , I intend to confine myself to TIM , the aid fund for the Palestinians .
The draft report shows clearly that the Commissioner has pulled off a real master stroke here .
I congratulate you on that , Commissioner , because the EU had been compelled to call a complete halt to its aid payments to the Palestinian Authority .
We had no option .
We cannot assist terrorists .
We never have done in the past , and we never should .
There is always a duty to act , however , when individual suffering occurs .
With TIM the European Union has found a solution that meets the high moral standards applied by Europeans to the payment of aid .
In these circumstances , I believe that , while criticism of minor accounting errors and inaccuracies should be noted , it certainly must not be made the focus of this debate .
After all , we are dealing here with a project that was put together somewhat hastily .
We all know that we were subject to certain constraints .
I do not agree with the critical undertone regarding the Israeli strategy of suspending the release of tax revenue .
We cannot blame the Israelis for not having run after the terrorists with the money , and for that reason we should let the matter rest .
Besides , subsequent events have shown that it was right to keep back the money as security , since it can now doubly benefit President Abbas and the forces of moderation .
In this context I must also commend Israel 's decision to open the Erez border crossing on humanitarian grounds , thereby directly helping the Palestinians who were fleeing from Hamas .
In conclusion , let me express my gratitude to the aid workers on the ground , for aid has to be delivered to the local people .
The European Parliament is grateful for the humanitarian mission they are accomplishing .
Theirs is no easy task .
Our sincere thanks go to them .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mrs Κratsa-Tsagaropoulouon her hard work , even though I disagree on certain issues .

I do not agree with Mr Chatzimarkakis ; I will oppose Mr Chatzimarkakis and I will point out your responsibilities , Commissioner , as a representative of the Commission , for the chaotic situation prevailing today in Palestine .
You are responsible because you did not allow a procedure for channelling any financial aid to a government called National Unity to work .
Furthermore , you alone are responsible for the present situation , because you insisted - selectively and groundlessly - on circumventing the institutional channels and the direct channelling of financial aid to a national unity government which had accepted the agreements of the PLO and , as such , met the Quartet 's preconditions .
And lastly , from now on , we must be clear that under no circumstances can the resumption of direct financial relations depend on terms which split the Palestinians and serve Israel 's expansionist policy .
I should like to ask you , Commissioner , to acknowledge your responsibilities and to assume them .
( MT ) Thank you Mr President , I too would like to join my colleagues in congratulating Vice President Kratsa for her extremely interesting report .
This report is especially important and useful at this particular time , because this is a time when we are facing the challenge of how to send out a message of hope in a situation that seems completely hopeless .
This is the challenge ahead of us , and our answer , despite everything , should be that we are still persevering in our efforts and that we must take heart .
I am in no doubt , Commissioner , that in your enthusiasm this is exactly what you are doing ; that you continue to be our ray of hope in these difficult circumstances .
That is why we support the initiatives you have adopted , such as the TIM mechanism , which we now know will be renewed .
You have our full support because we feel that this mechanism will cater for the basic requirements .
You also have our backing when it comes to the ability to provide direct assistance to the Palestinian authorities , naturally on condition that financial transparency is guaranteed , because it is the duty of this Parliament to ensure that the money is spent in a transparent manner .
It is a pity that we do not have time to talk about the other aspects of the Mediterranean because we know that the MEDA funds were spent in other countries and that they were spent in a way worthy of praise .
For example , the rate at which the money was spent in countries such as Morocco , Jordan and Tunisia has improved greatly over time .
Mr President , I want to thank Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou for an important report , which reflects the excellent work the European Union is doing through the MEDA programme .
I have one caveat , however , relating to recital N , which does not reflect the realpolitik of the situation following the formation of the National Unity Government .
I believe that particular reference should be amended to more accurately make that reflection .
The European Union and the Quartet did not respond quickly or pragmatically enough , in my view , to the achievement of the formation of the Unity Government by the democratically elected representatives of the Palestinians .
I believe that this failure on our part was the straw that broke the camel 's back .
We now have a coup d 'état in Gaza which threatens the longed-for peaceful future of the Palestinian people .
Yes , it has to be condemned , but any novice politician could have predicted this development .
Indeed , many of us who are more long-toothed did so last month in this very House .
After 40 years of brutal occupation and constant humiliation by the Israeli authorities , coupled with the world 's refusal world to act in accordance with its own democratic norms and to recognise the democratic choice of Palestinians , it is not surprising that Palestine is undergoing this crisis now .
Even at this late stage , Europe must seek to act in partnership with all the elected representatives of the Palestinian people to restore confidence in politics , in negotiations and in elections .
We must do what we can to help restore law and order , which is just as important to the Palestinian people at present as humanitarian aid .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , the European Union has dedicated a lot of time , effort and budgetary aid to cooperation amongst the countries of the Mediterranean .
The two MEDA programmes add up to more than EUR 7 000 million in commitments and more than EUR 600 million per year .
We believe that the MEDA actions have been one of the European Union 's great successes and they have contributed not just to economic development but also , crucially , to democratic development and the defence of human rights throughout the Mediterranean Basin .
I believe that the majority of the entire network of civil society associations in the Mediterranean countries owe their existence to the work of the MEDA programme .
We are therefore very proud that the execution of all the aspects of this programme is very good .
Palestine has always been controversial from a budgetary point of view ; it is the aspect of the MEDA programme that creates most conflict .
Direct aid to Palestine is very difficult to control , as certain Members have said , both in terms of its destination and in terms of its application .
I would like to mention that during the last term in office we had a committee of inquiry on direct budgetary aid , of which I myself was a member .
Its results and conclusions led to a series of doctrines and measures that , amongst other things , made it possible to create this transitional intervention mechanism .
Of course , today we are faced with a situation in which the humanitarian and political reality goes beyond any budgetary aid predictions we could make from the point of view of budgetary control .
I therefore share this Parliament 's practically unanimous view and we are entirely in agreement with this vote of confidence in the Palestinian Government .
We know that direct budgetary aid is very difficult to control , but we are expressing our confidence so that , with everybody 's help , we can move ahead with it .
( PT ) Mr President , although the MEDA programme is quite new , it has already had positive results on the ground , on the other side of the Mediterranean .
There is some way to go , however , before it becomes genuinely effective and is recognised by the people who benefit from it either directly or indirectly .
Having seen at first hand what MEDA has done in Gaza and the West Bank , I welcome many of the suggestions made by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou in this report , and I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate her .
I agree that support and efforts need to be targeted at specific areas , but should be expanded to cover other areas that may prove fruitful in the short term without major investment , as in the case of microcredit .
We are going through a period of change in Palestine , which should , at the earliest opportunity , be the precursor to the resumption of international financial aid and ultimately to the end of Israel 's illegal confiscation of customs revenue from a people and a government that is literally being strangled , without food , without economic revenue and without a future to fight for .
Salam Fayad has given us guarantees of political competence and responsibility .
It is up to us , the European Union , to give them the resources , both via financial aid that we channel into the territories and by lifting the blockade on the movement of persons , goods and services in the West Bank - any multiplier effect arising from this aid is rendered useless by the blockade .
For this to happen what is needed is a proactive , rather than reactive , European Union .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I once again express my special thanks to the rapporteur but also to all of you for the debate and your contributions , which have certainly underlined how important it was to launch the Barcelona process more than ten years ago and to formulate a policy for that purpose .
It was also an attempt to find new instruments .
Some of you made clear that the MEDA programme also served to promote improvements in the political situation and infrastructure in our partner countries .
When we look at certain countries on the southern fringes of the Mediterranean , it sadly becomes apparent that a good few aims have not yet been achieved .
Some of you referred to the need for greater efficiency here .
The continuation of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument , however , will play a major part in consolidating this Euro-Mediterranean dialogue .
Allow me to return to the point about the particular situation of the Palestinians .
Several of you emphasised that the Commissioner had found a way through this difficult situation , and for that she was rightly praised .
It is also important to say that we must help , but when we do help - and sometimes our approach will be driven by pragmatism - the procedure must not suddenly come under fire after three months .
I do believe , Commissioner , that a way has been found in which we can actually provide help in the current situation .
As I said yesterday at the meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , there is certainly a need to distinguish a little between cause and effect .
The European Union has repeatedly said how it intends to support the process in the wider Middle East , but it has also said that its recognition of newly elected governments depends on the fulfilment of certain criteria , namely renunciation of violence , adherence to the Road Map and acceptance of the State of Israel , all of which are long-established requirements .
It is important to be aware of that .
We too have made corresponding efforts , of course .
I would not keep putting all the blame on insufficient recognition of governments or on inadequate resources .
In the Council of Foreign Ministers the European Union has just pressed for and secured an important pledge from Israel to release the frozen funds .
That certainly involved negotiations with the Palestinians too .
As the Commissioner stressed in the debate with the Foreign Ministers on Monday , very rapid results will be achieved here , because it is important to provide assistance both on the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , it is highly important to recognise that there is an important connection between MEDA and the new Neighbourhood Policy .
It is true that we have achieved a great deal : the Mediterranean countries are now working together with us , for the first time , not only multilaterally but also bilaterally , i.e. not only the Mediterranean and Barcelona programmes but also bilaterally in the Neighbourhood Programme .
The European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument is a special instrument which builds on MEDA as regards programming and implementation .
However , we have tried to concentrate and focus a little more in order to increase efficiency .

With regard to ECHO , Mr Michel , who is responsible for ECHO , has made everything possible ; EUR 60 million from ECHO funds has already been allocated this year to the Palestinians via UN organisations and NGOs .
Allow me to speak briefly about OLAF .
As you know , the Director-General mentioned that he has to respect the various rules and regulations of OLAF .
At the same time , however , he has delivered a résumé of the main conclusions , around ten pages approximately , in a special report to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
He has also offered to attend that committee to answer questions in a closed session .
However , I must make it clear that this would concern money for the years 2001-2003 only and not the last period .
Allow me to return to the difficult question of Palestine and of our funding there .
First of all , you know that this is a European Union policy , not just a Commission policy , and therefore it is the Member States in unanimity which have decided on policy , and we have then tried to support this as much as we could .
Therefore , when the National Unity Government was formed , it did not take us long ; I held my first meeting with Salam Fayyad the following week .
I had already met him before he was in government , and we tried to see what could be done .
It was he who said that we have to take some time : you have the Temporary International Mechanism so use it for the time being .
However , I am obliged to issue an order to the Finance Ministry , to the single treasury account .
He then also opened a special PLO account , but this was never the account that we used .
This was intended to be used for money from the Arab countries , in particular , and perhaps also for Israeli money which , in the end , did not materialise .
Therefore , it should be clear that this was an EU policy .
Now there is a new situation , to which we reacted immediately , and so has and had the Quartet .
I have just outlined what can be done as regards this policy .
In response to the Member who mentioned micro-credits , we want to assist in jumpstarting the economy and , for that reason , we are paying arrears to the entrepreneurs from the EUR 22 million that was a reserve programme .
This has not been done for a long time and we have now activated that , therefore we will also have good financial control over it .
On the whole , we have done what we can and have always taken into consideration that the Palestinian people should not suffer .
We try to at least assist them .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 21 June 2007 .
External dimension of the area of freedom , security and justice ( debate )
The next item is the report ( Α6-0223 / 2007 ) by Mr Klich , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on an area of freedom , security and justice : Strategy on the external dimension , Action Plan implementing the Hague programme ( 2006 / 2111 ( ΙΝΙ ) .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Madam President , this report was initially supposed to be a review of the Commission 's Communication from 2005 on the strategy drawn up by the Council that year .
However , during the course of the work it turned out that great progress has been made in creating an area of internal security , freedom and justice and that the work has gained new momentum .
New documents have been drawn up , new decisions have been made and new action has been taken .
Our situation today is very different to a year and a half ago .
That is why I have decided to look forward , rather than look back .
This is also the attitude that both the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , which have worked on this report on closer cooperation , should take .
Therefore , it should not seem strange that the report actually amounts to a set of recommendations for the Commission and the Council .
The report is based on two assumptions .
First of all , in the modern world , internal and external security are intertwined , they influence each other and are really inextricably linked .
Secondly , our legal systems and political attitude need to maintain a balance between civil liberties and the safety of our citizens .
This means that if we want to ensure that our citizens are safe and free , both of these values must be promoted beyond the borders of the European Union , but a balance should always be struck between them .
Thus , our foreign policy must always take into account these principles and adapt its instruments , namely our common positions and actions , bilateral and multilateral agreements , accordingly .
In other words , we should , for example , include both anti-terrorist and human rights clauses in our agreements with third countries .
In its current cooperation with these countries , the European Union should promote both respect for human rights and the joint fight against international terrorism .
Here , in Parliament , we are also aware of the current limitations and barriers which restrict the effectiveness of the European Union in this field .
They partly result from our complicated and unclear institutional structure , and partly from a lack of willingness to deepen European integration .
Different procedures apply under each pillar to decisions concerning cooperation and external agreements .
The joint Community police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters that we have been hearing about for a long time has yet to materialise .
It must appear soon .
We expect the forthcoming EU summit to lead to an international conference which will , by the end of the year , produce a new draft treaty and that this treaty will give the Union a legal personality , abolish the current pillar structure , reduce the number of categories that apply to legislation and simplify and unify decision-making procedures .
However , before all this takes place , and before the treaty comes into force , as it may only come into force in 2009 , the report proposes the application of a temporary clause , a passerelle , in accordance with Article 42 of the Treaty on European Union , in the field of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters and the policy on legal immigration and the integration of foreigners .
This would allow the Council and all of us to introduce the new Community mechanisms into these very important fields .
In view of the pressure of immigration on our southern borders and the threat of organised crime on our eastern borders , the failure to make these decisions would be a serious political mistake .
As we are discussing the issue of borders , I would particularly like to draw the Commission 's attention to paragraph 42 , which mentions the need for a visa to enter the Unites States , and is particularly galling to European Union citizens .
Once again , Parliament calls for this matter to be settled .
Finally , I would like to warmly thank all of my collaborators , including those from my political group , the shadow rapporteurs from other political groups and Commissioner Franco Frattini , for their excellent and fruitful cooperation .
Madam President , Vice-President Wallström , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has set itself the task of providing its citizens with an area of freedom , security and justice .
The Union , however , cannot achieve this aim on its own .
Free movement of persons and goods and Europe 's economic strength and democratic stability have made the European Union a magnet for illegal immigration , organised crime , international drug-trafficking and even Islamist terrorism .
This means that we must reflect on how we can develop the existing mechanisms and approaches in the field of justice and home affairs and , as the rapporteur just mentioned , integrate them into the external relations of the EU .
I warmly welcome the great interest shown by the European Parliament in the external dimension of justice and home affairs and particularly in the aforementioned strategy , and the recommendations contained in your report , Mr Klich , provide important food for thought for the Council 's deliberations on how to strengthen the role of the Union 's policy on justice and home affairs in its external relations and make it even more effective .
The strategy for the external dimension of our justice and home-affairs policy sets out the objectives and line of approach in detail .
One element of our cooperation with countries outside the EU is the support provided by the European Union to institutions and to capacity-building efforts .
This is a long-term task , and progress in its performance is discussed within the joint institutions .
The direct neighbours of the European Union play a particularly important role with regard to the security of the Union .
This is why the action plans adopted jointly with our partner states as part of the European neighbourhood policy contain very comprehensive chapters on cooperation in the domains of justice and home affairs .
Among the countries involved in the European neighbourhood policy , Ukraine has a very special status , not only on account of its long common border with the EU .
Cooperation with Ukraine in the fields of justice and home affairs is already far advanced .
Another cornerstone was laid in Luxembourg on 11 June with the signing of a working agreement between Frontex and the Ukrainian border-guard service .
In addition , visa-facilitation and readmission agreements were signed on 18 June .
The Union attaches special importance to close cooperation with neighbouring regions in the realm of migration .
On the basis of its Global Approach to Migration , the European Union has greatly intensified its cooperation with the countries of Africa and the Mediterranean region over the past year and a half .
The results are encouraging .
Only two days ago , on 18 June , the General Affairs Council decided to extend the Global Approach to Migration to the neighbouring regions on the eastern and southern borders of the EU .
Besides our direct neighbours , cooperation in the realm of justice and home affairs assumes particular importance in the context of the European Union 's relations with its strategic partners , the United States and Russia .
Accordingly , the report also deals with many aspects of this partnership .
In May 2005 , Russia and the EU adopted four road maps for the creation of common areas .
The common area of freedom , security and justice is the one in which the greatest progress has been achieved to date - a view shared by the Russian side .
This , of course , includes the agreement on visas and readmission , which entered into force at the beginning of June .
At the last EU-Russia meeting of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers , Wolfgang Schäuble , the German Minister of the Interior , also openly addressed the issue of the Russian security forces ' heavy-handed response to the demonstrations staged by the opposition in talks with his Russian counterpart , Rashid Nurgaliyev .
Shortly after the Troika meeting of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers , the regular human-rights consultations with Russia also took place .
During the German presidency , human-rights issues relating to Uzbekistan have also played a key role in the deliberations of the Subcommittee on Justice and Home Affairs .
Our last meeting with the United States focused sharply on the fight against terrorism , visa issues and issues of data protection , including the transmission of airline passenger data .
In the last few days the German Presidency has been continuing to do its utmost to bring about the conclusion of a new agreement on the transfer of passenger name records .
The United States is not an easy negotiating partner , as we have learned from these discussions .
In addition , the German Presidency has also brought Europe 's two strategic partners , the United States and Russia , round the table to discuss common security challenges .
These include combating the drug trade , fighting terrorism and managing border security .
Another part of the report is devoted to the reinforcement of police and judicial cooperation .
I believe the German Presidency has made considerable headway in improving cooperation within the European Union .
Special mention should be made in this context of the agreement to bring many of the provisions of the Prüm Convention into the legislative framework of the EU .
Political agreement was also reached on the incorporation of Europol into the legal framework of the European Union .
Frontex has also been considerably strengthened over the past six months .
Let me also highlight the framework decision on exchanges of data from criminal records between Member States , which was referred to in the Klich report .
The extent to which cooperation is possible with non-EU countries such as Russia depends on the level of data protection in those countries , and that will have to be examined on a case-by-case basis .
Global threats and phenomena can only be effectively combated through international cooperation .
This strategy for the external dimension of justice and home-affairs policy is therefore indispensable to the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice .
The Council will continue to rely on close cooperation , conducted in a spirit of mutual trust , with the committee and the European Parliament in the implementation and further development of this strategy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , undoubtedly we all agree on the principle by which people 's fundamental rights and freedoms can know no territorial borders .
Unfortunately , organised crime and terrorism know no borders either .
It is for this reason , as the rapporteur and the President-in-Office of the Council have said , that there is a growing link between the internal and international dimensions of European Union policies in the area of freedom , security and justice .
This means working together towards an important two-fold political objective : firstly , to strengthen an internal area of security guaranteeing fundamental rights and freedoms to citizens and residents of the European Union and a harmonisation of systems and rules to provide justice to those who need it , and secondly , to guarantee an international dimension that in some way provides an instrument for European Union foreign policy by strengthening the role of the law and the institutions , by promoting democratic values outside of our borders and by consolidating the institutions .
These are ambitious foreign policy objectives for the European Union , to be achieved through measures on security on the one hand and respect for fundamental freedoms and rights on the other .
These two values can and must go hand in hand .
As has been said , there can be no contradiction between guaranteeing security for citizens and all human beings , and at the same time guaranteeing respect for their fundamental freedoms .
I believe that these common values must form the basis for our agreements , relations and partnerships with non-EU countries .
When Europe plays a role on the international stage our policies must therefore include the promotion of human rights and democracy .
The report before us concerns fundamental matters that I fully support : improving democratic accountability , strengthening security and rights , guaranteeing citizens a higher level of protection against terrorism and organised crime , promoting cross-border cooperation among police forces and judicial authorities and developing an effective European Union immigration policy characterised by solidarity that must go beyond the borders of the European Union , a European asylum policy for those in need of international protection and a concerted effort to clamp down hard on people trafficking , which exploits the desperation of immigrants .
We are already part-way to achieving all this .
European immigration policy is growing .
Over the last few weeks I have put forward documents to Parliament and to the Council on opening up to economic migration and circular migration , promoting mobility and thus abandoning the solely repressive approach to migration policy , although it remains essential to combat all forms of illegality .
Just a few days ago I proposed a Green Paper on asylum policies , which will enable this Parliament and all interested parties to participate , so that by the beginning of next year I can present an action plan creating , as promised , a single European system on political refugee status by 2010 .
There are thus many issues regarding immigration and asylum policies in which Europe already plays a role in the international arena .
I believe that the Euro-Mediterranean dimension of Europe should be further strengthened in this area , just as Europe plays a part in the east , as regards the Balkans , the Caucasus and relations with the Russian Federation and Ukraine .
We are already conducting activities in various sectors in this region , from people trafficking to the fight against the sexual exploitation of children and women and the fight against cybercrime , another issue that obviously knows no boundaries or borders and which must be tackled at international level .
Much has already been said on terrorism .
Clearly , the fight against terrorism must continue using the means of the rule of law , but it is certainly necessary to pursue and improve international cooperation with the major world players .
For this reason , I very much welcome the fact that the rapporteur has highlighted the importance of decision-making processes that enable the European Union to make its own decisions .
I very much welcome the reference to Article 42 of the Treaty , known as the ' bridging clause ' , but I believe that it is extremely important not to waste the opportunity presented by the next European Council to discuss the future institutional framework of the European Union and not to forget that , in the area of security , justice and fundamental freedoms , Europe cannot remain at a standstill .
Europe must have the means to make decisions quickly , effectively and with greater democratic legitimacy , for example by assigning a greater role to this Parliament and to the European Union Court of Justice .
Finally , I would like to say a few words on Euro-Atlantic cooperation .
As the President-in-Office of the Council has said , with the United States of America we have two sets of difficult negotiations in progress .
One of these concerns the transfer of information on financial transactions , born out of the SWIFT affair , and the other concerns the transfer of information on passengers on flights to and from the United States .
I hope that in both cases agreements can soon be reached guaranteeing both the certainty of our legal positions - therefore a European legal basis rather than reliance on bilateral relations - and a balance between the needs of the fight against terrorism and ensuring the confidentiality of personal data , both of which are key human rights .
I hope that the United States will accept the balanced position that the German Presidency , with the Commission 's support , has tried to put across and that these agreements will be reached by the end of this month , before the German Presidency comes to an end .
I have briefed the Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on the status of the negotiations .
There are aspects that cannot yet be made public because the negotiations are still in progress , but I have endeavoured to provide the Chairman and the parliamentary group coordinators within the committee with frequent updates on the outcome of the talks .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - Madam President , this report was prepared under enhanced cooperation between the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I am pleased to inform my colleagues that Mr Klich and I have agreed on a comprehensive text which , I believe , reflects the views of both committees .
I very much thank Mr Klich for his time , cooperation and flexibility .
In addition to the many points made in the report , my main message to the Council and to the Commission would be as follows . Firstly , it is obvious that the internal stability of the EU is to a degree dependent on external factors , such as the situation in neighbouring countries .
Secondly , no standard approach will work to improve the political situation in these countries , as the countries differ greatly in their economic , political and social realities .
Thirdly , I therefore stress the need for a tailor-made approach towards neighbouring countries in EU policy in the area of freedom , security and justice .
This debate is now adjourned until 9 p.m.
Council Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0125 / 2007 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : EU taxation policy
The taxation policy pursued by the Member States should be consistent with the Community 's objectives in terms of job creation , EU competitiveness , the single market and free movement of capital .
The 27 Member States are solely responsible for the planning and implementation of direct taxation policy , while the Community rules governing individual areas of taxation policy in the Union require the unanimity of the 27 for any decision-making .
Value added tax ( VAT ) on products has become quite a complicated matter in recent years .
In particular , VAT in the Member States ranges from 3 % in Luxembourg to 25 % in Denmark .
Will the Council say whether the EU is moving closer to adopting a common system for value added tax , what stage has been reached in discussions to date and what the Member States ' intentions are concerning the adoption of a common rate of VAT ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( DE ) Madam President , the common system of value-added tax was established in 1967 by the first and second VAT Directives .
These two directives prescribed the general structures of the system .
The detailed provisions governing the application of the common VAT system were introduced in 1977 with the adoption of the sixth VAT Directive .
This directive has since been subject to numerous amendments , most of which were occasioned by the creation of the single market and the accompanying removal of tax barriers between Member States .
On 1 January 2007 the sixth directive was repealed and replaced by Directive 2006 / 112 / EC on the common system of value-added tax , which incorporates all of the statutory amendments to the original directive .
As far as VAT rates are concerned , the directive establishes the principle of applying a standard rate plus one or two reduced rates .
The standard rate must be at least 15 % .
This minimum rate is fixed until 31 December 2010 .
The reduced rates , which must amount to at least 5 % , are applicable to goods and services defined in the directive .
The directive also provides for certain exceptions to this general rule and for transitional arrangements , allowing the Member States to respond to specific situations .
So that the effects of the reduced rates can be more accurately assessed , the directive also lays down that , by 30 June 2007 at the latest , the Commission is to present to the European Parliament and the Council an overall assessment report on the impact of reduced rates applying to locally provided services , focusing especially on job creation , economic growth and the proper functioning of the internal market and based on a study carried out by an independent economic think-tank .
( EL ) Madam President , Minister , as the Commission has said , you must have information on the impact on economic prosperity and job creation in the Member States from different value added tax rates at your disposal and make it known by 30 June 2007 .
It is only to be expected that different VAT rates have a strong impact on sectors of the internal market and on the flourishing of the economies in the Member States , with the result that individual economic indicators are affected and inequalities in the economy and society are exacerbated .
I ask you , Minister , do you already know the impact different VAT rates have and , if you do , what is it ?
Finally , what policies is the Council considering in order to mitigate the adverse repercussions of these differences ?

Mr Mavrommatis , I also said that there has been a variety of developments and decisions within the scope that exists for this in the European Union .
It should be particularly useful in that , when the report of the expert group is presented , we shall have the facts on the table and be able to assess whether or not there are obstacles , as it were , to the functioning of the internal market , and what has been the impact on certain sectors to which reduced rates have applied in the past .
I am sure you will understand that we ought to wait for this report .
After that , we - the Council and Parliament - must conduct an assessment together .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , I should like to extend the question a little .
The attempts to achieve uniform or harmonised VAT rates in Europe are admirable , but surely the objective of European tax policy should be the ultimate achievement of uniform , or at least comparable , taxation rates and taxes throughout the European Union .
I should be interested to hear what kind of discussion there has been on this issue in the Council in general , whether this issue has been approached , and if so , how .

The Council has discussed in detail the initiative of the Kingdom of Belgium with a view to the adoption by the Council of a Framework Decision on the recognition and enforcement in the European Union of prohibitions arising from convictions for sexual offences committed against children .
Following this discussion , the Article 36 Committee decided at its meeting of 22-23 March 2007 to deal with these issues in connection with the Framework Decision on the organisation and content of the exchange of information extracted from criminal records between Member States , and to amend this draft Framework Decision accordingly .
On 13 June 2007 , at the Justice and Home Affairs Council meeting in Luxembourg , the Council reached agreement on a general direction for a Framework Decision on the organisation and content of the exchange of information extracted from criminal records between Member States , and brought the initiative of the Kingdom of Belgium to a conclusion consensually .
In so doing , the Council took account , in particular , of the important aspect of the Belgian initiative that Member States should have access to information on the relevant convictions pronounced and prohibitions imposed in another Member State , so that each Member State can draw such conclusions from this information as are necessary to protect children from the risk of sexual abuse .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for that answer , but I should also like to ask him to acknowledge in the German Presidency the real concern across the European Union about recent incidents of possible child abduction for the purposes of exploitation .
I would ask him to acknowledge that this is now a major issue in the European Union , for his country , for mine and for others , and to ensure that we come to a conclusion , before the end of the German Presidency , on the exchange of criminal records on people who work with children and will be a danger to them .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Moraes , as I said before , we have indeed taken up the initiative , and the Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs , too , have recently agreed to implement the key concern at the heart of the Belgian initiative .
Notwithstanding certain differences concerning the information permitted to be passed on , the EU has now found a joint solution to the core issue forming the basis of Belgium 's initiative , which I believe is a significant step forward .
I am sure you appreciate that the time remaining to the German Council Presidency will presumably be insufficient to bring about agreement in other fields .
Is it not a pretty dire situation that , three years on from the proposal and when everybody agrees that making cross-border information available on sex offenders is one of the most urgent priorities and one very much supported by the public , we simply have no agreement ?
And the Council says it will look at this soon !
Is it not also pretty shocking that the UK Government is seeking an opt-out from this law enforcement area of European cooperation so that , even if it were agreed , our children would not even be protected by measures to track sex offenders ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) I should like to start by saying that the Council Presidency considers this a very important , valid question .
The Council is fully aware of the importance of guaranteeing the welfare of disabled people and of children with learning difficulties .
The Council would like to take this opportunity to draw attention to the general legislative framework for the fight against discrimination in employment and occupation on grounds of a person 's religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation .
The Directive , which is based on Article 13 of the EC Treaty , lays down the minimum requirements to be met by all Member States .
The problem is that this legislative framework extends to neither insurance nor the education system .
Nevertheless , Member States may introduce or retain provisions that do even greater justice to the principle of equality than those of the Directive , and which envisage protection against discrimination in fields subject to national competence .
Concerning the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , the Council notes with satisfaction that the Commission is intending to publish a number of studies relevant to the honourable Member 's question .
These studies are intended to highlight the social situation of disabled people , including with regard to education and training , and to summarise the statistics on disabled people provided , in particular , by social-security institutions , with a view to obtaining a realistic overview of the situation of disabled people , including with regard to the educational dimension .
( EL ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for your reply .
I wanted to point out that , as a country , Germany is already demonstrating understanding for people with disabilities and there is legislation allowing them to obtain insurance , so that they are treated equally in employment .
European schools do not have the same measures to help children with disabilities as the Member States and that is why I am asking for initiatives on the part of the Council .


President-in-Office of the Council . - ( DE ) Madam President , I crave the House 's indulgence , as I shall have to refer to many technical aspects in my reply that may not always be easy to follow , but those actively working on the subject matter are of course aware of how important the principles are in this regard .
Currently , measures in this field - that is , the field of migration - can be taken pursuant to Title IV of Part Three of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
The fields in which measures are taken by means of codecision with the European Parliament are extended by Council Decision 2004 / 927 / EC of 22 December 2004 providing for certain areas covered by Title IV of Part Three of the Treaty establishing the European Community to be governed by the procedure laid down in Article 251 of that Treaty , in accordance with the second indent of Article 67 ( 2 ) .
Most measures referred to in these provisions are now taken by means of codecision .
However , the European Council took the view that , until the entry into force of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe , the Council should continue to act unanimously with regard to the measures referred to in Article 63 ( 3 ) ( a ) and ( 4 ) of the EC Treaty in the field of the legal migration of nationals of third countries into and between Member States .
These and other issues are still being examined in the course of the ongoing process of Treaty reform .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for the information that he has given us , of which , despite its technical nature , this Parliament is clearly very well aware .
At the moment there is immense concern in Parliament at the Council 's inability to resolve immigration issues by means of intergovernmental cooperation .
I shall refer to a single case , that of the maintenance of the Dublin II Regulation , which currently prevents us from showing solidarity towards the Republic of Malta in order to deal with the immigration problems , something which could be resolved in a Community fashion .
My worry is that the intergovernmental method is not sufficient and that we should move over to the first pillar .
One example of this is the issue of the Dublin II Regulation .

Mr Medina Ortega , the migration issue has been the subject of frequent discussions in past rounds .
I have pointed out many times , including in connection with another of today 's debates , that the global approach to migration will undoubtedly play a key role in the Council conclusions tomorrow and the day after , and that it is not just an issue , but rather is being dealt with .
The honourable Member is right to ask how we can help Member States of the European Union such as Malta .
However , we shall also endeavour to find solutions to the issues surrounding , and causes of , migration , particularly illegal migration , together with the countries of origin .
The other question is of a technical nature , but of course this all depends on how we deal with the issue of the future of the Constitutional Treaty .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , mass legalisation of illegal immigrants in various Member States has often been interpreted as an invitation , and has led to veritable waves of refugees , as well as gift-wrapping a boom for people-smuggling gangs .
To what extent are there plans to extend readmission agreements , particularly with countries receiving financial support from the EU ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Readmission is an important issue , one that has been on the agenda of the joint debates between the European Union and African countries , and most recently of last year 's joint conference on migration in Tripoli .
This is true of many areas , of course , as - even though this has not had a decisive influence on the present discussion - there is currently a wave of migration not only from South to North , but also from East to West .
In that regard , the very issue of whether it is possible to arrive at regulations for the respective readmission agreements is always included in discussions on visa provisions .
This is also the case in the talks with African Union countries , for example .
I cannot give you any figures at present as to the countries with which such agreements have already been concluded , but I am sure we shall be able to provide these at a later date .
( MT ) Although I agree with the President that what has to be discussed are the causes of emigration , I would like to know what the German Presidency 's position is regarding Malta 's burden-sharing proposal .
We agree that , eventually , this will have to be discussed in the light of the Constitutional Treaty , but this is an urgent catastrophe and requires urgent action .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) At the 2007 EU-USA Summit , the European Union and the United States agreed the following : consistent with our common values , we confirm that we have long been working to ensure that efforts to combat terrorism are in line with our obligations under international law , including human rights standards , refugee law and international humanitarian law .
We shall continue and intensify our ongoing dialogue on the fundamental rights under international law that are relevant to our common fight against terrorism .
This dialogue has helped us obtain a better knowledge of each other 's legal framework and should promote cooperation between us on fighting terrorism .
The Presidency informs Parliament regularly about transatlantic relations , including about issues connected with international law .
One such briefing was given here in the run-up to the EU-USA Summit on 24 April 2007 .
On the subject of transatlantic dialogue , the legislator contributes to the transatlantic dialogue on security .
The Council noted the European Parliament resolution of 14 February 2007 on extraordinary rendition on the agenda of the General Affairs and External Relations Council on 5 March 2007 .
The Presidency has neither sought nor received any responses from the Member States to the said European Parliament resolution .
The post of counter-terrorism coordinator is currently being assessed , and the search for a suitable candidate is under way .
It would have been preferable to have a full debate on the CIA renditions and European complicity this part-session , as the Liberals wanted , but unfortunately the largest groups on the right and left strangely refused to support that idea .
We could then have pressed the Council collectively to respond at last to Parliament 's and Dick Marty 's reports .
How is the Council ensuring human rights compliance , as stated in the summit conclusions , when we know that US efforts are directed at persuading EU Member States to dilute legal protections ?
Is the Council going to let MEPs into those ongoing secret discussions given that we are supposed to have a high-level trialogue on terrorism ?
We have never been consulted on the action plan , and I think it is about time the Council improved its partnership with Parliament on these matters .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) If I remember rightly , I have already explained , in the debate on the subject , the importance of transatlantic dialogue and what the European Union and also the Council Presidency have contributed to that debate .
It is indeed the case that many an impetus has been given and that the relevant talks are currently being held - admittedly not high-level talks , but talks at working level .
I hope you will understand that these are confidential talks .
Regularly including the subject of transatlantic relations on the agenda , however , ensures that the possibility of exchanging views on how far both parties ' efforts towards a resolution have progressed will continue to exist in future .

( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , allow me to express my opinion that your efforts in certain part-fields have not yet proved entirely successful , particularly - with regard to my area of competence - in the field of the checks on European passengers at US airports , which I consider shameful and without doubt in violation of human rights .
I believe that this state of affairs is unacceptable in the long run .
I should be interested to hear what the President-in-Office intends to do about these measures , which have been taken in the United States under the guise of combating terrorism ?

Mr Papadimoulis , the US missile defence system and the planned stationing of 10 rockets in Poland and a radar system in the Czech Republic has not yet been discussed in the Council .
The bilateral cooperation between the United States and some EU Member States in connection with the stationing of elements of the US national missile defence system falls within the national competence of the Member States concerned .
Consequently , the Council has not considered raising the issue of missile defence in talks with the USA or with NATO .
Ballistic missile defence is the subject of consultations within NATO and the NATO-Russia Council .
On 19 April , special meetings of the North Atlantic Council and of the NATO-Russia Council were held on the subject of missile defence .
This subject was also discussed at an informal meeting of NATO Foreign Ministers in Oslo on 26-27 April .
( EL ) Madam President , I am surprised by the Council 's reply .
Fine , you do not want to discuss it with the Americans and ΝΑΤΟ .
Do you intend to discuss it in the Council , with your Czech and Polish colleagues ?
Or have you handed everything over to ΝΑΤΟ ?
The German Minister of Foreign Affairs has expressed his concern .
Mr Solana likewise .
Germany wants smooth Euro-Russian relations .
Do you intend to discuss the matter during this summit ?
Do you intend to discuss it at some point ?
What is the point of the Council talking if it does not talk about issues which worry all the citizens of Europe ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) I should like to refer once again to the starting position .
A few years ago , at the North Atlantic Council in Prague , the partners agreed on the new challenges presenting themselves and on the answers - possibly new ones - NATO had to find to these .
NATO has set up the relevant working parties .
This debate was continued in Riga , but no definitive result has been achieved as yet .
For example , we agree on the joint threat analysis .
At this stage , however , the United States made its proposal for a national missile defence system .
We take the view that , as a rule , the subject of the missile defence system should be discussed within NATO rather than within the European Union .
I can only reaffirm that this neither has been , nor will it be , discussed within the Council .

( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , you say - rightly - that the Council does not wish to deal with this issue , but I should like to ask , against the background of surveys according to which 51 % of Poles oppose the planned stationing of this US missile defence system , why calls by citizens ' action groups for a consultative referendum have been dismissed on grounds that referendums are unsuitable in this case .
What is the Council 's position on the subject of public participation in such important decisions ?
Does the possibility of negotiating on this , at least , still remain ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) As far as public participation is concerned , this is a national decision , and no guideline is required on the part of the Council Presidency .
This is a matter for Member States on their own responsibility .
In this connection , however , I should like to reiterate that there has indeed been movement on this issue in general terms , particularly between Russia and the United States , who have agreed to an intensive exchange of views on the subject and to confidence-building measures .
This currently remains open .
As the honourable Member is aware , Mr Putin recently made proposals to this end to the USA , too .
I believe that we should await these talks .
( DE ) My question follows on directly from this .
Has the EU Council Presidency taken a position on Vladimir Putin 's proposal to involve Azerbaijan in this missile system ?
Secondly , does the position of the EU , or rather the Council , on the US missile system correspond to NATO 's position , or is there a difference ?
If the latter , what is the nature of this difference ?
Thirdly , does the Council intend to deal with the issue of the missile system at any stage ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) I would point out that there is no legal basis for the Council to formally approve or reject projects such as those mentioned in the honourable Member 's question .
In other words , such projects can go ahead without the need for the Council 's prior approval .
As the honourable Member is no doubt aware , Decision 1364 / 2006 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down guidelines for trans-European energy networks and repealing Decision 96 / 391 / EC and Decision 1229 / 2003 / EC makes reference in several places to a gas pipeline between Russia and Germany running across the Baltic Sea via the offshore route .
I also assume the honourable Member is aware that , in accordance with Annex I to this Decision , a North European gas pipeline is categorised under ' projects of European interest ' : the category of projects given the highest priority .
With regard to the special provisions governing projects of this standing , the Council would draw attention to the operative part of the aforementioned Decision , which was adopted by the European Parliament and the Council by the codecision procedure .
I should like to refer Mr Lundgren , in particular , once more to Article 13 of the Decision , which reads as follows : ' This Decision shall be without prejudice to the results of the environmental impact assessment of projects , plans or programmes which define the future framework for such projects .
The results of the environmental impact assessments , where such an assessment is requested in accordance with relevant Community legislation , shall be taken into consideration before a decision on the carrying out of the projects is actually taken in accordance with the relevant Community legislation . '
Regarding the second part of the question , in accordance with the Treaty , it is up to the Commission to ensure the correct application of Community legislation and , in the case of infringements , to take such measures as it deems appropriate .
Naturally , this principle also applies to the Community legislation in force for environmental impact assessments .
( SV ) Madam President , as an EU country and as the country holding the Presidency right now , Germany is appealing for a common energy policy for the EU .
In spite of that , it is concluding a bilateral agreement with Russia concerning a very considerable investment in infrastructure in the form of the gas pipeline and is doing so without consulting other EU Member States around the Baltic Sea .
What are there by way of comments on this ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) This issue has also been the subject of a previous Question Time .
I can only reiterate that this is a private rather than a State project , and that any enterprises carrying out this project have to submit all the relevant documents , including in the countries in which this pipeline is ultimately to be laid , where they have to carry out this examination in accordance with the relevant provisions .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , as we know , this gas pipeline has been severely criticised by various politicians , experts and scientists , particularly from Scandinavian and Baltic countries and Poland .
Perhaps the Council could help bring the competent experts and politicians together to discuss the problem and perhaps reach a practical compromise ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Paleckis , it is primarily the task of the parties planning and wishing to carry out this project to keep the countries concerned informed as appropriate - which is done by making the appropriate application .
This application will undoubtedly be followed by an examination of all possible aspects , particularly those of the environment and security .
I am assuming that the appropriate talks will also be held .
However , first and foremost , it is entirely up to the parties involved in the project to take the initiative on this - and these parties are private and not State enterprises .
( LT ) Madam President , Minister , this is not the first time we are discussing this issue .
Talking about its ecological consequences evokes all sorts of concerns and fears .
Now Russia , implementing the project , is carrying out its own environmental impact assessment , saying that the weapons on the seabed are not dangerous .
Do you not find it illogical that a private project manager is carrying out the environmental impact assessment ?
The Council has not discussed this issue in terms of the aspect which has been mentioned by the honourable Member .
The physical distance or proximity to the 27 Member States is not , in itself , decisive as regards relations between the individual countries and regions of the European Union .
Relations with overseas countries and regions are regulated in the fourth part of the Treaty Establishing the European Community , as well as in Council Decisions .
The currently valid Council Decision , which was adopted on 27 November 2001 and amended on 19 March 2007 , will run until 31 December 2013 .
The Council will review the situation again before then .

My point really was that what we decide in this Chamber - as you said in response to the last question , when you referred to EU laws that have to be respected - applies in places like Martinique , or Guadeloupe , or French Guiana on the coast of South America , thousands of kilometres away , far removed from this place , but it does not apply in places like the Channel Islands , which are between France and Britain , or the Isle of Man , Liechtenstein , Andorra - I could go on .
There are all these peculiar little tax havens and exemptions that we seem to allow and where EU law does not apply .
Does the Council not consider this position to be such an anomaly that we ought to look at it again and consider a more modern way forward , rather than trying to legislate thousands of kilometres away , and not on our own doorstep ?

I presumably do not need to make specific reference to the fact that the areas associated with your question concern regions outside Europe but which are part of the European Union because , as it were , they are members of the European Union in view of their links to the mother country .
You are aware , of course , that countries such as Andorra or Liechtenstein are not members of the European Union even though they are situated in Europe .
A corresponding review in Council will establish whether these regions will continue to be affiliated and whether legislation will continue to be transferred to the areas mentioned .
( DE ) Overseas territories where military bases of EU Member States are located are certainly a frequent occurrence .
I would like to mention another specific case : Cyprus has designated sovereign military bases which belong to Great Britain but which are not part of the European Union .
My question here is as follows : Is it a tolerable situation where an EU Member State has areas belonging to another EU Member State which are not part of the European Union ?

Mr Bushill-Matthews , you are aware , of course , that monitoring of the proper transposition of EU legislation by Member States is the responsibility of the European Commission in the first instance .
The Council does not therefore wish to comment on the specific case mentioned .
Well , that was a very short answer , but not very sweet .
I am aware that the Commission has certain responsibilities , but are you saying that the Council has no interest whatsoever and does not care about age discrimination ?
Because that is the clear message you are giving .
You have just said that the Commission is the guardian of the Treaties .
It will review this accordingly .
Furthermore , the opportunity exists for the parties in question to have a corresponding review carried out in the event of discrimination .
( DE ) I believe that air travel basically requires reorganisation .
The question to the Council is therefore justified : In future , is it envisaged proceeding more within the framework of intergovernmental cooperation or on a bilateral basis in this area in the event of discrimination , or do you consider it right that the Commission takes an initiative in this area ?

Mr Posselt , the entire political situation in Kosovo continues to be determined by the status process .
When the UN 's Special Envoy , Martti Ahtisaari , forwarded the Comprehensive Proposal for a Kosovo Status Settlement to the UN Security Council , this process became the definitive responsibility of the Security Council .
EU Foreign Ministers have repeatedly given their unequivocal support to Special Envoy Ahtisaari as well as expression to their conviction that the Ahtisaari package represents an important basis for sustained , economic and political development in Kosovo and can also contribute to the consolidation of stability in the region as a whole .
Following the G8 Summit of Heads of State or Government , at which agreement could not be reached in relation to Kosovo , the EU Presidency called on participating parties to intensify their efforts in order to adopt a new UN Security Resolution at the earliest possible juncture .
The European Union is also continuing to follow the Status process intensively .
The preparations carried out by the European Union in terms of its contribution to a future , international , civilian presence in Kosovo following a solution to the status issue have , by and large , made headway .
The European Union is prepared to assume an important role , in close cooperation with other international actors as regards a possible future , international , civilian presence .
To this end , planning teams are to be found on site which are making preparations for possible future work undertaken by an EU special envoy and an ESDP [ European Security and Defence Policy ] mission in the areas of policing and the justice system .
The conclusion of these preparations will depend on how the status process itself and the actual status solution continue to progress .
As in the past , in future too , substantial assistance will be required from the international community in general , and the European Union in particular , in order to improve the economic framework conditions and the social situation in Kosovo .
This can only be achieved in close cooperation with international financial institutions and partners on site .
As soon as a precise cost estimate is available , which naturally also depends on the status solution , the Commission will draw up an overall finance package which will also be the subject of a donor conference .
This donor conference will only take place once Kosovo 's status has been clarified .
( DE ) My supplementary question to you is as follows : Can the issue of Kosovo 's status not be resolved in terms that the European Parliament can agree to ?
Is the Council aware that 75 % of the European Parliament came out in favour of the Ahtisaari plan , international independence and provision of an immediate warning system concerning further delays ?
Does the Council consider this to be a course of action which should also be adopted by other institutions ?
What does the Council mean by suddenly coming out and advocating the postponement of the entire matter for a period of six months , something which the European Parliament expressly warned against by a significant majority , and what does it mean by the statements made by Mrs del Ponte , who has no jurisdiction whatsoever in this field ?
Naturally , we are aware of the debates which have taken place in the European Parliament and the resolutions adopted by this House .
However , I would again make reference to a detailed discussion which took place last Monday in the Council of Foreign Ministers and which will continue tomorrow evening in Brussels .
In the course of this , unambiguous clarification was again provided in relation to the fact that although the Ahtisaari proposals constitute a basis , we do need a UN decision to assist in finding an acceptable solution .
It would now be completely wrong , and this has also been discussed with the governments of neighbouring regions , to take a unilateral decision .
I believe that we should also be able to convince our partner , the United States , that a multilateral decision under international law is required .
To this end , further talks will soon take place at a bilateral meeting between Mr Putin and Mr Bush .
These talks will also certainly involve Kosovo .
However , I am now giving due notice that a unilateral decision would not represent a sound basis for other decisions which are in the pipeline .
I am aware that impatience also prevails in the region .
We have , for example , particularly thanked the Albanian Government for its influence over recent weeks and months and declared that a decision under international law is necessary and not just unilateral acceptance by individual countries .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , what initiatives are planned by the Council Presidency in the area of economic policy , above all , in the sphere of energy policy as well ?
Could you envisage the SME Charter or the Energy Charter , for instance , being used as a starting point for also counteracting unemployment in the economic process as well as for transposing the Lisbon agenda there in an attractive manner ?


Mr Rübig , we are certainly aware , and Mr Posselt 's question has also helped trigger this awareness , of the importance of establishing economic stability alongside political stability .
A precondition is now a basic decision .
We all know the circumstances .
As regards future prospects ( you have mentioned the Energy Community which already exists in the region ) , decisions must then be taken if the preceding political decision has been taken .
However , you are also aware following other debates , including those relating to neighbouring regions , of the opportunities afforded these countries by the European Union in terms of promoting regional cooperation .
The aspect you have mentioned certainly has far-reaching implications .

Article 28 of the Treaty on European Union lays down the principles for financing civilian and military crisis management operations .
Military or defence policy-related operations cannot be financed from Community funds .
Athena is the mechanism created by the Council in 2004 to manage the financing of the joint costs of such operations .
The joint costs are less than 10 % , which amounts to the total additional costs of an operation .
The remaining expenditure is financed directly by Member States according to the principle whereby costs are borne where they accrue .
Athena is managed under the supervision of a special committee made up of representatives from Member States who are accountable to their own national parliaments through their respective ministers .
As far as the Althea operation is concerned , both the European Union and NATO pay for their share as regards jointly used facilities , personnel , etc .
NATO does not receive any reimbursement from Athena for the services rendered .
( FI ) Madam President , Secretary of State , this is a peculiar system , which has no democratic supervision .
By democratic supervision I mean parliamentary supervision , not supervision by the European Parliament or the national parliaments .
This is the way to recycle the rules of the Treaties , as you just said .
I would now like to ask if the new Constitution , regarding which the Presidency has drafted a proposal , will alter the Treaties in such a way that this money could be granted out of the EU budget without the Athena system ?

Mr Seppänen , on the eve of the European Council , I do not wish to speculate today on the future of the European Constitutional Treaty .
We will see which debates will be held and the consequences in terms of the contractual provisions .
On the second point , I would like to say that the respective ministers from the Member States are represented in committee and these ministers , in turn , are ultimately accountable to their own parliaments since the contributions come from the Member States .
As far as I am aware , parliaments either have relevant specialist committees which can pass judgment and question the respective minister on the use of funds , or there are budgetary control committees which examine how these funds are used .
( DE ) Unfortunately , the reality is somewhat different .
In the security and defence sub-committee , I am told that the EU has paid money to NATO .
You are now saying that no money has been paid .
This is very interesting .
The problem is that we do not receive any figures when enquiring about them in the individual national parliaments , nor do we receive figures through the Committee on Budgets or in the security and defence sub-committee .
Would it be possible for the Council Presidency to compile a summary of the expenditure effected hitherto in relation to this Athena mechanism ?

As Council President , I can inform you that no initiatives have been taken in order to provide the Commission with a mandate to start negotiations on corresponding agreements with Georgia .
However , provision is made at any time in the EU-Georgia action plan within the framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy for the initiation of a dialogue on issues connected with the transit of persons , including issues of readmission and the issuing of visas .
In connection with discussions on the possible unequal treatment of citizens living in Abkhazia who receive visas there on the basis of the new agreements , as well as in connection with the issue regarding whether imbalances may indeed exist in this area between the rights of people living in Abkhazia and those of people living in Georgia itself , I would like to add that this debate , which has also taken place at another level within the European Parliament , will continue to bring about a solution .
( LV ) Mr Gloser , you just referred to Abkhazia and South Ossetia , and it is well known that Russia is currently issuing Russian passports on a massive scale to inhabitants of Abkhazia and South Ossetia , thus artificially reducing the proportion of Georgian citizens in those regions .
The European Union , in hesitating with regard to the allocation of this visa facilitation to Georgia , is indirectly creating an additional incentive for Russian passports to be acquired , since Russian citizens currently have more opportunities of travelling to the European Union than Georgian citizens .
I would like to ask a second question : why were these talks on visa facilitation for Georgia not begun in the Council ?
What specific solutions do you see that might resolve this situation which is , in my view , unacceptable ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr Rutowicz , you enquired as to the status of the Regulation on roaming at the part-session back in February , and so I am pleased to be able to give the following answer to your further enquiry - even though you should already be aware of the subject matter , as the subject of roaming concerns us all given that we can no longer do without mobile phones .
As I am sure you are aware , the Regulation on roaming , which is based on Article 95 of the EC Treaty , is subject to the codecision procedure pursuant to Article 251 of the EC Treaty .
I can assure you that all three institutions have set themselves the objective of adopting the Regulation on roaming as quickly as possible .
At the European Council on 6-8 June , the Council reached a political consensus on the proposal , and thus approved the opinion of the European Parliament at first reading .
The legal and linguistic experts are already carrying out the final revision of the text , so that it can be adopted under an expedited procedure .
It is anticipated that the legal act will be adopted at the end of June .
It will be published in the Official Journal immediately afterwards .
( PL ) Madam President , unfortunately , the question was asked when the situation was quite different .
Therefore , I imagine that we should at this point applaud the fact that these directives have been adopted so quickly and that European society will benefit from this work .
Incidentally , this is a great success for the whole European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
However , the rates set out in this directive are not such a great success .
According to experts from the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , these rates were previously lower .
The rapporteur increased them during the consultation process and , finally , they were increased in the directive itself .
However , I do have a question I would like to ask .
Roaming remains , if I may say so , something that is unacceptable in Europe .
My question , therefore , is when might roaming be abolished altogether in European Union Member States ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) action plans consist of political documents that represent a political consensus between the European Union and the individual partner countries on an agenda of political , economic and sectoral reforms and contain both short- and medium-term priorities for action .
They are adopted between the EU and the respective partner country by the Association or Cooperation Council .
ENP action plans have been concluded with five of the six partner countries in the East , the first being that with Ukraine on 21 February 2005 and that with Moldova on 22 February 2005 .
These were followed by individual ENP action plans for Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia on 14 November 2006 .
No such action plan has been adopted with regard to Belarus , as the EU has no contractual relations with that country .
Belarus will not be able to enjoy the extensive benefits of the European Neighbourhood Policy until it introduces a democratic system following free , fair elections .
The following ENP action plans have been adopted with regard to partner countries in the South : that with Israel on 11 April 2005 , with the Palestinian Authority on 4 May 2005 , with Jordan on 2 June 2005 , with Morocco on 22 June 2005 , with Tunisia on 4 July 2005 , with Lebanon on 19 January 2007 and with Egypt on 6 March 2007 .
No action plan has been concluded with Algeria as yet , and no action plans have been adopted for Libya and Syria as the EU has no contractual relations with those countries .
The EU will provide a total of EUR 12 billion in Community funds for the implementation of the European Neighbourhood Policy in the 2007-2013 period , representing an increase of 32 % in real terms .
Following discussions with the EU Member States , and pursuant to Regulation No 1638 / 2006 of 24 October 2006 laying down general provisions establishing a European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument , the Commission decided on the financial breakdown and adopted strategy papers and indicative programmes covering countries , regions and cross-border programmes for the 2007-2010 period .
The multiannual appropriations for the country programmes under the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument , ENPI , for 2007-2010 are as follows : EUR 220 million for Algeria , EUR 98.4 million for Armenia , EUR 92 million for Azerbaijan , EUR 20 million for Belarus , EUR 558 million for Egypt , EUR 120.4 million for Georgia , EUR 8 million for Israel , EUR 265 million for Jordan , EUR 187 million for Lebanon , EUR 8 million for Libya , EUR 209.7 million for Moldova , EUR 654 million for Morocco , EUR 632 million for the Palestinian Authority , EUR 130 million for Syria , EUR 300 million for Tunisia and finally EUR 494 million for Ukraine .
It should be remarked that no strategy papers or indicative programmes have been adopted for Libya and the Palestinian Authority , as medium-term programming is not possible in those cases , and therefore the appropriations stated are only position numbers .
( LT ) Madam President , thank you for the comprehensive response .
I would like to clarify one thing .
In the implementation of this policy , certain agreements and action plans are made with particular countries : the European Union and Ukraine , the European Union and Georgia .
Are the Member States neighbouring these countries involved in drawing up the action plans ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) This afternoon , we held a debate on MEDA and the European Neighbourhood Policy , but more in relation to the South .
I should like to underline that saying that the EU now has an external border , but that it also has neighbours and is interested in the political , economic and social stability of these countries , has given the Member States who joined the European Union on 1 May 2004 an impetus .
When we developed the ENP , therefore , we also established a priority , particularly with the important aspect that a programme can be drawn up for each neighbour having the appropriate relations with the EU , depending on the progress made in the individual case , with the result that there are customised programmes for Ukraine or Moldova , for example .
I can only say , Mrs Budreikaitė , that the countries you mention are cooperating on drawing up these action plans and have every interest in these .
The content of these plans and this neighbourhood policy can play a vital role in certain fields , for example access to the internal market .
The fact that the European Council is to give its blessing to this new approach of neighbourhood policy in its conclusions tomorrow and on Friday will mean that the subsequent Council Presidencies are hopefully able to use this programme as a basis for their further work .
( FI ) Madam President , you said that there are no Neighbourhood Policy programmes in effect for Belarus , because no free elections have been held in the country .
A programme of this sort has nevertheless been agreed with Azerbaijan . Do you think that the elections in Azerbaijan were free and above board , and do you think it is logical that such a programme has been agreed with Azerbaijan but not with Belarus ?


Mr Nicholson , in accordance with Community law , it is the Commission who bears responsibility for the application of the protective clause , and thus the Council has no direct influence on the decision that the Commission has taken with regard to Brazilian beef .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office , but I am a bit frustrated by that reply .
I also put a question last night to the Commission , which was not very helpful either .
I would like to put to the President-in-Office that , when the Irish Farmers ' Journal and a representative from the Irish Farmers ' Association visited Brazil , they found clear evidence that rules were not being followed in Brazil .
Traceability is non-existent .
There are no controls at regional borders .
Animal movement in Brazil from foot-and-mouth areas is taking place every day .
There is evidence that substances banned in the European Union are being used in Brazil .
Is it not beyond time that we in Europe stopped paying lip service to this type of problem - when our consumers could have the possibility of being affected by this - and have a ban on Brazilian beef , which everybody in the European Union wants for the betterment of the producers and the consumers ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) I do not like having to say that the Council does not have competence in this area , but you said yourself that you have taken the opportunity to raise this problem with the Commission , too .
The Council is also aware of the problem , of course , but it is now up to the Commission to look into the relevant information .
Subsequently , the Commission is also responsible for making the relevant proposals and taking precautionary measures .
This really does not fall within the competence of the Council .
President-in-Office , you say this is a matter for the Commission , but the health of European citizens must be a matter in which the Council has more than a passing interest .
The United States of America has imposed a total ban on all fresh beef imports from Brazil because it says traceability is non-existent , illegal growth hormones are in widespread use and , generally , controls are alarmingly weak .
Is the health of EU citizens less important than the health of American citizens and , if not , then why have we not already banned Brazilian beef ?
I have heard what the Council has said , but I think it is sidestepping the issue here .
At the moment we are negotiating with the G4 in Potsdam and I would like to know whether we can ignore the recommendations of the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which called for a ban on the import of beef from Brazil .
Can we ignore the conclusions of the final report on a mission carried out in Brazil by the European Food and Veterinary Office , which tell us quite clearly that the present system of residue and veterinary medicine control is not adequate ?
Major shortcomings remain in the design , scope and implementation of the National Residue Control Plan .
I should like to ask the same question as the others .
Do you not agree that now is the time to take action and to protect European consumers ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) I agree with you that the European Union has to take action where there is information such as you have just described , but we have laid down rules for ourselves in this area .
All I can do is take up your calls in the interests of consumers and encourage the Commission to inform the relevant bodies of the extent of its examination and what measures it is able to take , but I regret that we cannot constantly swap roles .
We have clearly defined fields of responsibility , and this is the Commission 's .
I cannot anticipate the answer of the Commission , which does not need to be present for today 's Question Time .
I can only offer to make a renewed enquiry , so that you , as citizens ' representatives , receive a suitable , clear answer from the Commission .
I should like to take this opportunity , President-in-Office , to thank you very much for your cooperation and courtesy during your country 's Presidency at our Question Times .
Questions which had not been answered for lack of time would receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Exchanges of information extracted from criminal records ( debate )
The next item is the report by Agustín Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council framework decision on the organisation and content of the exchange of information extracted from criminal records between Member States C6-0052 / 2006 .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , at present information on criminal records does not circulate efficiently between the Member States of the EU .
This is not acceptable in a European area of freedom , security and justice and that is why the objective of the EU in the area of criminal records is twofold : firstly , to improve the circulation of information on criminal records between the Member States and , secondly , to use this information outside the territory of the sentencing Member State .
As you know , in 2005 the Commission adopted two legislative proposals dealing with these aspects respectively .
A proposal dealing with the second aspect - circulation of information - was adopted in December 2006 .
Political agreement on the proposal dealing with the circulation of information was fortunately reached by the Council of Interior Ministers in Luxembourg on 13 June .
This instrument is another important step forward .
In improving the way in which information is exchanged and made available to Member States , it radically overhauls the outdated , inefficient system of information exchange under the Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance of 1959 .
In its place , it establishes a streamlined system that will ensure that information stored in a single Member State is updated and then accessible to other Member States .
In addition , the information will be easier to understand and , therefore , of greater value to the end users .
I note , with regret , that Member States have decided that the follow-up work should take the form of Council decisions and , even more regrettably , Member States do not trust each other enough to accept that these implementing measures will be adopted not by qualified majority but by unanimity .
I know that there are some amendments and I thank the rapporteur for the quality of his report .
I share the spirit of the great majority of all the amendments proposed .
I have a reservation concerning the amendments that propose the introduction of general provisions on data protection .
Why ?
Because this instrument is a sectoral one : it contains a small number of provisions on data protection which are specific to criminal records and therefore they are more restrictive .
Therefore , my worry is that the application of general provisions on data protection will be too flexible and less restrictive .
That aside , personal data handled as part of the implementation of the framework decision should be protected in accordance with the provisions of the future framework decision on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
You all know perfectly well that I am urging the Council to find an agreement on such an important framework decision on privacy protection by the end of this year .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank all of my colleagues in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs for their cooperation on this report and particularly the shadow rapporteurs , Mrs Buitenweg , Mrs Vălean and Mrs Grabowska .
Information on criminal convictions circulates between Member States under the mechanisms of the European Convention on Mutual Assistance on Criminal Matters of 1959 , but there are serious difficulties with that mechanism .
These deficiencies were demonstrated dramatically by the case of Fourniret , a French man sentenced in the 1980s to seven years in prison for the rape of a minor and then released after just two .
We would discover years later that , between his release and his re-arrest in June 2003 , Fourniret had murdered nine girls and was suspected of killing a further twelve .
He had managed to evade judicial action for more than 14 years , simply by changing his residence from one Member State to another , and furthermore , to top everything , he even managed to get a job in a school .
It was clear that the mechanisms for exchanging information on criminal records had to be modified and improved .
The proposal for a Council framework decision intends to replace the information exchange mechanisms regulated in Article 22 of the Convention of 1959 and repeal the decision of 21 November 2005 , all with a view to guaranteeing that the Member State of nationality is in a position to provide a correct , rapid and exhaustive response to requests for information that it receives with regard to convictions of its nationals .
Of the measures included in the Council 's proposal , we must highlight the following :
the principle of centralising information is retained ;
a framework is established for contributing to , designing and implementing a computerised system for the exchange of information on criminal convictions , based on the use of a standard European format that makes it possible to exchange information in a standard , computerised and easily translatable form by means of automated mechanisms ;
the principle of obligatory forwarding to the Member State of nationality is taken up , eliminating the dispensation of notification when the person also has the nationality of the Member State passing the sentence ; and , finally ,
the obligation to conserve the information forwarded to the State of nationality is laid down .
With regard to the parliamentary measures proposed , I would highlight the following :
with a view to guaranteeing the integrity and authenticity of the information forwarded , the Member State handing down the conviction shall be considered to be the owner or proprietor of the data relating to the sentences passed by their courts and tribunals ;
the future framework Decision must provide for a range of additional guarantees in the field of the protection of personal data ;
with regard to the definition of convictions , for the sake of consistency with other reports by this Parliament , the definition contained in the report by my esteemed friend and colleague , Mr Demetriou , must be retained ;
the inclusion of sentences in the register of criminal records of the Member State where the sentence was passed is a prior obligation , since it guarantees the authenticity and accuracy of the information forwarded ; the information on sentences will therefore only be forwarded once it has been registered , but not before ;
it must be made clear that the deletion of criminal records depends not just on completing the sentence , but also on compliance with other additional conditions , such as fulfilling the civil responsibilities arising from the crime , or not re-offending within the time period laid down in law ;
it is necessary to establish clearly which legal framework will regulate the deletion of data , that is to say , whether the legislation of the Member State where the sentence is passed is applicable , or that of the State of nationality of the convicted person .
With regard to the conditions for use , Mr Frattini , I genuinely share your concern regarding personal data .
The proposal is much more restrictive than the provisions in force in the field of judicial cooperation in criminal matters , which is justified by the speed with which information on criminal records can become out of date .
Therefore , each time information on a person 's criminal record is required for the purposes of a new criminal procedure , it will be necessary to submit a new request for information .
I would like to end , Mr President , by calling upon the honourable Members to vote in favour of the proposed report , and I thank you for listening .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal we are debating this evening is a necessary step towards the development of judicial and police cooperation between the Member States of the European Union , a step towards promoting the strategy to develop an area of justice and security and I congratulate Commissioner Frattini on promoting proposals such as we are examining today , which promote the Hague programme .
Recording convictions and passing them on for recording in the Member State of which the convict is a national and exchanges of information on convictions in general will undoubtedly help in combating both national and cross-border crime .
There are , of course , gaps in the proposal .
There is no Community method for regulating the question of recording administrative convictions which , in most Member States are not entered in the criminal records .
There is no Community regulation of the question of recording convictions extracted from criminal records .
Unfortunately , the variety of national regulations is still needed . There is still no approximation whatsoever of laws even on these procedural issues .
Nonetheless , the coupling of national systems for recording and using information on convictions in the framework proposal goes some way towards dealing with the lack of a single Community policy on all aspects of the matter .
However , we must emphasise the need for respect for the right to protection of personal data , not only theoretically , but also in practice .
This will become clear in the natural course of events .
We hope that respect for this right will be real and constant .
I support the report by my honourable friend Mr Díaz de Mera and I congratulate him on the interest which he has always demonstrated in the European Parliament in the promotion of this strategy to create an area of freedom , security and justice .
I believe that the report will be supported by a large majority in Parliament tomorrow .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Member States have their own guidelines for collecting data on those convicted in criminal trials .
Sentencing data is stored in national criminal registers .
Each Member State is responsible for the central storage and management of information on court sentences .
However , we are crossing national borders ever more frequently and , as we are no angels , we sometimes come into conflict with the criminal law system in another Member State , and are tried and sentenced there .
What should we do with these sentences ?
Should we register them or not ?
The Member States have different , not very cohesive practices and that is why we need to harmonise this field .
We need closer cooperation between judicial bodies , we need a better and more efficient exchange of information and we need to ensure that the Member States exchange accurate , comprehensive and exhaustive information in response to each request for information from criminal records .
This is what the framework decision proposal aims to do .
We need a European system for exchanging information in a standardised , computerised format , where interpretation is facilitated by automated procedures and a standardised format .
That is why my political group support this report .
However , my group does have one serious doubt concerning the report , which discusses judicial cooperation and the exchange of information .
Bearing in mind the importance of telling the whole truth , respect for the rights of and fairness towards the victims of the terrorist attacks in Spain on 11 March , we would like to express our concern regarding the choice of rapporteur for this report .
He has also drawn up other reports on the issue of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
The European Parliament must be seen to be an institution based on the principle of transparency and which serves the citizens .
That is why the authors of specific reports cannot be seen , in view of their activities at a national level , to be controversial figures .
To conclude , I would like to indicate that my political group welcomes the good compromise that has been achieved in this report .
We support this report and we intend to vote in favour of it .
We also believe that the implementation of this decision will mean that Member States will trust each other more , and that this much-needed basis of trust will also apply to criminal proceedings .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , for his very good work that led to this report .
I will recall , as he has already done , the terrible story which took place three years ago in Belgium .
A Frenchman , aged 62 , was given a job at a school .
He was then arrested and confessed to nine murders on both sides of the Franco-Belgian border .
It was then learned that he had previously been convicted of rape in France but that no one in Belgium was aware of his criminal record .
We all remember the Fourniret case .
This case , among others , demonstrates how urgently we need a functioning European criminal records system in a Europe composed of so many different legal systems .
I congratulate the Commission on this very valuable proposal .
This is a clear case of much-needed legislation that could bring tangible improvements to citizens ' security in their day-to-day lives .
I therefore salute last week 's agreement in the Council , but I urge the Council to adopt this important text as soon as possible .
For the first time , we now have uniform EU-wide rules which will ensure a faster exchange of information on criminal records and bring more legal certainty .
It is also a first step towards online data communication between the EU countries .
I am satisfied that the option chosen was an interconnection of records rather than having another central EU database .
This is a positive step as far as cost and above all data protection are concerned .
I should like to insist again on the privacy issue .
In the absence of any agreement on the framework decision on procedural rights in criminal proceedings and on data protection in the third pillar , I urge the Council to adopt the additional data protection provisions included in this report .
We cannot continue adopting such instruments without giving additional guarantees to our citizens that their fundamental rights are respected .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra rightly notes that information on investigations shared between countries should have a standardised format and should be shared as flexibly as possible .
The report is also aimed at ensuring the exchange of other information that in certain situations may prove useful .
Every time such information is exchanged there are , of course , potential pitfalls : at the very least there are the different legal systems in the Member States and the different classifications of the same acts .
In extreme cases this may involve the boundary between a crime and a minor misdemeanour .
Personally , I am not happy that Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra was appointed rapporteur for this report despite being accused of non-cooperation with the Spanish police in connection with misleading information implicating ETA in the Madrid train attack .
Where is the political and human responsibility of the former head of the Spanish police ?
To conclude , my group has significant reservations regarding this report .
( PT ) Mr President , I must begin by referring to the last speech .
It is unacceptable here in this Chamber for attempts to be made at curtailing the parliamentary and political rights of any MEP whose rights have not been curtailed either by decision of this Parliament or by legal decision in his or her own country .
We cannot accept this kind of political persecution of Mr Diaz De Mera Consuegra , who has a distinguished record in combating crime and defending justice as a professional in his own Member State and who has been an outstanding Member of this House .
The report before us today is further proof of his political ability and of the rigour that has characterised both his parliamentary work and his professional life .
I should like to say to Mr Frattini that I am firmly behind everything he said in relation to the Council 's attitude .
This measure is a much-needed one , and it is a great shame that the Council did not go further , in terms of both trust between the Member States and Parliament 's involvement .
In any event , I share everything that other speakers have said regarding the need to look into criminal background in detail and regarding the fact that the sharing of this information between the Member States constitutes a value-added in combating crime , in terms of identifying suspects , supporting criminal investigations and determining the severity of a punishment .
I should like to finish by saying that I also agree with those who say that the Council must act more quickly in adopting , on the one hand , the framework decision on procedural guarantees for suspects and defendants in criminal proceedings and , on the other , the framework decision on data protection in the third pillar , for which the rapporteur was Mrs Roure , a further essential element in striking an appropriate balance in the legal measures in the sector .

( ES ) Mr President , I have requested the floor in order to rebut some unacceptable personal remarks , but I have essentially requested the floor in order to thank my colleague , Mr Coelho , who has spoken not just as a friend , but also with knowledge of the facts .
I will just make one comment demanding a correction and an apology from Mr Kohlíček .
Mr Kohlíček , the only possible explanations for your extremely unfortunate comments tonight in this House are ignorance , bad faith or some immoral purpose .
I am sure , Mr Kohlíček , that you have heard - I hope you have heard - of something called presumption of innocence .
I am sure you have heard of the European Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights and Article 48 thereof .
I am sure you have heard of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948 and Article 11 thereof .
I do not imagine that you are familiar - and there is no reason why you should be familiar - with Article 24 of the Spanish Constitution .
But all free and democratic Constitutions contain their Article 48 , Article 11 or Article 24 .
I therefore hope that , when you are in a position to understand what the presumption of innocence means , and , in particular , when you are in a position to properly understand a case about which , to judge from what you have said , you clearly know absolutely nothing , you will be capable of making a private and public apology , and I shall be willing to accept it .
Yours was an unfortunate and unacceptable intervention with which to end the debate tonight , Mr Kohlíček .
( Applause from the right and from the centre )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Framework decision on combating racism and xenophobia ( debate )
The next item is the report by Martine Roure , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council concerning the progress of the negotiations on the framework decision on action to combat racism and xenophobia .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , the European Union is based on humanist values , of tolerance , multiculturalism and protection of fundamental rights .
We share strong values that should be protected .
The fight against racism and xenophobia is one of our priorities , but we must bear in mind Article 10 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is devoted to freedom of thought , conscience and religion while respecting the inalienable right to freedom of expression , in accordance with Article 11 of this same Charter .
The Commission presented a proposal for a Framework Decision on racism and xenophobia in November 2001 , in order to bring closer together the legislative provisions of Member States in relation to racist and xenophobic offences and to fight more effectively against racism and xenophobia in Europe .
Until now , and despite an initial opinion issued by the European Parliament in July 2002 , this Framework Decision has been at a standstill .
In spite of the efforts of several Presidencies , Member States have still not been able to reach an agreement on the definition of punishable behaviour and the level of corresponding penalties to be imposed .
It is , therefore , absolutely essential to have a European instrument that makes it possible to combat racism and xenophobia .
Recent statistics show that racism and intolerance are on the increase .
The growth in extreme right-wing parties in Europe and , unfortunately , within our own Parliament , obliges us to strongly condemn any speech that incites hatred .
This Framework Decision obliges us , however , to find a fair balance between freedom of expression and sanctions for offensive behaviour .
The freedom to mock and criticise certain excesses , be they political or religious , are necessary in all democracies .
The European Council has finally come to an agreement on this subject and we are pleased about this .
Indeed , the European Union must spread a strong political message to fight against public expressions of racism or hatred .
We cannot allow ourselves to fail again on a text that is symbolic for the European Union .
I should like to thank the German Presidency for this strong message , which confirms that Europe is not just a great market , but is working for the defence of the fundamental rights of all European citizens .
This new compromise is the fruit of long and difficult negotiations and we are aware that , of necessity , it has its weaknesses .
Nonetheless , I want this political compromise to constitute a minimum level of harmonisation that will allow Member States to go further in future , and I am particularly pleased by the addition of a review clause which will make it possible to achieve a higher level of harmonisation in future years .
Having said that , in order to compensate for these weaknesses , I call on the Commission to present in parallel a proposal for a directive on the fight against all the forms of discrimination listed in Article 13 of the Treaty , in order to strengthen European legislation in this area .
I know , in fact , that Mr Špidla is working towards this , I think .
I hope that we shall soon have a proposal for a directive .
Finally , this political agreement on the framework decision has brought about substantial changes in the text in comparison with the Commission 's first proposal on which Parliament gave its opinion .
Consequently , Parliament should be consulted again in the next few weeks .
We will issue our opinion quickly , you can be sure of that , because we have all worked hard for several months .
We are all set .
This instrument is absolutely necessary for us to live in a world at peace , in which everyone is respected with their differences , beliefs and ways of life .
This instrument is essential if we are to put an end to hatred and racism in a united and fraternal Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mrs Roure for her speech and for her report .
The political agreement reached at the Council last April , after five years of negotiations , was certainly highly significant .
This agreement , albeit on a less ambitious version of the framework decision than the Commission 's original proposal , in fact ensures that from the moment the framework decision enters into force and is transposed in each Member State , there will no longer be any safe haven in Europe for those who incite racial hatred , racism and xenophobia .
This represents a political success .
I appreciate that the text of the framework decision contains penal provisions that could have been much harsher .
I would have preferred stricter legislation .
However , as the rapporteur has just said , we had to accept a compromise because , it being a framework decision , the principle of unanimity meant that we could not set our sights as high as we would have liked to .
Nevertheless , for the first time we have a common rule , stipulating that behaviour inciting hatred or discrimination based on race , skin colour or religion must be punished with criminal sanctions in all Member States .
Consider how important it is to punish behaviour inciting anti-Semitic or Islamophobic hatred at a time in which we are talking about integrating immigrants from outside the European Union into our communities .
One of the main issues has certainly been to find the balance between criminal punishment for such behaviour , which is not free expression of thought but concrete incitement to commit violent acts and must be punished as such , and due respect for freedom of expression .
We have worked hard on this aspect and I believe that the final result is satisfactory .
The measure is not intended to punish ideas , but behaviour inciting other people to commit criminal acts , to attack , to wound , to kill and to commit real acts of violence .
All this has absolutely nothing do with freedom of thought .
We are not punishing ideas , but those who , on the basis of a mistaken , if legitimate , idea , move from this idea to behaviour inciting others to attack and to commit criminal acts .
This is the boundary between freedom of expression of thought , which must be safeguarded , and concrete incitement to violence .
This is why I believe this decision to be significant .
It is for this reason that we have established the principle - which is highlighted in Mrs Roure 's report - by which a racist motive shall be considered an aggravating circumstance in all offences .
If an ordinary offence involving physical violence is committed for racist motives , it must be more severely punished , since not only incitement as such , but also racist motives , make a given offence more serious than the act itself .
This is an important principle , and I believe that the fact that all 27 Member States have accepted it unanimously puts the European Union in a better position to uphold this key value listed in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to apologise for Mrs Esteves , shadow rapporteur for my group , who unfortunately will not be able to take part in this debate .
I thank Mrs Roure for her work , her application and her perseverance because , yes , perseverance was needed to keep on demanding that the Council reach an extremely necessary agreement .
More than five years of negotiation to reach a proposal for a framework decision on racism and xenophobia : is it really reasonable to have stalled for so long measures that are so fundamental to the lives of our fellow citizens ?
I should like also to warmly thank the German Presidency for succeeding in breaking the deadlock on this text .
The European Union is founded on communities with values , universal values of human dignity , freedom , equality and solidarity .
By uniting , we have all decided to share those values .
Ladies and gentlemen , declarations of good intentions are not much use , if they are not followed up with strong actions .
That is why it was necessary to act , to act practically , so that intolerance , in all its forms , should no longer poison our continent .
Harmonisation of the legislation of Member States in relation to offences of a racist nature was vital .
Henceforth , every Member State will have to make it an imprisonable offence to publicly justify , deny or crudely trivialise crimes of genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes , and I am satisfied about that .
Nonetheless , I will not hide from you that my satisfaction is not absolute : yes , the adoption of this text sends a strong signal , especially in this European Year of Equal Opportunities , but I am afraid that its added value may be minimal .
In fact derogations are anticipated and flexibility accepted .
Therefore , behaviour will be penalised only if it could incite to violence or hatred towards a group of people .
How , then , is it tolerable for a revisionist to be able to express his views in some European countries in the name of freedom of expression ?
Freedom of expression stops when the rights of others are flouted .
I completely understand that there are different cultural and legal traditions in our Member States , but the fight against racism must not be the subject of any compromise .
Tolerating certain expressions of hatred is , in actual fact , accepting them .
Ladies and gentlemen , as elected representatives , we shall have to be clear and condemn forcibly these acts of violence .
We must remain vigilant because our fight in defence of human rights and for respect for the Charter of Fundamental Rights is far from over .
I ask you , tomorrow , to vote very broadly in favour of this text .
This battle is ours .
It is an honour to our European democracies and an honour to our Parliament .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I am not only indebted to Mrs Roure for her report , it also receives my unqualified support .
Racism is a persistent and growing problem in European societies .
This is why more and better instruments are needed to address it , including at European level , should this prove necessary .
As racism knows no boundaries , neither should measures to address it therefore .
Last year , my resolution on racism in football met with overwhelming support in this House , and I hope that this will also be the case for Mrs Roure 's report tomorrow .
In the resolution on football , we called for a tougher approach , but a European stand on racism should not confine itself to football alone .
Europe must promote the safeguarding of equal treatment for all its citizens .
This is why proper education is needed , as is Europe 's active commitment in favour of social inclusion in a bid to isolate those advocating racism and xenophobia and to strive towards a tolerant and diverse society .
I am pleased that hate crimes are being highlighted in particular in Mrs Roure 's report .
I also endorse the appeal not to introduce a hierarchy among the different grounds for discrimination .
All forms of discrimination , including Islamophobia therefore , should be addressed in the same tough way .
The report mentions 9 million victims of racism and xenophobia .
This is probably an accurate figure , but as I see it , 494 million citizens are the victims of racism , because if racism goes unpunished , then this has a damaging effect on society as a whole .
Europe is there for everyone , and we should , above all , keep it this way .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all I would like to pay my compliments to Martine Roure , who has once again done a great job .
I would also like to commend the German Presidency for having secured this deal , but again I note with deep regret that the Council is absent during this important debate .
However , I am very happy that this legal instrument has finally been adopted .
It is long awaited and very welcome , but now much depends on whether and how it will be used in practice , because a legal instrument making hate crimes a criminal offence is only the last resort .
A legal instrument will not eliminate racism .
Only our own attitude and our own mentality can do that , and we need much more than just this framework decision .
We need to promote equality , respect and tolerance , and that should be more than just words .
Each of us has a responsibility in Europe .
Legislation is not enough and we should lead by example .
I very much concur with Mr Gaubert , who made reference to statements by people in public .
That does not just apply to the average citizen but , even more so , to prominent politicians and religious leaders - in short , opinion leaders .
It is therefore regrettable that even prominent people in Europe have recently made statements that incite hatred and violence .
They contribute to a climate of intolerance and hatred .
I refer , for example , to the President of one of the Member States , who made very denigrating remarks about Roma people .
It is unacceptable and I think that Parliament at least should speak out against such unacceptable statements .
I am also referring to a Member of this House , Mr Giertych , who issued an anti-Semitic leaflet .
Fortunately we reacted very strongly to that .
I am also thinking of Mr Wilders in my own country , who made the most outrageous remarks in a debate yesterday , to which nobody reacted .
That is another problem : we allow these extremists to set the political agenda .
Even the mainstream parties have adapted their language to the language spoken by extremists .
So we should look very carefully at our own statements and our own behaviour .
Finally , I very much agree with the call for the legislation to be extended to cover other groups , because we all know that hatred and violence against homosexuals is rampant in Europe , even in my own country , unfortunately , as it is against women .
Sometimes we tend to forget that , but there are many statements that somehow seem to make violence against women acceptable .
The next step should be to create a legal instrument that condemns incitement to hatred and violence against all groups of society .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her commitment on this ongoing dossier , which should have been on the statute books before now .
As others have said , we also think that action is important .
Last year , we saw a rise in anti-Semitic and anti-Muslim hate crimes in many parts of the European Union , or at least those parts which record such crimes effectively .
As others have said , it is the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All and many of our citizens , residents and visitors still face discrimination and hate crimes simply because of the colour of their skin , their beliefs or because they have committed the perceived crime of being foreign .
The Director of Human Rights First stated that ' victimising one member of a particular group threatens all members of that group and causes immeasurable harm to society at large ' .
My group sees this framework decision as a complement to existing legislation , but we also want to see existing legislation fully implemented .
We support the call to be reconsulted on this dossier , and we have some concerns , for example that provisions for mutual assistance between Member States have been removed , which may make it more difficult to combat cross-border racism .
We know that there is significant international organisation , for example , among groups based on despicable concepts of racial supremacy .
We have co-signed the constructive amendments to this report .
Other amendments represent to us part of the problem , but we look to the Council for constructive and forceful action in conjunction with Parliament .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mrs Roure for her persistent work with the Council in putting together this framework decision .
It has taken a long time , but we can say that we have at last reached an important milestone .
It is quite right that we should combat racism and xenophobia with legal instruments , but I think that above all we must implement widespread cultural action .
I believe that this Parliament also has the means to initiate an effective information campaign in Member States , to ensure that this framework decision can be organised into a great cultural battle of ideas .
I believe that it is necessary to fight against racism and xenophobia , because the data provided by the European Monitoring Centre are alarming .
There are increasing reports of racist and xenophobic behaviour , and it is my belief that we must tackle those who frequently attempt to incite racial and religious hatred .
This can be achieved primarily through the media , which are all too often used to communicate messages that are highly dangerous for society .
I believe that the initiative adopted by the Council , but above all the work carried out by Mrs Roure in this Parliament , will serve as an effective tool for the political efforts and for continuing this work .
As Mr Frattini has said , we need to establish the limits within which there is a balance between freedom of expression and the fight against racism and xenophobia .
I believe that this is vital and that we need to implement strong political measures and important cultural action .
( LT ) Mr President , Commissioner , colleagues , in the Berlin Declaration adopted on 25 March this year it is stated : ' European integration has shown that we have learned from our history full of bloody conflicts and suffering ' .
I believe this is so , and one proof thereof is the document we are considering today .
The basic resolution defines the following as crimes : fomenting hatred and violence , public endorsement of genocidal crimes , crimes against humanity and war crimes , and refusal to acknowledge these crimes or immense trivialisation of these crimes .
The basic resolution limits itself to crimes perpetrated on the basis of race , skin colour , religion , ancestry , or national or ethnic origin .
However , it does not deal with similar crimes committed for other reasons , such as hate and violence against certain people because of their political beliefs , or their affiliation with a certain social group , or the social situation of groups of individuals - for example , the crimes perpetrated by totalitarian régimes .
I think the time is coming for a supplementary document which could deal with fomenting hatred and violence , public endorsement of genocidal crimes , crimes against humanity and war crimes directed against groups of individuals defined by criteria other than race , skin colour , religion , ancestry , or national or ethnic origin , which I have already mentioned .
Such a document might address , for example , social situation or political beliefs , refusal to acknowledge these crimes , or trivialisation of these crimes .
Criminal responsibility could be laid down in these instances .
The European Commission 's initiative in fostering public discussion at the European level of genocidal crimes , crimes against humanity , and war crimes perpetrated by totalitarian régimes and those who endorse them , grossly distort them or diminish them , is welcome and worthy of support .
On the basis of these discussions , after two or three years it should be possible to submit another proposal concerning a fundamental resolution on these crimes .
( LT ) Mr President , I congratulate the author of the report , Martine Roure , on her courage , and extra loud praise goes to Germany , which has proclaimed adoption of a resolution on the fight against racism and xenophobia to be a priority of its presidency .
The idea of the European Union is based on tolerance , trust and peaceful coexistence of nations .
Unfortunately , in recent times the number of racist and xenophobic attacks is not diminishing ; instead it is getting close to 10 million per annum .
Racist , xenophobic and anti-Semitic elements are being used not just by extremist parties - even the apparently more stable mass-membership parties and their leaders do not shy away from them .
Even in this Chamber and in some national parliaments it is not uncommon to hear speeches steeped in extreme nationalism and xenophobia .
I agree with the rapporteur that in a culture based on rights and freedoms , criminal law is the last resort to be used desirably as little as possible .
However , it is inevitable that penal policy will have to be used to tighten up this area .
I fully support Commissioner Frattini 's opinion that a racist motive in a crime should mean an increased penalty for that crime .
No less a priority is education , likewise dialogue between different religions and cultures , and a measured and thoughtful look at the past .
Even when people are feeling their most tolerant , if discussions start about whose tragedy is the greatest and whose pain hurts the most , this is the road to the trampling of tolerance and lack of trust in one another .
For the new countries of the European Union the issue of restoring historical justice is particularly sensitive .
The time is coming for an attempt to reconcile the attitudes of old EU members and the new countries to the tragedies and painful events of the 20th century .
This needs to be done without some parties feeling a monopoly on morality , able to force their opinion on other nations .
The most important aim is not to exacerbate , but to heal wounds , to learn from history and to block the path for any rebirth of racism and xenophobia .
Mr President , whether it is the increase of Islamophobia or the sharp rise in anti-Semitic attacks , intolerance in Europe is on the rise .
It is long overdue and more important than ever for the EU to remain firm by adopting legislation to counteract these worrying phenomena .
This text does not , in itself , constitute the concrete action needed to address the persistent problems of racism and xenophobia in Europe today .
It could be stronger by using the International Convention on the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination as a benchmark .
Secondly , this legislation must reaffirm Europe 's commitment to our core values of respect for diversity and intolerance of discrimination , a commitment that must amount to so much more than the sum of the political compromises of the Council 's text .
In the current political climate , where support for right-wing extremism across Europe has brought racism into the mainstream , moderates must use this legislation and the dialogue that will surround its implementation to take back ownership of the diversity debate .
We must rebuild the bonds of trust between divided communities and we must ensure that feelings of alienation are replaced with a much-needed sense of security .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr Frattini , ladies and gentlemen , first , I am delighted to say that I share Mr Gaubert 's kind words for Mrs Roure .

She is an MEP to whose outstanding work we have become accustomed , and she has once again proved this and , as Mr Catania correctly pointed out , her tenacity .
Crimes of a racist nature continue to be a constant , persistent problem in all Member States .
The first step must always be that of prevention .
It is necessary to try to prevent racism and xenophobia by means of a policy of education as early as possible and by means of political and social discourse aimed at preventing the dissemination of hate and the promotion of xenophobia and racism .
The figures from the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia confront us with this reality in the EU .
Whilst it is important to recognise , in legal terms , that the Member States have legal provisions at their disposal , it is also necessary to point out that there are major differences between these provisions , and that harmonisation needs to take place .
This framework decision is therefore welcome insofar as it comprises a certain level of harmonisation of the Member States ' criminal law and improved mutual assistance in combating racism and xenophobia .
With this initiative , Parliament has presented its recommendations and adopted its positions on an issue on which - let us not forget - it has been much more consistent than the Council .
( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Nazism and communism are two banks of one river .
Nazism has been studied in detail by academics and politicians ; it is well known and condemned by the international community .
Germany itself has contributed to this process , understanding and acknowledging its historical mistakes .
We know little about the other bank of the worst crimes of the past century - communism .
It is hardly discussed ; therefore , its crimes against humanity have not yet been acknowledged on a global scale .
About 20 million people died during the Nazi period and the Holocaust ; but 100 million people of various nationalities became the victims of communism .
I support the Council 's basic resolution and the declaration adopted with the basic resolution , in which the Council condemns the crimes committed by totalitarian régimes .
I invite Member States to continue the work of exposing the crimes committed by communist régimes , assessing them appropriately and supplementing the basic resolution .
I invite the European Parliament to initiate discussions about the crimes of communism and to make its own input by acknowledging communism to be a crime against humanity .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Roure , for her excellent report on this important but , it seems , highly controversial subject .
It is important since it is estimated that millions of people fall victim to racist crime each year .
It is controversial since it involves striking a balance between effective action to combat racism and xenophobia on one hand and respect for freedom of expression on the other .
In fact , the subject apparently seems to be so controversial that the text currently under discussion has been the product of several years of negotiations .
This of course begs the question , was it strictly necessary that so much time was and still is spent before arriving at a suitable solution ?
Let us think of the millions of people who have suffered as a result of this serious time lag .
Is the reason for this extreme delay purely technical politics , or even negligent indifference ?
Or is there some underlying attempt not to proceed speedily as some influential political forces are not so favourable to such action and are themselves bordering on being racist and xenophobic ?
Perhaps the Commissioner can reassure that the latter is not the case at all and that my fears are utterly unfounded .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - I have become increasingly concerned by the rise of racism and xenophobia across the EU , both in new Member States and established Member States .
In a Union which has the free movement of people as a central pillar , this is doubtless an issue which requires Community action .
Indeed , initiatives like the European Year of Equal Opportunities , which we are currently in , are key to spreading best practise in eradicating discrimination .
It is important that these efforts are redoubled in order to counter the rise in Islamophobia , Anti-Semitism and discrimination against other minority groups , especially those from new Member States .
We , as a House , and all of the European Union institutions and Member States must do our utmost to rid Europe of the scourge of racism and xenophobia , and make clear that it will not be tolerated .
Decision-making in the common European asylum system ( debate )
The next item is the report by Hubert Pirker , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on asylum : practical cooperation : quality of decision-making in the common European asylum system .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , the proposals we have drawn up in this report take us one step closer to a common European asylum system .
The report , which - I assume - will receive broad support from Parliament , represents a clear declaration of commitment by the European Parliament to a functioning European asylum system that aims to take speedy , fair , sure decisions in the interests of those concerned .
It is based on closer cooperation between authorities , cooperation that should have the objectives of building and increasing trust between Member States , of speeding up decisions and thereby providing help more quickly than before to those with a genuine claim to asylum , and of enabling us to combat abuses of the system accordingly .
I have been able to highlight 10 core demands , and I should like to express my particular thanks to the shadow rapporteurs for their support and to the Commission for its excellent proposal , on which this discussion has been based .
These 10 core demands are as follows .
The first concerns the establishment of uniform procedures so that speedy , sure decisions can be taken .
The second demand is for the introduction of a list of safe countries of origin , to enable a very clear decision , depending on the individual case , as to whether or not a claim is justified .
The third is the drawing-up of a joint database on the situation in countries of origin , so that all the competent civil servants in the various Member States have the same information at their disposal regarding this situation and thus are all in a position to take sure decisions on the basis of the same information source .
The fourth is that we need highly skilled civil servants to take the decisions .
This is the rationale behind the proposal for the development of a European curriculum , so that qualifications are acquired according to the same standards in all Member States .
The fifth demand is that we help Member States who are under particular pressure from migration flows by temporarily - for as long as necessary - providing teams of experts comprising members from the various Member States , to enable the speedy completion of asylum procedures .
The sixth point is that we need to improve measures for the repatriation of persons , more particularly those who have not been granted refugee status or whose refugee status has been revoked .
The seventh point concerns prevention , and I have already mentioned it many times . We have to launch intensive information campaigns to inform potential migrants in countries of origin and transit of the risks inherent in illegal immigration and the consequences of denial of refugee status , and also inform them of legal means of entry into the European Union .
The eighth point concerns the European Support Office .
The committee disagreed with the Commission proposal on this .
I think it would be better to provide the Commission with more staff and funds than to set up yet another agency , as I believe this would be more efficient and economical .
The ninth point is that we must demand that Member States do indeed transpose the directives or regulations adopted at European level .
In this regard , a ' table of equivalences ' has been proposed - namely one in which Member States set out the measures with which they believe they have transposed the corresponding Community requirements .
The tenth and final point concerns the sharing out of the burden that is afforded by , for example , teams of experts providing support to enable faster completion of procedures in exceptional situations .
Indirectly , the fact of having uniform procedures would also share out the burden to a certain degree , as it would avoid people heading in larger numbers for countries where procedures are lax or based on incorrect information .
This should not be the case .
We have endeavoured to present a catalogue of points highlighting in specific terms how we believe that , in future , help can be provided quickly to genuine refugees to whom refugee status has been granted and , equally , it can be made clear to others that they cannot attain this status .
I should like to express my thanks for the cooperation and support I have received .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , I should especially like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Pirker , for the report , which contains a series of very useful recommendations .
Many of these recommendations address the level of ambition that a truly comprehensive common European asylum system should have .
Many of the concerns expressed by the European Parliament in this report are addressed in our Green Paper on the future of asylum policy , which I proposed on 6 June and which the Commission has adopted , and on which I intend to launch a broad European debate .
The ultimate objective pursued at European level is thus to establish a level playing field .
Asylum seekers should have access to protection under equivalent conditions in all Member States - that is the first precondition .
The goal pursued in the first stage was to harmonise Member States ' legal frameworks on the basis of common minimum standards , but the goal in the second stage should be to achieve both a higher standard and greater equality of protection across the EU , as well as greater solidarity between Member States .
It will be necessary to identify existing gaps and deficits and to pursue further legislative harmonisation while guaranteeing high standards .
For example , models need to be explored for the design of a single procedure for assessing applications for refugee status and for subsidiary protection .
It is also necessary to reflect on the need for fuller harmonisation and clarification of the European rules regarding the reception conditions granted to asylum seekers .
Reflection is also needed on whether the criteria for allocating responsibility currently applicable under the Dublin system should be complemented in order take other factors into account , such as more equitable distribution between Member States on the basis of their capacity to process asylum applications and to offer long-term prospects to recognised refugees .
This is a very important point , raised by a number of Member States , particularly by our Maltese friends , who stressed the importance of integrating the current Dublin regulation .
I am studying this point .
Based on the results of this wide debate and after a public hearing to be held on 18 October with the full involvement of Parliament , I will issue a policy plan at the beginning of 2008 .
The policy plan will set out further measures to construct the comprehensive asylum system along with a timeframe for adoption .
I am confident that with the due institutional framework which will fully involve the European Parliament in the legislative process - I refer to the codecision procedure - we will be able to match this high level of ambition .
On the specific issues addressed in Mr Pirker 's report concerning practical cooperation , there is a need to enhance converge of practice between Member States .
Training is certainly one of the areas where practical cooperation is taking place .
At the moment , the development of a common curriculum is under way .
We will establish a first pilot European-wide portal on the exchange of country of origin information by the end of this year , in a few months ' time .
For the time being , this will only connect some of the existing databases and will be accessible to selected national authorities , but my services also intend to carry out a feasibility study on how to provide a better structural support to practical cooperation activities ; the idea is to have a European support office .
It should be remembered that the European Refugee Fund can provide , through Community actions , financial support to Member States to implement projects , in cooperation with the United Nations , to improve the quality of their asylum systems .
In the new World Programme for 2007 , specific mention is made of this point .
The Commission has also proposed to amend the European Refugee Fund , precisely to provide rapid financial support to those Member States that face particular pressure because of sudden arrivals of migrants at their borders , some of whom are in need of international protection .
In addition , the new budget line ' Preparatory action : Migration management - Solidarity in action ' , which is the name of the project , will be used to assist Member States faced with particular difficulties .
We will fund it with a supplementary amount of money of about EUR 7 million .
Finally , of course , as the rapporteur has just said , one of our main political objectives is to make a clear distinction between economic migrants on the one hand and true refugees on the other .
Thus , there will be credible European policies for the return of third-country nationals who are staying illegally , in full respect of their human rights and fundamental freedoms .
rapporteur on behalf of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has always been committed to setting up a common asylum system by 2010 .
The report by Mr Pirker , whom I congratulate for his excellent work , points out the necessity of maintaining this objective .
The purpose of creating a common asylum policy must be the protection of the individual and not the reduction or externalisation of asylum applications .
European policy must be based on the obligation to admit asylum seekers and the principle of non-refoulement , in accordance with the Geneva Convention .
Working out a uniform status , improving the quality of decision-making , single European procedures on compilation and examination , common use of information on countries of origin , and improving cooperation between Member States will , I hope , allow people whose situation requires urgent protection to enter European territory in complete safety and to see their application examined as it should be .
Nonetheless , the need to improve cooperation in relation to information on countries of origin should not be limited to keeping a generalised list of third countries , as the reliability of such a list would be uncertain .
On the contrary , assessment case by case on the basis of the rights of the individual needs to be introduced .
Europe must also share between the different Member States the burdens and responsibilities of its asylum and immigration policy by helping countries such as Malta , which are no longer capable of absorbing further influxes .
Furthermore , I pointed out with concern , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , the total absence of gender issues in the European Commission 's communication .
Aspects relating to women 's rights as well as protection of minors are completely ignored .
The same goes for the rights of homosexuals and transsexuals .
I consider also that gender-based persecutions , that is marital and domestic violence , female genital mutilations , sexual abuse , crimes of honour , rape , forced marriages and crimes resulting from enforcement of Sharia law , must be legally considered as sufficient reason for granting asylum .
The Commission must establish practical criteria for granting asylum or a special humanitarian status for women suffering violence of this kind .
I also highlighted the need to put in place special training for people authorised to admit asylum seekers , in particular women , children and older people , and to provide reception centres suitable for these people .
I am delighted that the rapporteur has taken note of this , although I regret that his report devotes only one paragraph to these concerns relating to gender , which seem to me to be of vital importance 's the more so because we can no longer ignore the lack of respect by most reception centres for the basic human rights of the individual .
I realise , however , after listening to the Commissioner , that this is a subject he feels strongly about , for which I thank him , and so I have high hopes .


on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Pirker and to say to him - although I am sure Mr Weber will do so with greater authority - that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will of course support his report , which is aimed at improving cooperation and the decision-making process in asylum policy .
I wish to congratulate Mr Frattini on his speech and I must tell him that this is an issue that very much reflects the difficulty we are having in making decisions .
In an area without borders , an area of free movement , asylum is perhaps the clearest example of an area in which there needs to be harmonisation between the Member States and the creation of a common system .
The point is that we are working towards 2010 and , if all goes according to plan , we should have a common asylum system up and running by then .
I am aware that this is a tricky issue on which a lowest common denominator , ' race to the bottom ' , strategy has been adopted , which leaves the way open for differences between Member States and for the continuation of so-called ' asylum shopping ' .
I should like to raise three brief points on issues that I feel are essential .
Firstly , I feel it is necessary to create a single EU-wide procedure to ensure that decisions are taken quickly and are duly substantiated and fair .
Secondly , I wish to echo the view expressed by Mr Frattini , that the quality of decisions depends on the quality of information .
It is therefore necessary to deliver the best possible procedure in terms of gathering and exchanging information .
Lastly , I feel it is necessary to strengthen cooperation between the Member States , which also means addressing the issue of solidarity and burden-sharing .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I would like to welcome this report because over recent months we have clearly seen a fall in the overall number of asylum-seekers coming to the European Union from the key asylum-producing countries .
But that number is of course now increasing , partly as a result of Iraq , and the number of people coming to the European Union because of extreme poverty - the people that we see coming to Malta , Lampedusa and so on - is a huge issue for this House and for the European Union .
Because of this , any report which moves towards a better procedure and a better common policy on asylum is welcome .
The compromises which we have had in this report are very welcome and the cooperation from the rapporteur , Mr Pirker , is very welcome also .
What are we trying to achieve in this report ?
In referring directly to what Mr Pirker has listed , and to Mr Frattini 's speech , we believe that the single procedure is extremely important .
Decision-making with one operation for the assessment of applications granting refugee status and granting access to subsidiary protection is extremely important .
This kind of efficiency in asylum decision-making is vital .
We also believe that the quality of asylum decision-making is extremely poor across the European Union .
To increase the quality of asylum decisions - and I speak from my own experience as a lawyer having dealt with asylum applications - is vital .
We know that , in creating this quality of asylum decision-making , we need open systems with information that can be genuinely assessed : sophisticated information , information which can be cross-referenced .
What we probably do not want to see are databases which are , perhaps , for officials only , but ones that can be examined by outside experts .
Many Member States currently have this quality of decision-making , and it is extremely important .
In terms of the role of the Commission , we also want to see the door kept open to a European agency , because we want to see the Commission 's role being full and resourced .
We cannot have it both ways ; we cannot have a role for the Commission in the issue of asylum for the European Union and , on the other hand , not pay for it and resource it .
Finally , there will be differences between our parties on the common safe list , but the compromises we have sought to create , I think , are worthy of support in this House .
On Dublin II , we know that there are imperfections in burden sharing , one of the most vital issues in this report , and on the issue of asylum in the European Union .
We need to strive towards making Dublin II and burden sharing a reality .
If this report can move us towards a better common asylum system , then it is worthy of support in this House , and we in the Socialist Group will be supporting this report fully .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the rapporteur 's intent is commendable ; he has put together an excellent report aimed at rationalising asylum practices and making them more efficient .
Nonetheless , we must continue to work along these lines , not least to correct the legal and practical interpretation of this institution , which , precisely because it is so crucial from a humanitarian point of view , must not be subject to abuse or be confused with other areas and other concerns such as economic migration , which have nothing to do with the inalienable principle of the right of asylum .
Furthermore , for reasons of decency , we cannot allow an institution of such importance to be used by criminal organisations , as was shown recently by the highly significant findings of an investigation carried out by our police in Italy , which routed an extremely dangerous gang active in various criminal sectors and using the very asylum system itself to recruit people to carry out crime .
I am sure that the Commission is deeply concerned about these problems , which we must never tire of highlighting , in order to protect this institution that is so important .
I would also like to point out the need to create reception areas for asylum seekers in safe third countries outside of the European Union , since Dum Bruxelles o Strasburgo consulitur , Saguntum expugnatur [ while Brussels or Strasbourg talk , Saguntum falls ] , in the sense that the landings continue , the assault by criminal organisations continues and , above all , this tragedy of trafficking in human flesh continues , the consequences of which we are all aware of .
We must also be on full alert to ensure that asylum is not granted to members of fundamentalist Islamist organisations .
This does in fact happen and it is often in this way that the threat of Al Qaeda and its presence in Europe increases .
I do not agree , however , that the European Court of Justice should be given greater powers on asylum , thus taking jurisdiction away from Member States .
In particular , I would like to invite the Council to restore to the Court of Justice all of its powers on preliminary rulings .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I am not quite sure how we got from the subject of the need for high standards of protection to al-Qa 'ida ; I will try to concentrate on the report rather than what is not in it .
My group would also like to thank the rapporteur for his work on this report , even though , on some compromises , I think all of us could feel the eggshells cracking as we moved towards agreement .
As has already been said , the report covers a number of important points : the high standards we expect , the primacy of protection , the issue of raising the quality of decision-making , the availability of sound country information to all those involved in the process , effective staff training , the use of the quality initiative ( recently seen in the UK , which certainly needed some help ) and the involvement of the UNHCR .
All these points are necessary , because the people making decisions are deciding on what are matters of life and death for many of the people they see .
We welcome the recognition of the need for a single procedure in all Member States and find it very interesting that we are talking about reviewing the role of the Court of Justice this week .
This might be a good time to pass that point on to the Council .
We are also looking forward to the debate on Dublin II , although our group will support Amendment 17 on that .
We agree that the Commission lacks sufficient resources to monitor effectively the implementation and quality of the common asylum policy .
We hope that our political groups will take up that message when looking at the budget and decisions in that area .
We know that there is disagreement on the Support Office , but , like the Socialists , we would welcome the opportunity to hear the Commission to spell out its intentions in that regard in order to see whether we want to move ahead with that proposal .
We have tabled no amendments to this report , but we shall support the constructive amendments relating to the issue of safe third countries .
However , there is no way that we can support some of the amendments .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , 20 June , is World Refugee Day , which makes this debate particularly fitting .
There is however great hypocrisy in our debate , as just two days ago this Parliament decided to remove the issue of Iraqi refugees from the list of urgent matters .
This is an extremely important issue , given that we are talking about over four million people fleeing an infamous and illegal war .
We should in fact be discussing this matter and the difficulties that the European Union has in receiving these refugees , the majority of whom are received outside of the European Union , and considering how these refugees are often received in our territory .
A European Parliament delegation recently visited Samo and noted that within the detention centre on that island - a horrifying place - there were Iraqi , Palestinian , Lebanese and Afghan asylum seekers , all people from war zones .
I therefore believe that we must think long and hard about the need to guarantee respect for the right of asylum , in order to prevent that which has unfortunately occurred frequently in Europe in recent years , namely mass expulsions and failure to honour the right of non-refoulement .
We have witnessed too many symbolic cases ; the fact is that over the last few years migratory pressure has increased and successful applications for asylum in Europe have decreased .
I believe that this is indicative of a problem that we have within the European Union .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I could not agree more with the 10-point emergency plan by Mr Pirker , whom I should like to warmly congratulate on this .
Last week , we were again shocked by the fact that people are drowning on their way to Europe .
Eleven people drowned near Lampedusa .
Today 's Dutch newspaper , Trouw , features the harrowing account of Somali refugees who tried to reach Yemen under adverse conditions .
We should therefore try to set up a better asylum procedure and at the same time take measures to distinguish asylum seekers from illegal immigrants as a matter of relevant urgency .
Whilst achieving better asylum policy thanks to practical cooperation may sound like a very good idea , it is unrealistic .
Practical cooperation is not enough .
We also need the political will to take the necessary steps .
When I read the Dutch newspapers about the Justice Ministers ' meeting in Luxembourg on Tuesday of last week , I get the impression that this political will is absent , because the ongoing issues in the discussion are the real deployment of people and equipment .
While we cannot agree on the common Frontex deployment , a common admission policy for refugees from Iraq , for example , is unlikely .
Without a common position on third country security , European official reports cannot be compiled , which is , after all , a precondition for moving harmonised asylum policy forward .
I anticipate major problems surrounding the implementation of the plan to compile a list of safe countries of origin .
Which sources are reliable ?
Can the sources of information from countries that are unsafe be made public ?
After all , it is highly dangerous to collect evidence against regimes in the grip of a dictatorship .
This is a double-edged sword though .
A list of safe countries includes countries with which we can forge trade relations , but if a country does not feature on the list of safe countries , refugees should be welcome .
It is then necessary to suspend trade relations with unsafe countries in order to promote human rights .
This is where big problems will arise .
It is unlikely that former French or British colonies that are currently in the grip of a brutal regime will be excluded from relations with the European Union .
I should like to hear from Commissioner Frattini how he will avert this problem .
In addition , harmonised asylum policy benefits from clarity .
Mr Catania has tabled an amendment in which he pleads in favour of open reception centres for asylum seekers and other immigrants .
In my country , asylum seekers stay in open asylum seeker centres .
Illegals are brought to closed centres , with good reason .
It strikes me as unwise to set up open reception camps on the Union 's external borders .
Support for asylum policy is bound to be undermined if people can move around freely without any valid documents .
If the European Union seeks to formulate a charitable and fair asylum policy , there must be a political will to back this up .
I call on the Council and Commission to display this will in a bid to prevent new victims .
( SK ) First of all , I too would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur for drafting the report on this serious topic .
I welcome the strengthening of practical cooperation between Member States in view of the need for solidarity in dealing with problems which Member States without internal borders cannot address effectively .
I concur with his view that decisions on granting refugee status should be taken more quickly , more fairly , and more predictably , which in itself is the ultimate objective of introducing a common European asylum system .
As a rapporteur expressing an opinion on EU strategy in the area of children 's rights , and specifically on the situation of children in developing countries , I deal with the issues of the children of refugees , children of immigrants without nationality and internally displaced children .
Many children of refugees and children seeking asylum are treated like adults , which leaves behind a lasting trauma .
Children suffer in refugee camps , where they very often become victims of neglect , violence , abuse , intolerance and inadequate legal protection .
Immigrants , refugees and displaced children account for 5 % of all asylum seekers .
This suggests that on their arrival in the country , such children should be assigned well-trained legal representatives who will be in a position to best represent their interests .

Mr President , I want to congratulate Mr Pirker for his excellent report and I am also glad to hear that the Commission supports the call of my country , Malta , for a fairer share of responsibility , even with respect to the Dublin Regulation .
In fact , any review of the Dublin Regulation must surely take into account the unintended effects of the current rules , whereby countries such as mine are being obliged to carry a disproportionate responsibility simply because they are border Member States .
To establish a fairer division of responsibility we need to ensure that solidarity is truly rendered meaningful .
So far , it has to be said that in EU policymaking ' solidarity ' has always meant granting financial assistance .
Now this is no longer sufficient .
We need to go beyond that .
A true meaning of solidarity must also mean something beyond throwing money at the problem ; beyond merely writing a cheque .
It must also mean sharing the burden , sharing the responsibility .
It must also mean opening up our borders to share with border Member States the responsibility of dealing with asylum seekers and others who make it often perilously , but alas illegally , to EU territory .
So in reviewing Dublin , I agree with the report that we need a fairer share of the burden .
Finally , one issue regarding timing : we are discussing the establishment of a common asylum system by 2010 . However , we all know that a common asylum system is not needed in 2010 .
It is urgently needed today .
So we should ask ourselves , how many lives will be lost before 2010 ?
How many things will go wrong before Member States rise above their national egotism and get there ?

( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner Frattini , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Pirker for a constructive report .
Following the discussions in the committee , the feeling is that we can support it .
Asylum policy is an area that EU citizens expect us to deal with together , because the problem concerned is a cross-border one .
Here in plenary and in the committee we have often discussed the current situation in the Mediterranean , which we MEPs have still not succeeded in resolving .
It is scandalous that people are still dying there every day .
There are both immigrants and asylum seekers in the group I come from .
Since the start of the war in Iraq , my own country of Sweden has welcomed more refugees - approximately 10 000 - than any other country in the whole of the EU , and we are not even one of the larger EU countries .
As Mr Pirker said , we must share the burden .
I therefore believe that we cannot just make declarations and pledges that we do not fulfil .
Instead , we must , as is proposed in the report , not only speed up our procedures for handling cases and make a considerable investment in exchanging and gathering information but also have the courage to say that we believe in an open Europe in the future .
Human trafficking must be brought to an end .
There must be an end to the trafficking of women and children led into prostitution and the sex industry .
It must no longer be possible to provide the EU with cheap labour whenever employers need it , only then to send the workers back home when the jobs concerned have been completed .
These are difficult issues , but we have an obligation to solve the problems if we are serious about introducing a common asylum procedure in 2010 .
For me - coming as I do from Sweden , which has always been generous in welcoming refugees - it is still absolutely crucial for us to talk in terms of an inventory of third countries , but every refugee 's case must still always be examined individually .
Otherwise , many refugees will continue to be discriminated against because they belong to a minority or because of their gender , background or sexual orientation or because they are fleeing a war where they perhaps belonged to the group that is not going to win .
I hope that this report means that we are now taking the next step and that all the EU countries and we MEPs will together assume responsibility not only for solving these urgent problems but also for finding long-term solutions .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the right to asylum is universal , and that is why we need a European response - which , to some degree , we have already given .
The Commission proposals are very good , and I should like to place on the record officially here that we can be very proud of our Commissioner for Justice and Home Affairs , who is doing a very good job .
The proposals our rapporteur , my colleague Mr Pirker , has presented are excellent .
Anyone managing to achieve support across the group divide for such a difficult issue has clearly done an excellent job , and I should like to thank the rapporteur for this .

Even though none of its representatives is present , I should like to thank the Council .
This evening would not have been possible , and we could not have taken all these decisions , if we had not had an active German Council Presidency in recent months .
Therefore , I should simply like to say ' thank you ' .
Judging by the lateness of the hour , the politicians working on home-affairs policy are the hard-working ones : we are still at work .
Therefore , I should like to express my sincere thanks , and refrain from using up my full speaking time so that we can go home earlier .
( PL ) Mr President , it is very important , in terms of cooperation and improving the quality of decision-making process within the framework of the common asylum system , to create greater flexibility in the use of the European Refugee Fund .
The rapporteur , whom I would like to thank for his excellent report , refers to this problem in a number of the points he raises .
Last year , we finished work on the legal basis for the forthcoming version of the Refugee Fund for the years 2008-2013 .
At the time , we already supported the additional proposal put forward by the Commission during the course of this work .
The Commission suggested that we should change the existing operating principles of the Fund and aim its activities more at areas such as harmonising practical cooperation between the Member States , providing aid in the event of pressure resulting from a particularly large influx of immigrants , as well as intra-Union migration and regional protection programmes in third countries .
This meant increasing spending on Community action from 7 % to 10 % , making the procedures for providing financial aid to countries experiencing sudden mass influx of asylum seekers more flexible , and allocating specific amounts within the distribution chain .
These sums vary from three to five thousand euros per person for intra-Union transfers and within the framework of regional protection programmes .
Special financial incentives have been introduced to provide aid to those particularly affected , namely children , those in need of medical aid or women .
Therefore , the Commission and Member States need to make effective use of the Fund .
We are waiting for guidelines , action plans and specific results in relation to the use of the Refugee Fund , which will significantly improve the situation of refugees in Europe .
I would like to once again thank the rapporteur for his excellent report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.25 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Consumer confidence in the digital environment ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Roithová on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on consumer confidence in the digital environment .
rapporteur . - ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that , after a year 's work , I and the shadow rapporteurs can now present to you the complete report on consumer confidence in the digital environment .
With this report Parliament is sending out a strong political plea to the Commission and the Member States to update the conditions for online business and to take steps to enhance consumer confidence as regards the most recent trends in the digital environment .
Businesses and consumers are waiting for unequivocal , simple , enforceable rules that will enhance online business culture in the European market .
The report is merely the start of the whole process .
I am aware that implementing it would involve a considerable amount of work for the Commission , which is already limited in terms of financial and human resources
Public hearings and studies have revealed some telling facts , to which we cannot turn a blind eye .
Just 6 % of consumers buy online from suppliers in other Member States .
One third do not receive the goods or services they order on account of their nationality , their country of residence or the country in which their payment card was issued .
Some modern electronic services providing digital content are only available to customers in the old EU-15 .
Users are bound by any number of digital contracts that they have simply clicked on and have not read .
They are therefore unaware that these contracts may contain a number of unfair and misleading contractual arrangements .
We have discovered that not even legal experts are capable of deciphering the exact content of digital contracts , for example , licensing arrangements with the end user .
Small businesses are unaware of their obligations in e-commerce and have difficulty in making their way around 27 different legal systems .
Consumers do not know their Internet rights , and indeed , there is no document summarising these rights .
Users are not sure what they can and cannot do with the digital content they have purchased .
They are afraid of resolving claims in another country and do not know about counterfeit medicines sold on the Internet .
We therefore propose the following : a worldwide campaign to be launched by the Commission to highlight the dangers of counterfeit medicines ; the creation of a Europe-wide early-warning system to combat fraudulent activities on the Internet ; and an extension to the scope of contracts on which bans are to be imposed due to unfair contractual arrangements .
The principle of the single market is less restriction and more opportunity .
Paradoxically , however , it is as though this principle did not apply to the electronic environment , despite the cross-border opportunities .
I would venture to say that 27 separate national markets are hampering the development of the information society in Europe , which lags behind that of the USA and Asia .
If we are to demolish the artificial or natural obstacles to e-commerce we will have to overcome the fragmented rules of the Member States .
This will be possible in the long term if the political will is there to achieve complete harmonisation .
Such a dynamic sector , however , calls for a quicker and more flexible solution .
This is why in the report I opted for coordinated work on voluntary standards , or rather super-standards , for example an optional standardised contract geared towards cross-border e-commerce .
The content must be agreed upon by business and consumer organisations , in which the Commission will have a vital role to play in terms of coordination .
Holders of the European trustmark for cross-border e-commerce must adhere to these standards .
Consumer organisations welcome the implementation of the trustmark and are committed to revealing and disclosing any misuse , with the help of existing technical and legal resources .
We also call for the formulation of a European Charter of Users ' Rights in the information society .
The European Parliament is one of the first parliaments in the world seeking to clarify consumer Internet rights .
If the Charter is widely accessible and available in all official languages , consumers will begin to demand their rights and businesses will begin to uphold the Charter and not to risk having to spend money on resolving disputes .
I feel that the report will act as an inspiration for improving standards in the digital environment .
I should now like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their outstanding help : Mrs Herczog , Mrs Rühle , Mr Schmidt and Mrs Jäätteenmäki and the assistants , in particular Mr Jirsa for his invaluable expert advice .
I also appreciate the support of the coordinators , the chairman and the secretariat of the committee and the services .
I was delighted with the constructive communication from consumer organisations , businesses and individual members of the Commission staff .
I should in particular like to commend Mrs Kuneva on her obliging and very open attitude .
She has embarked on her new post in the Commission in an outstanding fashion .
I believe that we will be able to overcome any difficulties that may arise when our proposals on increasing confidence in the European digital environment are put into practice .
Mr President , I am really very pleased to be here today to discuss with you this very important topic of how we can improve consumer confidence in the digital environment .
I would like to start my speech by thanking Mrs Roithová and all the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent and very close cooperation - and this is not just a matter of courtesy , but a sincere recognition of very hard work .
I am glad that the Commission and the European Parliament agree on a common line in approaching this very important and challenging issue .
This is clearly an important and ambitious report , and I think we all broadly share the same objectives and analyses of the problems .
The digital economy - and more specifically e-commerce - has great potential to improve consumer welfare by making a greater range of products available , boosting price competition and developing new markets .
It is also central to completing the retail side of the internal market .
At present , retail markets are still fragmented along national lines into mini-markets , as Mrs Roithová indicated .
This makes no sense in the age of e-commerce and the internet .
E-commerce is changing the face of retail , but only at national level .
The internet is borderless but consumers , businesses and regulators are not .
Fifty per cent of European consumers who have a computer at home have made an e-commerce purchase in the previous 12 months , but only 12 % of those with a computer at home bought cross-border .
This indicates the need for action to increase consumer confidence on the retail side of the internal market and the necessity to solve the fragmentation of the market to achieve finally a citizens ' market .
As you know , since the beginning of the year we have launched two major initiatives for consumers : the consumer policy strategy and the consultation on the review of existing consumer protection legislation .
Our objective as a Commission is to help the EU rise to the challenges of growth and jobs and reconnecting with its citizens .
This objective will be met if , by 2013 , we can credibly demonstrate to all citizens that they can shop from anywhere in the EU - from corner shop to website - confident that they are equally and effectively protected .
The need to improve consumer confidence in the digital economy runs through every aspect of this strategy .
Mrs Roithová 's report shows that the obstacles - including regulatory obstacles - are numerous .
My predecessors made progress in tackling some of them with the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive and the Regulation on Consumer Protection Cooperation , which established the European Consumer Centre ( ECC ) network . My priority now is to tackle the remaining obstacles , with the reform of existing consumer protection legislation related to consumer contracts .
As you know , we have initiated a broad consultation on the future of consumer protection , and we have started to analyse reactions from the stakeholders .
We are looking forward to Mrs Petre 's report after the summer .
Your views and your support will be an important reference for our follow-up work and for specific proposals .
The Commission 's follow-up to the review of the acquis is a basis on which build consumer trust .
The development of standardised consumer contracts may be something to investigate further once this solid base is established .
One of the aims of this exercise is to reduce the regulatory fragmentation of the internal market by targeted harmonisation of issues that cause particular problems for consumers and businesses .
We will , inter alia , consider whether standards and standardisation can play a role in this process .
Similarly for self-regulation .
The Commission has done some important work to establish a best practice model for self- and co-regulation , and we will continue to do so in the future .
I share your concerns about the interplay of different legislation governing online transactions or digital goods .
There are many precise laws , and consumers and businesses may not be sufficiently aware of their rights and duties in the digital environment .
I will examine how best to clarify these issues with my colleagues , Mrs Reding and Mr McCreevy .
Thanks to your input , we will explore the idea of a practical guide which would cover information society services and help citizens to understand their rights better .
I would also like to thank you for insisting on the importance of enforcement - I fully agree with you .
Quality legislation is not enough if it is not backed up by effective enforcement .
We have set up a network of national enforcers in the European Union and we will now gradually enlarge the network to third country partners in order to enhance its efficiency .
In conclusion , I would like to thank you for your commitment to helping European citizens to enjoy all the benefits of the internal market and the digital economy .
I look forward to working with you to fulfil our common goals and to achieve a citizens ' internal market .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Roithová for such a wonderful report .
Consumer confidence in the digital environment largely depends on our ability to provide consumers with protection and clarity within that environment .
We must bear in mind that SMEs are also consumers , and the European Union must promote the use of these new technologies and encourage SMEs to participate in on-line markets .
At the same time , we must promote consumer confidence on these platforms by ensuring that transactions are transparent and fair .
Consumers must be aware of their obligations and rights in the digital world .
For some products , such as MP3 players , DVD players and computer game consoles , the consumer is obliged to accept very strict conditions in the small print , and in some cases this verges on the illegal and violates the right to privacy .
At the same time , the producers of these devices are expanding the use of digital rights management systems in order to prevent unauthorised copies .
This creates fear , and that can undermine consumer confidence .
In order to resolve the problem of interoperability , open standards are required that create a safer , more open and more trustworthy environment .
Software patents are also a serious threat for software developers in SMEs , who cannot afford the legal costs .
Fear in this environment is not compatible with confidence either amongst SMEs or amongst consumers .
Digital platforms can only provide growth and development if they are based on open and interoperable standards .
Standards can contribute to less fragmentation of markets and the use of open-source software can also make a considerable contribution to promoting on-line security .
Improving the security and confidence of consumers depends upon certain key elements : legislation , mechanisms for strengthening and creating regulatory instruments such as codes of conduct and confidence marks .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , it gives me great pleasure to welcome this report and to thank my colleague , Mrs Roithová , for her outstanding work , and the shadow rapporteurs , who are here as well .
It has been a very good team effort .
I also want to thank Mrs Kuneva for her very positive response .
This report shows the value that a parliamentary committee can bring to a complex issue , particularly one that cuts across so many policy areas .
The special message I want to put to the Commissioner is that I hope she will take this forward and become the champion of consumers in the e-world and in e-commerce , because , as she said , it is not just her services that have a share in this - it is also those of Mrs Reding and of Mr McCreevy , and , indeed , of Mr Frattini and of Mr Verheugen , in his role as champion of enterprise , in particular small enterprise .



As far as Mr Frattini is concerned , I want to emphasise again the concern that many of us feel about the proposed reform of the Rome I Regulation in particular , which is in serious danger of undermining the provisions for small businesses to be active in the world of e-commerce .
There are also important data protection provisions that consumers feel concerned about in terms of giving up their data and going online , which also come under his area .
Therefore , I think it needs that coordinated approach .
I also want to pick up on what Mr Hammerstein-Mintz said , that small enterprises are the ones we need to look at in particular .
Large enterprises can build complex websites in different languages , based in different countries , but we want to allow small enterprises with an innovative and exciting product and service based in one EU country to be able to access that EU market freely and simply , to take real advantage of the powers that e-commerce offers them .
We have to be very careful that we design the regime in such a way as to ensure that we do not discourage them from doing that , because we want not only consumers to go online but also businesses to put their products online , and to make the two work together , because that is what we have the opportunity to do in our dynamic e-commerce market as it moves forward from here .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work over the last eighteen months , during which she has demonstrated considerable openness and willingness to compromise .
Not the least , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her openness as we have been working together in this area ever since she was elected to this position .
The result of this work is a report whose ambitious political messages have not , contrary to what usually happens , been diluted by the numerous compromises made .
If anything , they have been reinforced by them .
This is exactly what we need ; after all , it is how Europe 's society and economy are gearing up for the digital age which is at stake .
What is required here is for increasingly wider sections of European society to have access to information technologies .
We must therefore emphasise , at any rate , as a footnote to this report the importance of e-inclusion , in other words , how important it is that the inhabitants of rural areas , those with disabilities , the older generations and those on the lowest incomes can be included in Europe 's vibrant digital society .
There is no question that the future belongs to the information society and knowledge-based economy .
As we have already realised , we also have to accept that business , the goods and services market along with consumption itself are becoming knowledge-based and digital .
However , consumers are still consumers even on the Internet , with rights and obligations .
They need to know , above all , what exactly they are facing : brochures , free newspapers , products or even services .
Equipped with this knowledge , they need to behave just as discerningly as if they were in a conventional library , bank , travel agents or store .
They need to know what they can and cannot do .
In return for their compliance , they can then enjoy the protection afforded to law-abiding consumers in the traditional market too .
However , there are numerous aspects of the digital environment which are fuelling the lack of consumer confidence .
The easy , rapid flow of information , the frequent lack of information for consumers and the quick and extensive spread of illegal behaviour are just some of the many reasons why anyone using the Internet can cross the boundary of law-abiding consumer activity , even acting in good faith .
It is our political responsibility as politicians to devise those tools for Europe 's digital environment , which will allow our Internet users to remain law-abiding consumers .
On behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I can say that we will support the idea of a digital consumers charter in the longer term , which will provide every single consumer with clear , comprehensible information about what they should do in particular situations when using the Internet .
Parliament is also aware that the dynamic development of the digital environment and the ongoing monitoring of consumer protection legislation will have a major impact on the content of any future charter .
However , consumers also need information until then , which is why we are asking the Commission , even in current circumstances and based on current legislation , to provide some guidance as to what rights and protection e-consumers have .
With this in mind , we are proposing that a network of consumer protection centres should be set up , based on the model of the SOLVIT system and Dolceta website .
In other words , a European e-consumer information and support portal , which can help Europe 's online consumers by offering advice , answers and solutions .
Similarly , we support clarification of the legislation governing the use and protection of digital content .
After all , the interoperability between the tools and content , on the one hand , and online management of rights , on the other , are two important principles .
Finally , I would like to draw the attention of consumers and industry to the fact that this is something in their joint interest .
Based on the model of traditional markets , the digital market too depends on law-abiding behaviour .
There are currently a large number of committees involved in this area .
We would therefore like the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , which is linked to consumers and is the most responsive , to coordinate within the Commission the further efforts in this area .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SV ) Commissioner , Mr President , few could have imagined how the Internet would fundamentally change the world , both politically and economically .
In spite of attempts by totalitarian regimes to limit the flow of information , the Internet is winning millions of new users .
The way in which we use the Internet is also rapidly being transformed from the passive acquisition of information to an interactive approach .
We buy and sell goods and services on it , and we chat and meet each other there .
We have even acquired another life on the Internet , a virtual reality that , for some people , becomes more important than reality itself .
There are statistics showing a 21 % annual increase in Internet commerce , and even though cross-border shopping within the EU is not extensive , there is a lot to indicate that it will increase .
More than half of European households own a computer - an increase of approximately 4 % in one year .
Forty-two per cent of all households are on the Internet , and here too the increase is one of 4 % in one year .
In my own country , a good 75 % of the population have an Internet connection at home .
It is nonetheless gratifying that the biggest increase is taking place in the new Member States .
As many of my fellow Members have pointed out in this House , the number of frauds and other acts of deception is increasing concurrently with this development .
In the light of this , Mrs Roithová 's report is an important step towards improving consumers ' faith in the digital market .
We know that , in parallel with Parliament 's work , the Commission reviews the whole of the EU 's consumer legislation .
Paragraph 19 of the report proposes what it calls a European trust mark .
That is obviously a good idea , but I can see certain problems .
Firstly , the costs of keeping such a quality mark updated may prove to be considerable .
The Commission has itself calculated the costs at EUR 1 million per country per year , which is a considerable sum of money .
Secondly , there is a danger of the trust mark being stolen , misused or falsified .
Another important point is the setting up of an EU charter of users ' rights and obligations in the information society .
This is not a new issue and is obviously an important area for the Commission , as the Commissioner also pointed out in connection with the ongoing review .
I believe that the wordings proposed in the amendments better take account of the complexity and speed of the changes in the digital environment .
It perhaps does not even need to be said , but the digital environment obviously needs an efficient framework in the form of rules and legislation .
All actors who make use of the Internet need to be aware of their rights and obligations .
We need informed and educated consumers .
We need not only vendors and entrepreneurs with a sense of responsibility but also bold innovators who envisage new possibilities and new jobs .
We of course also need laws that operate in a changing environment .
The Commission has to balance all these interests with a view to an EU that is better able to become more competitive and to comply with the requirements of the Lisbon Strategy .
Last of all , I should like to point out that we must never forget that it is freedom and free access to information that has formed the basis for the huge success of the Internet .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Roithová for tackling such an important issue .
We should remember that work on developing the Internet began barely 40 years ago , yet we can now speak of an Internet revolution .
This extraordinary instrument opens up tremendous opportunities in many areas .
It also presents us with many challenges .
It may be used for laudable purposes but may unfortunately also be exploited for criminal activities .
The same is true of many other instruments used by men and women as they develop civilisations .
The use of digital technology in electronic commerce for the purchase of goods and services ought to be seen in this context .
As stated in the report , the legal and technical solutions applied should comply with a range of criteria .
I would like to make a few remarks in this regard .
Firstly , access to the Internet retail market should be far more widespread .
This is linked to more generalised access to broadband Internet , a matter that has been repeatedly mentioned in the House .
At present only around 25 % of households in the European Union have a broadband connection , and therefore enjoy a high quality connection .
Secondly , the purchaser needs to be certain that making purchases in this way is secure , both as regards the transaction itself and in terms of the relevant guarantee for the goods and services purchased , regardless of borders .
Thirdly , the fact that the transactions are often anonymous cannot be allowed to facilitate criminal activity in any way .
I have in mind piracy of films or musical works that are protected intellectual property .
It is therefore essential to clarify the expression ' for personal use only ' .
Fourthly , other activities conducted through the Internet , such as the purchase of paedophile or pornographic material and the propagation of prostitution call for specific action by the police and prosecuting authorities .
This is weighing on our consciences .
Fifthly , payments over the Internet must be undertaken in a way that ensures full security for both parties .
Sixthly , advertisements for goods or services that can be purchased electronically must allow potential purchasers to verify the information put out .
My seventh remark is that the security of bank transactions undertaken by electronic means needs to be drastically improved .
My eighth remark is to point out the importance of using digital means to provide certain medical services , diagnosis , and monitoring at a distance , notably in more remote areas .
My penultimate point relates to the importance of distance education .
Finally , we would do well to remember that the disabled in particular benefit greatly from the opportunity to use digital platforms as consumers .
In conclusion , I should like to emphasise that high quality , honesty , transparency and flexibility must be essential features of the soundly based market in digital services open to competition that we wish to create .
on behalf of Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my special thanks go to the rapporteur .
Through her efforts we have an excellent own-initiative report to approve today .
I hope and am confident that the Commission will take the report 's recommendations and conclusions on board when reviewing European consumer rights .
Our group supports your report , Mrs Roithovà , and most of your compromise amendments .
However , we do regret your decision to water down your proposal on the subject of the European trustmark .
We will therefore not be voting for Amendment 4 and we will also be rejecting the Liberals ' amendments .
Intellectual property rights cannot be allowed to erode consumer rights .
Consumers need clear information about their legal position when dealing with digital content and digital rights management .
They are entitled to interoperable solutions .
The report addresses important issues , calling for a European charter of user rights , the creation of a European early warning system and a database for combating Internet fraud , the inclusion of an external audit obligation for specific electronic services such as online banking , and standardising European provisions for cross-border electronic invoices .
It also calls for a coordinated global approach for the digital environment , including an analysis of external factors such as privacy protection , citizens ' access to information technologies and Internet security .
The report also calls on the Commission to examine measures to deal with class actions in the case of cross-border digital environment disputes between businesses and consumers .
We will be supporting the report and hope that it will be adopted in the plenary .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , trade and the exchange of goods , services and capital are the very bases of economic prosperity .
Therefore , any technology that reduces the transaction costs for commerce is also fundamental to increased prosperity .
With the world becoming more interconnected with the help of modern communications , safe and quick methods of payment and the removal of a good deal of protectionism , ever more countries around the world are now being drawn into global trade .
In the long run , this is to the advantage of everyone on earth .
It is therefore the EU 's most important task to do everything it can to facilitate trade , firstly within the EU area and secondly between the EU area and the rest of the world .
The EU is very successful at facilitating trade within the EU area and has made a considerable contribution to the EU countries ' economic development .
The big exception is agriculture , in which precisely no liberalisation has taken place and in which there are , then , major gains in prosperity still to be brought about .
When it comes to trade between the EU area and the rest of the world , matters look nothing like so good .
EU protectionism in respect of the surrounding world is extensive and embraces not only the agricultural sphere but also labour-intensive industrial products .
The economic costs for the poor countries of the world and for EU consumers are very great .
It is , therefore , above all in these areas that we wish to invest our political resources in order to design an EU policy for increased trade and increased prosperity .
EU trade is at present a phenomenon of limited scope , but I dare say we all believe that it is a form of trade with a great future .
Mrs Roithová is therefore discussing an area that will prove to be very important in the future , but the question is that of what the EU 's role might be in this area at this stage in the development of e-commerce .
Mrs Roithová and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy maintain that consumers do not dare to make cross-border purchases via the Internet within the EU because of poor legal certainty .
Perhaps that is so , but do we know it for a fact ?
Every new area and every new problem that is identified are presented in this House as evidence that the EU needs to intervene .
The tiresome phrase ' this shows that the EU is needed ' is repeated like a mantra .
In any socio-economic analysis of such problems , however , the attempt is first made to establish what the market failures are , whether they can be corrected through political measures and , if so , what these measures might be , and at which political level they should be resorted to .
In this House , the very point of departure is , more often than not , that the failures can and should be remedied at EU level .
Every problem that is identified is taken as a pretext for advancing the EU 's strategic positions at the expense of the Member States or of international bodies that are more global in scope .
Constantly , man merkt die Absicht [ ' the intention is noted ' ] .
E-commerce is still in its infancy , and we do not know what is slowing down its growth , in which areas it will flourish and what forms it will then take .
I would therefore advise the House to oppose all these proposals concerning EU-directed and EU-sponsored grant programmes and education and information campaigns and to wait before calling for charters of rights , dispute resolution mechanisms and harmonisation of contract law at EU level , and I advise it to say no to a logo for a European trustmark in this area .
Those countries and regions that are creative and that are pioneers in various areas are those that offer entrepreneurs the freedom to feel their way towards solutions that politicians or officials cannot normally foresee .
Where e-commerce is concerned , we shall find that there are very strong incentives for companies to create security for consumers .
Such security will therefore be brought about by the financial market with the help of new insurance services and through the development of trademarks by producers themselves .
- ( SK ) Allow me to thank Mrs Roithová for this report .
It is responding to a dynamically developing digital environment .
This is an area of everyday life for all of us , whether we are consumers or business people .
New technologies offer huge opportunities to make full use of the internal market .
Statistics , however , show that only 6 % of European consumers participate in on-line transactions , and 33 % experience problems , because their country of residence is different to that of the sellers of the goods .
According to the Eurobarometer survey , 48 % of merchants in the European Union are ready to sell across borders , but only 29 % of companies are actually involved in cross-border transactions with at least one other country of the European Union .
And yet 57 % retailers in European Union sell via the Internet .
The largest barriers to cross-border transactions include the uncertainty of transactions , different accounting rules , difficulties in the resolution of complaints and disputes , differences in national legislation on consumer protection , problems in provision of after-sales services , extra costs arising due to cross-border delivery , and the cost of translations .
The use of the on-line environment is more complicated than the off-line environment due to its many barriers .
Because of this , I consider important the proposal to elaborate a strategy to build consumer confidence .
It should be an attempt to respond and to implement steps for making Internet transactions more attractive , thus bringing an end to the fragmentation of the internal market in the digital environment .
This should lead to improvements in access to goods and services offered on-line in other Member States .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Roithová , many thanks for your excellent report .
My thanks also go to the shadow rapporteur Mrs Herczog , who was responsible for working on the report within my group .
This is a subject of particular importance to our citizens .
It was very good to hear that Commissioner Kuneva will be taking action in this area .
That is essential , and we can only support her efforts .
We will be behind the Commissioner one hundred per cent .
Our citizens have a whole range of problems in the digital environment .
Goods do not arrive , or they arrive late .
They may want to order a product in another country , but find themselves unable to do so because the company says that they are resident in the wrong country .
Or they place an order and suddenly find themselves landed with a subscription .
These are the problems that our citizens encounter .
Of course , within the European Union there is already some very positive regulation within this area , but it is very disjointed .
It is vital that we create positive legislation for this area that meets the expectations of our citizens and , more importantly , of consumers .
We want the citizens to enjoy the benefits of the single market in this arena .
However , they can only benefit if we provide them with legal certainty , if they understand the basis on which they can do business , if they know that when they have a problem with a company they will be able to seek redress - and not have to wait 12 or 15 years for a result .
They will also benefit from a more open market if they are able to compare prices and access more information .
As you can see , there is still a lot to do in this area .
The citizens are expecting not only that we regulate the internal market , not only that we establish constructive and simpler rules for businesses , thereby ensuring that companies are free to move within the European Union .
Our citizens also expect a Europe that works for them , in which policies are not just designed to encourage the economy , with the citizens merely expected to contribute to that economy .
Instead , consumer protection should also determine policy , particularly in the digital arena .
It must be clear that we are making policy for consumers , and that the economy serves the consumers .
If this happens , Commissioner Kuneva - and I know this is your intention - then we will achieve our objective , namely a Europe for the citizens ; a Europe in which they are free to make online purchases in another country without problems or obstacles , and in which they have rights , including the possibility of redress .
You will certainly have the full backing of my group , Commissioner , and we will be very happy to work with you to achieve your aims .
( PL ) Mr President , the role of the on-line transactions market in the provision of products , services or information on these is now invaluable .
Mrs Roithová rightly pointed out in her report , however , that the development and increased importance of that market is affected by its fragmentation across the various Member States of the European Union .
I agree that the aforementioned lack of harmonisation of provisions across the territory of the European Union and the lack of consumer confidence in transactions on the digital market may endanger the European Union 's competitiveness on the world market especially as Europe is now lagging behind the United States and certain Asian countries .
Creating a European information system is certainly a good idea although it will require time and tremendous financial investment .
It does appear , however , that such a proposal may increase the security of on-line transactions between entities in different countries .
This is because it is precisely the diversity of provisions across Member States and the lack of access to them that enterprises cite as the main cause of the uncertainty about entering into transactions of this kind .
I believe that the situation in the new Member States where there is a shortage of financial resources for information campaigns on access to electronic services and their quality is also an urgent matter .
The individual citizens of these countries often lack access to services of this nature , particularly in rural areas .
The report rightly refers to discrimination against consumers in this group of countries regarding e-commerce .
In my view , the Commission ought to deal with this situation as a matter of urgency , because all Union consumers are entitled to equal treatment .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , it gives me great pleasure to inform you that a delegation from the National Assembly of the Republic of Korea is present in the official gallery .
I warmly welcome the Korean delegation , which is here to take part in the tenth European Parliament-Korea Interparliamentary Meeting .
Mr Lee Sang-Deuk is leading the Korean delegation , which is composed of six members of the National Assembly .
Our dialogue has developed greater depth and regularity in recent years .
It has now become entirely political , covering a vast range of subjects from regional and international security to our citizens ' everyday concerns , alongside the increasingly active role of the European Union and South Korea in the international community .
We are delighted to have these fruitful , stable and ever-deepening cooperative relations with the Republic of Korea .
1 .
MEDA and financial support to Palestine - evaluation , implementation and control ( vote )
- Report : Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou
- Before the vote on paragraph 38
( PT ) Mr President , I should like to table an amendment that has been agreed with our rapporteur , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou .
This amendment is intended to replace the current Amendment 38 with the following text :
' Welcomes the Council decision of 18 June asking the EU to resume normal relations with the Palestinian Authority immediately and to this end to develop the conditions for urgent , practical and financial assistance , including direct financial support to the new government , as well as to ensure the provision of emergency and humanitarian assistance to the population of Gaza ; '
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , I should like first of all to thank all my honourable friends from the various political groups who cooperated with me on this report , which is so important for our Euro-Mediterranean partnership and which also contains important and sensitive points which have to do with the funding of the Palestinian Authority .
In the amendment referred to by Mr Casaca which , as he knows , we made together , there is a parenthesis at the end ' ( via , especially , the TIM ) ' , which is part of the oral amendment .
I have no other amendments to table other than to mention that paragraph 38 referring to the Mecca agreement and to a national unity government is no longer topical and has been deleted and replaced by the paragraph which Mr Casaca has just read out , with the parenthesis ' ( via , especially , the TIM ) ' at the end .
That is all , other than to thank you for your cooperation and support .
To recap for everybody 's benefit , Mr Casaca has tabled an oral amendment to paragraph 38 , which in its original version and with the rapporteur 's addition already has the words ' via , especially , the TIM ' added at the end of the text that you will find attached to your voting list .
Are there any objections to the oral amendment in its entirety ?
There are no objections .
Quite exceptionally , the rapporteur is asking for the floor again .
Recital N , which has to do with this matter .
The second oral amendment on suppression of recital N was tabled at the same time . It will require a separate vote , but the two amendments are connected .
( The oral amendments were accepted )
2 .
Review procedures concerning the award of public contracts ( vote )
- Report : Fruteau
- After the vote

( DE ) Mr President , I think we should congratulate Mr Fruteau on his election to the French Parliament .
It may not be good news for us , but I am sure he is very pleased with the result .
I too would like to congratulate Mr Fruteau , and we now go on to the next item .

3 .
Exchanges of information extracted from criminal records ( vote )
- Report : Díaz de Mera García Consuegra
4 .
Regional strategy and multiannual indicative programme for Asia ( vote )
Motion for a resolution :
5 .
Fact-finding mission to the regions of Andalusia , Valencia and Madrid ( vote )
Motion for a resolution :
- Before the vote on paragraph 11

( IT ) Mr President , I should like to point out that there is a mistake in the Italian translation , which for us is substantive and not trivial . Where the English version has ' calls upon regional authorities to establish special administrative commissions ' , it says , ' invita le autorità regionali a istituire tribunali amministrativi speciali ' .
That is a situation that we had at the time of fascism , which must not be brought back again .
I therefore suggest we put ' commissioni ' , in line with the English and French texts .
In addition , I should like to suggest that the ' powers of arbitration ' associated with the commissions be reviewed and replaced with ' powers of decision ' .
Thank you , Mrs Sbarbati ; we shall of course ask the appropriate services to take action on the linguistic part of your comment .
6 .
Towards an arms trade treaty ( vote )
Motion for a resolution :
7 .
Juvenile delinquency , the role of women , the family and society ( vote )
- Report : Batzeli
- Before the vote on Amendment 7
Mr President , there has been a change in the word order ; the proposed change is :
( the rapporteur continued in English )
' social inclusion of all young people and extrajudicial and judicial measures '
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
8 .
External dimension of the area of freedom , security and justice ( vote )
- Report : Klich
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to offer my sincere thanks to everyone who contributed to this report .
Special thanks are due to Mr Sakalas , the rapporteur for the Committee on Foreign Affairs , who was involved in the difficult procedure of strengthened cooperation between two of our Parliamentary committees .
I am also bound to call on the House to support this report , for three reasons .
Firstly , because the report advocates better coordination between our foreign policy and our internal policy , to ensure that our foreign policy achieves the priorities of the area of freedom , security and justice .
Secondly , because we advocate the specific European method which balances between action to ensure the security of our citizens and action to protect their civic freedoms .
Thirdly , because we are calling for what remains of the third pillar , notably police and court cooperation on criminal matters , to become a Community issue .
- Before the vote on Amendment 3 , first part
Mr President , in order to avoid confusion , I should just like to clarify our request for a split vote and an oral amendment to Amendment 3 .
The oral amendment concerns the part of the text that the amendment by the PPE-DE Group seeks to delete .
Therefore , if you wish to retain the text , including the oral amendment , you should vote against the first part of Amendment 3 .
Mr President , we propose to insert the words ' by the Council and the Commission ' , so that the text will read : ' to include a human rights compliance report by the Council and the Commission in all external policy initiatives or documents in the AFSJ ... ' .
I must point out to you that , if this House supports Amendment 3 , the oral amendment will fall .
However , if Amendment 3 by the PPE-DE Group is rejected , then the oral amendment will be included .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
9 .
Framework decision on combating racism and xenophobia ( vote )
- Report : Roure
10 .
Decision-making in the common European asylum system ( vote )
- Report : Pirker
Mr President , on 31 January 2007 I sent a letter to the President of this Parliament proposing the organisation of an annual lecture to honour the memory of the Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya .
This Politkovskaya lecture should be held by a journalist who distinguishes her or himself through an outstanding effort to defend democracy and respect for all human beings .
With this lecture we would honour all journalists for their essential role in keeping societies open .
This proposal was co-signed by Bart Staes , Jean-Marie Cavada , Ewa Klamt and Luisa Morgantini .
Rule 28 states that the Presidency has to answer within 30 days .
I received only a vague reply and nothing has happened in the mean time .
We would like to organise this event for October this year , one year after the assassination of our valued Anna Politkovskaya .
We need the cooperation of the Presidency and we hope we can count on it .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Berman .
I believe the aim of the brief reply was precisely to prevent the time period from lapsing . Clearly , however , I shall refer this to the Bureau and the President and check with them what will be done to follow up your request .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
Calendar of part-sessions : see Minutes
That concludes the vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Cuba
The next item is the debate on four motions for resolutions on Cuba .
author . - Madam President , the Council has recently recognised that no tangible results have been achieved on human rights in Cuba , despite the goodwill shown by the Council in 2005 .
The majority of us , if not all of us , are in agreement that it is necessary for Cuba to launch a process of political transition to multi-party democracy .
This is not the Eurocentric position our opponents like to use against us but is about the universality and indivisibility of human rights , including civil , political and economic rights , in which we believe .
Today we again urge the Council and Commission to continue to take whatever action is necessary to demand the release of political prisoners and prisoners of conscience .
It is important to give our unconditional support and full encouragement to the launching of a peaceful process of transition to a multi-party democracy in Cuba .
We have examples to follow .
Twenty years ago the present EU Member States from Eastern and Central Europe were in many ways - including as regards their human rights situation - in a similar situation to that which Cuba is in now .
I hope that we will soon witness major changes in Cuba and I look forward to that very special day .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , Cuba has been ruled by a dictator for almost half a century and human rights are constantly being violated there .
It is practically the last remaining bastion of Communism in the world .
North Korea is another such bastion , whilst the Chinese regime is somewhat different but often equally cruel .
After the collapse of Communism in 1989 we expected those Communist countries to review their situation and that Communism would collapse there too .
Unfortunately , that did not happen , notably in Cuba .
It is true that the intensity of persecution in Cuba varied .
There were times when it was particularly cruel and other periods when a degree of liberalisation was allowed and when concessions seemed to be made to the opposition .
A particularly worrying contemporary development is that Cuba has succeeded in gaining a number of allies . The latter include left-wing governments in Europe .
The support often provided by governments of Member States of the European Union to the Cuban regime , albeit indirectly , is particularly worrying .
The current more tolerant attitude to such evil regimes adopted also by the UN is unacceptable .
For instance , it is being suggested that human rights are not being violated in Belarus or in Cuba .
I call on the House to adopt an unequivocal approach condemning the Cuban governments , and to follow this up with specific actions aimed at toppling Fidel Castro 's cruel Communist regime .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would like to begin by expressing my concern at the fact that this item on relations between the European Union and the Cuban Government has replaced , in terms of urgency , another issue that I considered to be far more important and far more urgent : the situation of the refugee population in Iraq .
This is particularly worrying given that , in reality , the fundamental reason for this modification does not so much relate to issues involving that Caribbean Island , but rather to the customary tendency of certain Members from the People 's Party to use the European Parliament to express their personal opposition to the Spanish Government .
It is not for me to defend the position of the Spanish Government ; I am not a member of that government or of its party , but it does concern me that such an important opportunity as the Thursday afternoon sitting , which is dedicated to situations of violations of human rights in the world , should be called into question by this kind of initiative that goes against the very spirit of these debates .
Furthermore , I would also like to point out that on Monday the Council approved its conclusions on relations with the Cuban Government , in which it once again stated its intention to maintain the dialogue with civil society and offered to restore the dialogue with the Cuban Government on the basis of mutual , reciprocal and non-discriminatory interest .
Cuba must make a lot of progress on issues such as freedoms , rights , political rights in particular , and democratic openness , but I would insist that this is nothing new , it is not urgent .
What is more , I believe that the position adopted by the Council on Monday sets the parameters for moving in that direction , particularly insofar as it distances itself from the United States ' strategy based on a sterile confrontation and an embargo that is both ineffective and irresponsible , amongst other things because it actually hinders certain reforms within the island which would allow for a more ordered transition .
Furthermore , as we stated in our resolution , that of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , cooperation must be an instrument for development , with a view to achieving the Millennium Development Objectives , and not a tool for imposing conditions with a view to achieving political ends .


author . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , for once I do not agree with Mr Romeva i Rueda , because I believe that there is an urgent issue concerning Cuba , and one that actually concerns us as well as the European Union .
Otherwise , it would be pointless to treat questions of countries that have been dictatorships and not democratic for years and years , or even decades , as urgent topics .
In this case the urgency concerns us and our policy .
A decision has been taken in the Council to invite a Cuban delegation .
What can or what should initiating this dialogue mean ?
In our view , it should mean that any change , reform or strengthening of relations with Cuba must depend on an equally tangible plan to reform the situation of human rights and democracy on the island .
It is true that our strategy as the European Union is not to impose an embargo - and I intend to clarify and emphasise that again in an oral amendment - but it is also true that it must not and cannot be a strategy of unconditional and unilateral openness , because that too would prove to be a disastrous strategy , as it has proved to be in the past .
We must , for instance , give practical support to those dissidents who have come together behind the ' Unity for Liberty ' declaration - and this is much more urgent for the European Union than for Cuba .
One of the problems of Cuba 's dissidents and opposition has always been their internal divisions , but this time there is a joint declaration and document that talks about non-violence and democracy .
It is our job to support these dissidents .
This has to be taken into account when the discussions and dialogue are initiated , otherwise they will be going against this Union 's policies and principles on human rights and democracy .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I would like to start by saying to the Spanish rapporteur that I do not need a visit from Mr Moratino to get het up about what the Spanish Government is doing .
Within the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , we have enough colleagues from Central and Eastern Europe who work with the people in Cuba out of a sense of solidarity , and the issue is not limited to the Spaniards within the PPE-DE .
I do want to assure you of that .
The future for the people of Cuba should not be limited to two alternatives : either continuing with Communism or being taken over by the government in Miami .
In the light of the Common Position of 1996 we have a political responsibility to support the democratic and peaceful forces as they work for change .
That is why the European Parliament has awarded Sakharov prizes to the Ladies in White and to Oswaldo Payá .
I would have liked to have seen a clear statement in the Council Decision that the Common Position of 1996 still stands , that the Council Decision approved on Monday does not alter that Position , that the 2003 sanctions have merely been suspended , and that we will be reviewing the position again next June ( the 17th evaluation of the Common Position ) .
The Council should have made that clear .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would like to reinforce what Mr Romeva just said .
The sole motivation for raising this subject is a Spanish domestic political issue that has nothing to do with the situation in the country under discussion .
The People 's Party has preferred not to debate a truly urgent issue , which is that of Iraq .
There are currently two million Iraqi refugees within Iraq and a further two million who have been obliged to leave the country .
At the moment , rather then taking in these poor people who are fleeing the bombings and killings in Iraq , countries are returning them to their country of origin .
In other words , on the one hand , we are bombing the Iraqi population , and on the other we are not allowing them to leave and sending them back to that hell .
This is a case of total inhumanity and it is not appropriate at this point for us to forget the situation of these people .
We therefore believe that this urgency is entirely inappropriate and that we have squandered an opportunity to deal with a case of genuine humanitarian urgency at a time when measures needed to be adopted .
There has very recently been a conference on Iraq in which this issue has been debated , a series of resolutions have been approved , and this Parliament is incapable of following them up because it prefers to deal with domestic political issues rather than the genuine problems that are currently of concern to humanity .
Colleagues , I would remind you all that the subject matter of this debate is Cuba , and if anybody else tries to discuss something else , I will be very strict .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I shall definitely speak about Cuba !
This House has dealt with the situation in Cuba on several occasions .
Unfortunately , all our calls for full respect of fundamental freedoms of Cuban citizens have fallen on deaf ears .
The utterly anachronistic Castro regime is now so much out of date and out of touch with reality and modern democratic norms that it is highly unlikely , in my view , that any significant change for the better will occur while Castro is still in power .
However , he is now elderly , sick and physically incapable of running the country , so we must start thinking about what to do when he has finally gone from the power stage of Cuba .
In the mean time , we once again call for democratic reforms and , in particular , we call for the Cuban authorities to allow the two Cuban winners of the EP 's Sakharov Prize to travel to Europe .
Let us hope that some remnants of common sense may have survived in the minds of those ruling Cuba and that we shall soon welcome these Sakharov Prize winners to Parliament .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , for a few seconds the display for the sitting said ' Iraqi refugees ' .
The slip-up has evidently also affected the technology in this Chamber .
Indeed , that is the subject that we ought to have been debating : the 4 million Iraqis who are trying to come to Europe but to whom we are not showing any hospitality .
Instead , we are debating Cuba , because an international campaign is under way that led this Parliament to vote against Venezuela in the last part-session and will probably lead it to vote against Cuba today .
We now expect that someone from the Spanish People 's Party will put forward a resolution against Ecuador and Bolivia .
That is what we are expecting .
The real purpose , in fact , is to combat the economic policy that a large part of Latin America is implementing at the moment , in contrast to neoliberalism and the imperialistic philosophy of permanent war .
That is an objective fact in our debate .
Instead , I believe that we should call strongly for a review of the European Union 's common position and for a review of the embargo .
What the Council did last Monday in inviting a delegation from the Cuban authorities to Brussels was a very significant step that we ought to welcome , so as to initiate a positive dialogue and to give due merit to the progress made by Cuba .
I believe , however , that the content of this resolution , right from its first clause , explicitly states the views of one side of this Parliament .
In other words , it is calling for a change to the social , economic and political system of an island and sovereign state .
I regard that as unacceptable .

Madam President , Castro 's Cuba is the last polity in the western hemisphere in which there is no pretence of democracy : opposition movements are banned ; dissidents are imprisoned ; citizens are denied the right to travel abroad .
There are few sights so degrading as that of Western leftists arguing that all this is somehow justified because Cuba is good at producing doctors and ballerinas .
Two factors have maintained the Castroist dynasty in power : first , the misconceived American blockade , which has allowed him to sustain the siege mentality necessary to dictatorship , and second , the indulgence of those in Europe - and here I must especially mention the Zapatero Government , which indulges the Cuban Communists by according full diplomatic courtesies .
The way to bring freedom to Cuba would be through economic engagement but political isolation .
Instead , we are doing the opposite with calamitous consequences for that unhappy country .
' Sola mors tyrannicida est ' wrote my countryman , Thomas More - death is the only way to get rid of tyrants .
That it should have proved so in the case of Castro says nothing good about the rest of us .
( PT ) What ought to have been on Parliament 's agenda was an expression from the EU of a genuine desire for dialogue on the basis of respect for Cuba .
In our view , the establishment of open dialogue covering all issues of mutual interest naturally entails bringing down the barriers that have been created to make that dialogue difficult or impossible .
This means calling for a definitive end to the sanctions imposed by the EU in 2003 , which are temporarily suspended , and the permanent scrapping of the EU 's common position on Cuba .
These measures would pave the way for the normalisation of relations between the EU and Cuba .
This , however , is not an option for those who pushed this debate onto Parliament 's agenda and who have put their names to the motion for a resolution put to today 's vote .
Its objective is to encourage Cuba 's isolation , in line with the unacceptable embargo imposed on Cuba by the US Administration .
It is also aimed at the blatant , unreserved promotion of intervention in Cuba 's internal affairs and at exerting pressure from outside in order to impose decisions that only the Cuban people have the sovereign right to take .
Reality demonstrates that the best response to such plans is the country 's enormous prestige and importance , and millions of millions of human beings showing active solidarity with Cuba and its people .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I was in Cuba not long ago and the country has not made any progress in upholding human rights ; quite the opposite , in fact - things have got worse .
I therefore call on the Council and the Commission to protest more strongly against flagrant human rights violations in Cuba ; to support organisations that campaign for the very survival of political opponents and their families , or that help NGOs in Cuba to communicate with one another and express their opinions on how to resolve public issues ; and to make the Internet available for Cubans in our embassies , because people do not have access to information in Cuba .
The Council must campaign for the release of political prisoners who are physically maltreated and do not receive the medicines they need .
Normal Cubans , too , live in destitution and suffer illness .
There is a lack of doctors and modern techniques .
Health was once Castro 's pride and joy , yet today normal medicines are only for rich Communist leaders or foreign tourists .
Cubans want change and they want freedom .
We must not let the Council open dialogue with the Cuban regime without setting out clear conditions on the release of prisoners and on freedom of expression .
Madam President , we have good reason to follow closely the recent developments in Cuba , because after 47 years of ruling Cuba Fidel Castro transferred power to his brother , Raúl , who has been running the island in a relatively calm and organised fashion .
It is too early to say whether Fidel will fully recuperate from his illness , but nearly all observers agree that he will never be able to assume day-to-day management again .
Cuba , for the first time since the revolution of 1959 , has to face the prospect of a country no longer fully run by Fidel Castro .
This is definitely a new situation , which we must take into account .
The question is : how can , and how should , the European Union react to this new development ?
The Council of the European Union gave its first answer three days ago .
In its conclusions on Cuba of 18 June , the EU renewed its offer of an open and comprehensive dialogue with the Cuban authorities and invited a Cuban delegation to Brussels to sound out the feasibility of such an exercise .
This open-door approach is consistent with the EU 's overall policy of constructive engagement towards Cuba .
Since 1996 , when the European Union adopted its position on Cuba , experience has proved that only a policy of engagement and cooperation , not one of sanctions , has the potential to promote peaceful change in Cuba towards democracy , respect for human rights , the rule of law , sustainable economic recovery and improvement in the living conditions of the Cuban people , as stipulated in the EU 's common position of 1996 .
Only the establishment of an open , comprehensive and result-orientated dialogue with the Cuban authorities will enable us to make the best use of the variety of instruments the EU and its Member States have at their disposal to further cooperation in the fields of political relations , human rights , investment and trade , development work , scientific research , educational exchanges and culture .
The European Union is a profoundly value-based entity that makes respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms a key policy priority in its external actions .
It is deeply convinced that this commitment towards open dialogue must also involve wider Cuban civil society .
Extending a hand to the Cuban Government to enter into a long-term partnership with the European Union only makes sense if , at the same time , the European Union does all it can to maintain and step up its dialogue with those involved in Cuban civil society , including human rights defenders and peaceful political activists .
As long as Cuba denies its citizens internationally-recognised basic civil political and economic rights , the European Union will not stop lobbying for democracy and respect for the rule of law and fundamental freedoms .
It should not stop expressing its full solidarity with and support to those peacefully committed to making these universal values a reality in Cuba .
This is the true meaning of the ' two-track approach ' : saying ' yes ' to extending a hand to the Cuban authorities for dialogue and cooperation while explicitly expressing critical remarks and concerns , and ' yes ' to defending the right of Cuban citizens to decide freely about their future .
It is the Commission 's firm conviction that the Council conclusions of 18 June are a welcome and necessary first step in this direction .
That concludes the debate on Cuba .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , the proposal that the European Union should depart from the policy of freezing diplomatic contacts with Cuba is totally unacceptable .
We can agree to reopening a full and open political dialogue on all areas of common interest with the Cuban authorities with a view to improving relations between the EU and Cuba , but only on certain conditions .
To do so unconditionally would be to send quite the wrong signal to the Cuban regime .
It would imply that we condone the unacceptable behaviour of the authorities in that country .
By its very nature , dialogue is a two-sided process , not a one-sided one .
The Cuban authorities ' agreement to include in the discussion issues related to the state of human rights in Cuba must be a sine qua non to reopening a full dialogue .
It is also difficult to conceive of an honest dialogue with Cuba as long as the Sakharov prize winners are not allowed to travel to Europe .
The current Spanish Government 's approach is very ambiguous in this regard .
One would expect the Spanish Socialists to demonstrate greater solidarity with European policy towards Cuba .
It is our duty to demonstrate our consistent opposition to the flagrant violations of human rights by Castro 's regime .
For dialogue between Cuba and the European Union to lead to positive changes it must be a genuine dialogue , not a propaganda stunt .
In the past , the Cuban side has taken advantage of the Union 's openness to launch a propaganda offensive .
2 .
Human rights in Ethiopia
The next item is the debate on human rights in Ethiopia .
I have received six motions for a resolution .
author . - ( SV ) Ethiopia is in 170th place out of a total of 177 countries where human development is concerned .
Ethiopia has more important things to do than to oppress opposition figures and put them in prison and to treat people as a collective instead of prosecuting them for specific crimes .
As far back as in October 2005 , we criticised the way in which Ethiopia treats its opposition , but in 2006 and during this year the situation has deteriorated .
I believe that we have to make more stringent demands of Ethiopia .
After all , the African Union 's headquarters are in Ethiopia .
Ethiopia must set a good example , and we cannot accept that the country that is host to our cooperation partner , the African Union , should go in for extensive human rights violations throughout its judicial system .
Before we can get to grips with all the issues to do with poverty and poverty-related problems , we must be able to help Ethiopia combat these human rights violations .
Without a lively opposition , we cannot solve the problems .
author . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to draw the Commissioner 's attention to a contradiction to which we risk falling victim .
In 2005 , we , the European Union , encouraged everyone in Ethiopia , including the representatives of the Oromo people , to take part in the elections in order to help introduce a democratic system .
We also sent one of the largest delegations of observers to the country .
Today , our fellow parliamentarians who were elected to the Ethiopian federal parliament and the parliament of Oromia and who have had the courage to come out into the open are being forced to leave their country .
They have appealed to us , because some of their number have been killed for political reasons , while others are fleeing to neighbouring Somalia together with thousands of Oromo refugees and are being pursued by Ethiopian troops .
At this point it is my belief that , as we helped to encourage and initiate this process , we cannot now abandon these people .
We must accept our responsibility by immediately adopting a support strategy within the framework of the special measures provided for by the new democracy and human rights instrument .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , respect for human rights , democratic principles , the rule of law and freedom are the foundations on which the structures of a just state must be built .
The Commission and the Council should develop a cohesive strategy of actions to support the democratic process in Ethiopia and introduce mechanisms to counter the deterioration of the human rights situation in that region .
In addition to the arrest and imprisonment of people for their views , I find the information on the suffering and exploitation of children particularly alarming .
We have to condemn the harming of defenceless and innocent children .
I believe this is the most serious crime possible and it must be unequivocally condemned .
Only by acting in unison and with the cooperation of the countries bordering on Ethiopia , and drawing on stronger support from the whole international community can we improve the worrying situation in Ethiopia and return it to normality so that individuals are treated as entities and not as instruments .
author . - Madam President , I headed the EU election observation mission in Ethiopia in 2005 .
At that time , Opposition leaders warned the EU that the elections would be another scam by Prime Minister Meles Zenawi to fool the international community and that they all would end up in jail or killed .
We , the EU , persuaded them not to boycott the elections , promising to watch and ensure accountability .
The Ethiopians believed us and voted massively and in an orderly manner .
However , when people protested peacefully against electoral fraud , government forces resorted to brutal repression .
In June and November , hundreds were killed in massacres and thousands were wounded and imprisoned , including the leaders who had warned the EU .
They are among the 38 political prisoners found guilty on 11 June of this year in a farcical trial in which they were not able to present their defences .
Sentences are due next July , possibly carrying the death penalty , against some of the most representative , articulate and courageous leaders of Ethiopia - elected Members of Parliament , human rights defenders , journalists , activists for development , teachers and other prisoners of conscience .
Professor Mesfin Woldemariam , aged 77 , the respected founder of the Ethiopian Human Rights Council , is one of them .
The EU is the main donor of aid in Ethiopia .
I have seen the difference it makes there .
It can do it again if the Commission , Council and Member States stop turning a blind eye .
They must act immediately , holding the Government of Ethiopia accountable to human rights commitments under the Cotonou Agreement , holding Prime Minister Meles Zenawi personally responsible and pressing for the release of the prisoners without delay and unconditionally .
They must follow the recommendations made by this Parliament in several resolutions , including the one we will approve today , not to further let down the Ethiopian people , not to further discredit Europe 's commitment towards development in Africa and not to further betray our basic values of democracy and human rights .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , back in the early Middle Ages , Ethiopia played a leading role in dialogue between the Christian and Muslim world .
It is the oldest independent state in Africa , an ancient civilisation which fought against fascism and colonialism , and as has already been mentioned , is also the country where the African Union currently has its headquarters .
Given all these factors , it is with horror that we contemplate what Communism has done in the country .
The free elections two years ago in Ethiopia were a time of hope .
Unfortunately , that hope was immediately dashed , as demonstrators were beaten and scores were arrested .
As my fellow Member Mrs Gomes quite rightly points out , it was the best and leading figures in the country from all parties and all walks of life who were the victims of the first wave of arrests , and who have also been affected by the most recent round of arrests , sentences and trials this year .
We now need to take a stronger line .
I call on the Council and Commission to provide the long-awaited inspection reports from those observers who attended these unjust mock trials , which were merely for show .
In line with the Resolution , I call for an independent fact-finding commission , since the members of Ethiopian Parliament 's own investigation board have either been jailed or forced into exile for seeking to expose the truth about these events .
The situation is unacceptable and we now need an independent investigation .
We urgently need to use our strong position in the country to stand up for the rule of law and human rights .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , if more death penalties are handed down to opposition activists in Ethiopia in the near future , it will mean disaster not only for the people of Ethiopia but also for our own democracy .
I have followed the development of the situation in Ethiopia , and have concluded that the Ethiopian authorities consider that the elections held in 2005 represent the achievement of an aim , rather than the start of the process towards achieving that aim .
I wonder whether this is not due to the fact that despite the verified and documented abuses by the ruling party , the elections concerned have been recognised as the most democratic elections ever to have been held in the whole of Ethiopia 's three thousand year history .
The resolution we are to vote on today in the European Parliament contains many references to cases that must be unequivocally condemned .
We note that the situation regarding respect for human rights in Ethiopia remains very grave .
The process of democratisation has ground to a complete halt in that country .
There can be no justification for the arrest of leading members of the opposition , who are in danger of receiving death sentences after trials that failed to meet internationally recognised standards for free and fair trials .
We simply cannot condone the infringement of fundamental rights , arguing that it is impossible to expect full compliance with the standards of European democracy in Africa .
Ethiopia is a country with a long and distinguished history .
I believe its people deserve much more , and that it is incumbent on us to assist them .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , on the 11 June , 38 leading opposition figures were found guilty of charges ranging from crimes against the constitution to high treason , all linked to the mass protests following the controversial elections two years ago , in which nearly 200 people were killed .
Before the members of the Ethiopian Parliament 's investigation board were arrested or forced into exile , the board concluded that the security forces used unreasonable force and that marksmen targeted leading opposition politicians .
The sentences are expected in the coming months and there is a danger that most of the defendants will be condemned to death .
We call on the Ethiopian Government to release all political prisoners immediately and unconditionally .
The Ethiopian courts urgently need to review the rulings and the government must work to ensure an independent justice system and a free press .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , Ethiopia , a country with a population of 75 million , is one of Africa 's poorest states and almost two-thirds of its citizens are illiterate .
It has had a traumatic history , passing from colonialism to royal oligarchy to Marxist dictatorship and , recently , to a type of apparent parliamentary democracy , but with serious democratic deficits .
We do not expect Ethiopian democratic norms to be of a European standard .
That would be unrealistic on our part , bearing in mind the country 's huge problems , but we expect the Ethiopian Government to show respect for at least basic human rights .
We are currently very concerned about the psychologically paranoid mentality of the regime in Addis Ababa , which is behind a large-scale crackdown on Opposition leaders , journalists and human rights activists .
We are particularly worried about the government-controlled corrupt judicial and police systems which operate in the country , and call on the Ethiopian authorities to proceed immediately to drastic changes and corrective measures in order to remedy the currently abysmal situation and to show the outside world that they genuinely care about justice and democracy , instead of simply claiming to do so .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sure that we will agree with Mr Cappato this time .


( ES ) Madam President , I would like to express my support and acknowledgement of the work that some of our fellow Members have been doing for a long time with regard to Ethiopia and in particular that of our friend and colleague Ana Gomes , not just because of the mission that took place , but because over all these years she has been condemning the situation in Ethiopia and taking it extremely seriously .
I believe that support for this resolution that we are going to approve today may be crucial in terms of changing the situation in Ethiopia .
In my view , it was significant to see both the chairman and the vice-chairman of the committee of inquiry on the events that took place two years ago , having to flee the country , forced out under pressure from the Meles Government in view of the results of their inquiry .
This is something about which we cannot remain silent , particularly in view of the fact that it was the European Union that promoted and legitimised the elections in that country two years ago .
The situation is therefore clearly a worry .
It is serious and requires an immediate response .
( MT ) Europe views Ethiopia with ambivalence .
It was initially extremely confident that it could help this country progress towards democracy .
This is why we sent to Ethiopia one of the largest observation missions we have ever sent .
The West views Ethiopia almost as an ally , and by the West I also mean America .
The West also applauded Somalia when it offered aid to the Ethiopian Government .
What has happened internally , however ?
Internally , we have seen that , because this country relies on international assistance , especially from the West , human rights are not respected ; minorities are punished in one way or another , and there is corruption amongst the police and judicial authorities .
We have also observed that there are just under forty people in prison , who will probably be given the death penalty .
Therefore , I believe that Europe must try to re-open negotiations in a collaborative rather than authoritative manner with this country .
We must convey the message to Ethiopia that it cannot continue to operate in this manner .
Madam President , I want to assure you that the Commission fully shares Parliament 's concerns with the lack of progress with respect to democratisation in Ethiopia and even the deterioration of the situation since the 2005 post-election crisis .
The Commission , in coordination with Member States and the international community , actively undertook efforts to defuse tensions and urge the Ethiopian Government to take practical steps towards the reconciliation and the democratisation of the country , to restore confidence and to release the imprisoned opposition leaders and representatives of the media and civil society .
In its relations with the Ethiopian authorities , the Commission is continuously stressing the importance of reforms , including the implementation of the recommendations of the EU Election Observation Mission in 2005 .
As far as the political detainees are concerned , President Barroso and Commissioner Michel have reiterated their concerns on several occasions to Prime Minister Meles Zenawi , requesting a short , fair and transparent trial , asking for the withdrawal of the more outrageous charges and pointing out that they did not consider the trial an appropriate response to the Ethiopian political problems .
The granting of an amnesty to the political detainees was also suggested to the Prime Minister of Ethiopia .
The presence of an EU lawyer observer at the prisoners ' trial is intended to remind the Ethiopian authorities of the EU 's attention in this regard .
Notwithstanding the recent release of 26 of the 131 initial defendants , for whom some of the initial accusations had been dismissed , the Commission is at present seriously concerned about the guilty verdict pronounced on 11 June against 38 political prisoners , which could lead even to the death penalty .
The Commission , the EU Member States and the international community are following the situation very closely , also taking into account the ongoing mediation efforts between the Ethiopian authorities and the prisoners .
The Commission supports the mediation , but expects this mediation to lead to the unconditional release of the political prisoners .
The Commission is aware that the political situation is due to the lack of democratic reforms and extensive human rights violations , like arrests and detentions without charge .
I want to assure you that we will never abandon those Ethiopians who are committed to democracy , many of whom have been imprisoned and forced to leave the country .
Notwithstanding some progress made in parliamentary rules , there is a lack of substantial progress in the Prime Minister 's commitments entered into with the opposition after the elections , notably on electoral reforms , independence of the National Electoral Board , media reforms , independence of the judiciary and of the security and military forces .
The Commission remains convinced that we should continue to engage with the Ethiopian authorities in an intense political dialogue on such crucial issues at every possible opportunity .
Commissioner Michel , who is personally committed , has given priority to keeping an open and structured dialogue with them within the framework of Article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement on political dialogue , as the most appropriate way to encourage enhanced governance , reconciliation and democracy .
The Commission recognises that democratisation will take time and we must remain vigilant as well as ready to support the government 's efforts in that direction .
As regards the death penalty , we made it explicitly clear to the Prime Minister of Ethiopia that the European Union is opposed to its use in all circumstances and considers its abolition a crucial step towards the advancement of human dignity .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed , and the vote will take place shortly .
3 .
Burma
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on Burma .
author . - Madam President , Commissioner , Burma is a regular theme in our sessions on human rights breaches .
If we had a prize for the regime with the worst human rights record , Burma would certainly be a very strong contender .
Incidentally , Burma is also a world star with respect to another evil : drugs .
According to the International Narcotics Central Strategy Report for 2006 , Burma is the world 's second largest producer of illicit opium , accounting for more than 90 % of South-East Asian heroin .
I do not know how well the breaches of human rights are connected to drug production in Burma , but I know they should both be dealt with firmly , quickly and effectively .
Unfortunately , it seems that the EU 's stance - as well as that of the international community - against the Burmese regime has not been drastic enough to have any good effect .
A good example is the recent granting of permission by the Council to the Burmese Foreign Minister to attend the ASEM meeting , only days after the military junta in Burma had extended the deplorable house arrest of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi .
The Council ought to give an explanation for this action .
Another example is the fact that an arms embargo on Burma is largely ineffective , since countries like China and India are not taking part in it .
Surely pressure must be put on such countries to join in the arms embargo against Burma ?
In conclusion , let me reiterate our call for the immediate release from house arrest of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi .
That remarkable lady has contributed enormously to peace and democracy , not only in Burma but internationally , and she has been awarded both the Nobel Peace Prize and our own Sakharov Prize .
It is truly outrageous and shameful that she has spent more than 11 of the last 17 years in detention in her own country .
International and EU calls for her release have had no effect .
Our patience has long run out .
We recommend that more drastic action , such as expansion of sanctions and enlargement of the list of those targeted , must now take place .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , the European Union has adopted a firm stance regarding the abuses perpetrated by the military regime in Burma / Myanmar .
Europe is pressing for Burma / Myanmar to show more respect for human rights and get back on course towards democracy .
The authorities in Burma / Myanmar are continuing to imprison and persecute activists working for democracy .
I believe there are two ways in which the situation in that country could be improved .
One is for China and India to stop supplying it with arms and other strategic equipment .
The other is for foreign enterprises investing in Burma / Myanmar to respect human rights .
It is also important to develop programmes to assist civil society in Burma / Myanmar , notably organisations for women and ethnic minorities .
I represent the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .
We support all actions aimed at protecting human rights and respect for the principles of the rule of law and democratic freedoms including freedom of association and freedom of speech .
We will continue to do so at all times .
We wish to draw attention to the financial situation of the Burmese people .
Over 15 million of them are living below the poverty line .
This amounts to about 30 % of the population .
Immediate assistance is needed to protect the life and health of these individuals .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have often spoken in this House about the situation in Burma , making frequent use of the terms ' repression ' , ' military junta in power ' and ' flouted human rights ' .
The resolution that we are going to vote on today is a call for Burma to bring an end to certain actions .
Along with my colleagues , I particularly and principally deplore the house arrest since 30 May 2003 of Aung San Suu Kyi , the Burmese opposition member who celebrated her 62nd birthday on Tuesday and has spent eleven out of the last seventeen years in detention , mainly under house arrest .
She has only been able to leave her home once , for health reasons requiring urgent attention , and she has little contact with the outside world .
Aung San Suu Kyi is the symbol of the Burmese opposition to the military dictatorship , and also received the Nobel prize in 1991 .
It is absolutely unacceptable for her to be under house arrest . This is why we are calling for her immediate , unconditional release .
Burma must entirely stop persecuting and imprisoning pro-democracy activists and must release those who are already in prison .
I am thinking in particular of U Win Tin , a journalist who , now aged 77 , has been in prison for nearly 20 years for writing a letter to the United Nations reporting the poor conditions under which political prisoners were being held .
As Vice-Chairman of the ANASE delegation in Parliament , I see the growing role that this organisation can play in the region .
May it have a positive influence on the Burmese Government in the near future !
author . - Madam President , Burma has one of the world 's worst human rights and lack of democracy track records , with people-trafficking for sexual exploitation , domestic service and forced commercial labour .
This is compounded by the military junta 's severe economic mismanagement .
Burma also remains the world 's second-largest producer of illicit opium .
Despite multi-party elections in 1990 , which resulted in the NLD victory , the repressive military junta continues to refuse to hand over power .
NLD leader and Nobel Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi , who marked her 62nd birthday this Tuesday , has been detained for more than 11 of the past 18 years .
In February 2006 , the junta extended her detention for yet another year .
Her supporters , as well as those who promote democracy and improved human rights , are routinely harassed or jailed in a country with no independent judiciary and brutal law enforcement agencies .
Following the recent UN Security Council refusal to apply sanctions against Burma , disgracefully , the UN Human Rights Council has focused almost entirely and exclusively on one single country - Israel - totally ignoring Burma .
The EU , along with neighbouring ASEAN countries , and along with India and China as well , must now do much more to apply pressure to secure Aung San Suu Kyi 's release .

author . - ( ES ) Madam President , as other Members have pointed out and as is pointed out time and time again in the reports by the United Nations Special Representative on Human Rights in Myanmar , Mr Paulo Sergio Pinheiro , and in the reports by the United Nations Secretary-General 's Special Representative on Human Rights Defenders , Hina Jilani , the situation in Burma continues to be of concern and is deteriorating every day .
I would like to begin by recalling the appeals that have been made in this House on previous occasions and which we must make once again .
Extending the confinement of Aung San Suu Kyi by a year is entirely unacceptable , and we must therefore call upon the Burmese regime to suspend it as soon as possible .
It is also important to call once again for the release of all political prisoners and to guarantee freedom of expression and freedom of demonstration , which are currently being violated in that country .
On the other hand , however , I also believe that it is important to point out our responsibility as western countries in relation to that country , in terms of investments , and I say this because there are at least two crucial factors .
Firstly , let us not forget that Burma currently has , if not the most significant , then at least one of the most significant reserves of natural gas in South-East Asia .
That is a very attractive thing , naturally .
It is therefore essential that , before there is any foreign international investment , we guarantee that there is at least an analysis of the impact of those investments on human rights .
That is something that we forget too often .
Secondly , I believe that it is also important to stress that the sanctions currently being imposed by the United States , and the European Union 's restrictions , are not proving to be effective .
The fact that many other Asian countries are clearly increasing their investments in that country obliges us also to take a regional approach to the problem in order to ensure that our actions , and those of our allies , are more effective .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I reiterate the condemnation of the Burmese regime , which is so clearly and effectively expressed in the resolution .
The 17-year-long plight of Aung San Suu Kyi is one which few human beings could withstand .
She has selflessly withstood indefinite imprisonment and ongoing separation from her loved ones , yet is still showing unshakeable courage and consistency in her cause , and for this she must be applauded .
She is , without doubt , a leader of our time , enduring the curtailment of her civil liberties which closely mirrors the suppression of her fellow citizens .
The human rights abuses in Burma span religious persecution , forced labour and detention without trial and are elements of political violence which the UN has recently justifiably condemned .
The signatories of this resolution wholeheartedly denounce the economic support given to the regime through investment in the arms trade and the energy industry from other Far Eastern countries , which only shows up this ruthless dictatorship .
All democracies should seriously reconsider financing a country with one of the lowest health expenditures in the world .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , six months have passed since the last European Parliament resolution that sent out a warning about the serious internal situation in Burma / Myanmar .
The military authorities in power in that country have failed to make any progress towards democracy , however .
Burma / Myanmar 's economic situation is causing great concern .
Thirty per cent of its people live below the poverty line and human rights are openly violated .
In addition , forced labour and child conscription into the army are part of everyday life .
Opposition activists are persecuted and imprisoned for long periods , as has happened in the case of Aung San Suu Kyi , a Nobel and Sakharov prize winner who has been detained for 17 years .
Against this background , all the political groups in Burma / Myanmar should be urged to take part in the National Convention charged with drafting a new Constitution .
Representatives of the National League for Democracy should also participate .
Burma / Myanmar 's membership of ASEAN is particularly important for its future , as ASEAN members are required to redouble their efforts towards democracy .
China and India should exert political and economic pressure on the Burmese regime by refusing to support the army of Burma / Myanmar .
For its part , the international community should implement economic sanctions and freeze the assets of members of the Government of Burma / Myanmar and those associated with them .
It is only by taking decisive action of this nature that we can hope to force the Burmese regime to introduce democratic changes .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the subject of today 's debate on human rights violations is once again the political and social situation in Burma / Myanmar .
Ever since 1962 , Burma / Myanmar has been ruled by the military , who have kept an iron grip on the country .
For over 40 years , human rights have been violated in this Asian country , and thousands of individuals have been persecuted and punished for opposition activities .
Many have been imprisoned .
Forced labour is the order of the day , and children are conscripted into the army .
Most people in Burma / Myanmar do not have access to medical care .
Many of them die of tuberculosis , malaria , HIV or AIDS and almost half the children do not attend school .
Red Cross centres have been shut down and those in need deprived of protection and humanitarian aid .
The junta disregards the actions of the UN Human Rights Council and of the ILO .
It also fails to respond to European Parliament resolutions and to documents issued by the Council of the European Community .
On 15 May 2007 Aung San Suu Kyi 's term of house arrest was extended for a further year .
This Nobel Prize winner and opposition activist has spent 11 of the last 17 years either in prison or under house arrest .
We appeal for her release and that of other political prisoners .
We also call for the National League for Democracy to be allowed to resume its activities , and for the resumption of humanitarian aid to prevent the extinction of the Burmese nation and ethnic minorities .
A particular problem concerning the continued existence of this regime and others of a totalitarian nature is the ineffective actions taken by international bodies .
Despite promises to the contrary , the sanctions imposed do not have an impact on the economic structures of the regimes and the embargoes applied hit ordinary people who are already persecuted and living in extreme poverty .
Our European Parliament resolutions and all other actions will remain superficial and ineffective until these issues are resolved .
Madam President , the Commission remains worried about the situation in Myanmar / Burma .
The biggest worries concern the deep social and ethnic fault lines which divide the country and which result in human insecurity , widespread poverty and lack of progress in economic and social development .
It is obvious , that in a climate of human insecurity and ongoing armed conflict in a few border areas , there is little space for respect for human rights .
The authorities of Myanmar / Burma are confronted with a number of challenges , like establishing national unity and political stability , and - most importantly - advancing the development level of their country which remains one of the poorest in the world .
For the international community , helping the transition of Myanmar / Burma towards a more open and more developed society - led by a legitimate and civilian government - should remain the paramount goal .
The military leadership 's erratic governance continues , in economic terms and in the political sphere .
The military continues to employ practices of forced labour , while civil society faces repression , uncertainty and operational difficulties .
The ' 88 Students ' - the then leaders of the 1988 uprising - continue to exploit the minimal space for civil society as much as they can , while the National League for Democracy is marginalised and while the unjustifiable detention of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi continues .
Transition is hard to imagine with more than one thousand political detainees , among whom Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi sticks out as the icon of peace and reconciliation .
Such transition is equally inconceivable without a genuine dialogue with the various ethnic groups , including those continuing their armed battle .
The Commission supports the work of Professor Paolo Sergio Pinheiro , the UN 's Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in Myanmar .
He said , in his last statement , that ' grave human rights violations are indulged not only with impunity but authorised by the sanction of laws ' .
The Commission also welcomes the appointment by the UN Secretary-General of Professor Ibrahim Gambari as Special Envoy for Myanmar , and expects that the Government will extend its full cooperation to him , in order to allow the good offices of the UN Secretary General to continue .
Regarding the forthcoming session of the National Convention , we call on the Government to listen to the voices of ethnic groups and political stakeholders in opposition .
We note progress in the working conditions of the local International Labour Organisation office , which will hopefully improve the situation of victims of forced labour practices filing a complaint .
But we deplore the deteriorating working conditions for the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) and call on the Government to allow the ICRC to resume its humanitarian mission .
Among most observers , there is a growing consensus that more needs to be done about the political and socioeconomic situation .
The European Union , in its common position , has mandated the Commission to engage the Government in a dialogue over its responsibilities to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
The EU has , therefore , been looking for effective policies which may help the p