Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session suspended on Wednesday , 27 June 2007 .
Statements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , the chairmen of the political groups have asked me to make a statement on terrorism .
A few days ago , on 29 and 30 June , there were renewed terrorist attacks in London and Glasgow ; they came something over three years after the 11 March 2004 bombings in Madrid that cost 192 people their lives and two years after the 7 July 2005 bombings in London in which 56 people were killed and more than 700 injured .
A few days later , on 2 July , a suicide bombing claimed further victims in Yemen : seven Spanish tourists and two Yemenis were killed and eight other persons injured .
There are many indications that the al-Qaeda terrorist network is connected with these attacks .
This is a threat to us all .
Terrorism is a direct assault on freedom , human rights and democracy .
Terrorism is an attempt to destroy our values by blind force , values which unite us in the European Union and in our Member States .
Wherever it takes place and whoever is responsible , terrorism is a crime to which we must respond with determination and solidarity .
The European Union must join with the international community of nations to fight against every form of terrorism .
Today , the European Parliament will be discussing Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert 's report on the draft directive which the Commission presented last year that will require the Member States to identify important infrastructures in such areas as energy , health , communications and transport and protect them against terrorist attacks .
This will enable long-term security measures to be taken for the event of a terrorist attack .
This proposed European strategy is a tangible contribution to the fight against terrorism .
We must take all the measures necessary to counter terrorism .
In so doing , we must be guided by our principles of the rule of law .
The fight against terrorism can only be waged in a manner consistent with the values we are seeking to defend !
The European Parliament expresses its solidarity and support for the victims of terrorism and their families - for those who have lost their lives , but also for those who are still suffering the psychological and physical consequences .
May I conclude by quoting the words of the United Kingdom 's new Prime Minister , Gordon Brown : ' We will not yield , we will not be intimidated ' .
We will now keep silence in memory of the victims .
( The House rose for a minute 's silence . )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Membership of committees : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written statements ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Written statements ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Calendar of part-sessions for 2008
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda for this session , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 5 July 2007 pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday and Tuesday :
No amendments
Wednesday :
The Socialist Group , the Liberal Group and the Group of the European United Left propose that Mr Markov 's report on road infrastructure safety management be referred back to the committee responsible in accordance with Rule 168 .
Mr President , I would like to speak in favour of referring this report back to the committee .
There was a lot of concern in committee when the vote was taken to reject this proposal and no doubt the groups involved had reasons for doing that , but one of the consequences was that many road safety issues were then rejected also .
Rather than go through the whole procedure in this plenary , my group and I feel that it would be far better if we refer the whole Markov report back to committee as of today , take it off the agenda and basically start again with our discussions between all the groups in the hope that we can come to a proper solution .
( Parliament adopted the motion )
Thursday :
No amendments
( The order of business was adopted )
( DE ) Mr President , I crave your forbearance because I do not know which Rule of the Rules of Procedure I am speaking under .
But I am sure that in your infinite wisdom you will find the right one .
We have a number of debates in this House about Parliament 's calendar of meetings .
There is a very great need for coordination between the political groups .
The deadline for the tabling of amendments is 10 a.m. tomorrow .
On behalf of our group , but also with the agreement of other group chairmen and colleagues , I propose that the deadline be extended to 6 p.m. tomorrow .
That might give us time to resolve one or two serious problems , including organisational ones .
Thank you .
A large number of group chairmen and representatives are nodding their heads in agreement with this proposal .
I can therefore assume that there are no objections and the deadline will be set at 6 p.m. tomorrow .
Community action programme in the field of health - Action to tackle cardiovascular disease ( debate )
The next item is :
the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Council common position for adopting a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a second programme of Community action in the field of health ( 2007-2013 ) ( 16369 / 2 / 2006 C6-0100 / 2007 Rapporteur : Mr Trakatellis , and
the debate on the oral question to the Commission B6-0134 / 2007 ) by Mr Ouzký , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on action to tackle cardiovascular disease .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I call on you to give due attention to the question of promoting health , which must be seen not only as a valuable commodity and indicator of social prosperity , but also as an investment-generating parameter .
This approach is particular evident in the field of prevention , on which the programme under debate mainly focuses , because prevention means restricting morbidity and hence reducing the costs of treatment and hospital care .
There is no need to analyse the beneficial results of such a development for health insurance and , by extension , public finances .
Improving the health of the population undoubtedly drives progress , strengthens citizens , by guaranteeing them a longer , better and more productive life , and constitutes the precondition to economic prosperity .
By limiting the number of man-hours lost , prevention also helps to increase the productivity and employability of workers , two indicators which are in keeping with the Lisbon process .
Prevention , therefore , is the key issue for a revised , efficiency-orientated health policy and a preferential field of action for a Union programme .
That is why the European Union needs its second public health programme : because we must jointly defend ourselves against the health risks which have appeared so dramatically , with the possibility of a ' flu pandemic and with the bird ' flu epidemic , and that is one of the aims of the programme .
We must jointly promote a healthy lifestyle for our children , with a proper diet in a society free from smoke and stress and with proper socio-economic conditions in general that have a serious effect on health , and that is one of the aims of the programme .
We must jointly fight to reduce the morbidity and mortality rates of serious illnesses which destroy the body and the mind , and that is one of the aims of the programme .
We must recommend that better medical practices , which are not only the most efficient way of combating disease but which limit further loss of health , be within reach of everyone , both of those working in the health professions and of simple citizens , and that is one of the aims of the programme .
Particular importance is attached to collating data on the resistance of bacteria to antibiotics , which is currently the scourge of hospitals in Europe .
Particular importance is also attached to the effect of environmental factors on health .
It is also extremely important that we collate data and develop strategies on patient mobility .
I could continue by describing one by one all the aims of the programme .
I think that it is not necessary , because we are all convinced that we must act jointly and at European level , while at the same time giving the Member States the possibility of increasing their efficiency on health matters .
This is the second programme , which will apply in the years 2008-2013 .
It is better , more comprehensive and more ambitious and is marked by an integrated perception both of health and of the means , mechanisms and practices for combating health problems .
It will assist convergence and the integration of the European Union , which we must look on not only in economic terms or foreign policy terms , but also in terms of convergence in the fields of education and health , because that is when the fabric of stability and prosperity of European society is really woven .
This sort of ambitious plan which , at the same time , is of exceptional benefit not only for the health , but also for the economy of the European Union , needs financial investments that will yield exponential results , because it will considerably reduce the onerous costs of health services in the Member States .
Unfortunately , the Council made huge cuts to the European Union budget in December , which for certain programmes , such as the programme under debate , were exceptionally painful .
One wonders how we can progress along the difficult path of European integration when the programmes which fundamentally build and create a European society of the future are subject to significant cuts .
The good news is that the need for adequate funding for the health programme has been understood by the Council and by the Commission and by Parliament and I believe that the arrangement brokered through unofficial consultations allows for adequate financing within a framework of the rules of the Community budget .
I call on my honourable friends to vote in favour of the agreed amendments brokered through unofficial consultations .
author . - ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to express my support for the words of my dear colleague Dr Trakatellis on the particular issue of cardiovascular diseases .
In my question to the Commission , I focused on a widely known issue , namely the seriousness of cardiovascular diseases , which in the EU alone kill almost two million people per year .
This is an established and universally acknowledged fact .
As long ago as 2004 , the Council recognised the importance of providing decisive solutions to the problem of cardiovascular diseases .
There has been extraordinary medical progress in this field in the last 10 to 15 years .
The problem , however , is the dramatic increase in costs .
For the purposes of illustration , I always tell Czech citizens in debates - and I emphasise the point here in this Chamber - that treating a coronary thrombosis 15 years ago , using the methods of the time , cost around EUR 20 per day , and after streptokinase was introduced the cost rose to EUR 1,000 per treatment .
Nowadays , with the advent of stents and acute catheterisation , the cost has risen to EUR 10 000 for a single treatment .
In other words , there has been a huge increase in the financial cost .
On the other hand , there has been enormous growth in the range of opportunities for treating a significant number of patients who would previously have had to suffer and die .
Today , patients with acute coronary thrombosis , provided they are treated quickly and properly , can return home on the very same day and go back to work few days later .
The money we spend , therefore , can be recouped later .
A further problem is the differences that exist not only between the various Member States but also within individual countries .
According to one study in my country , the death rate from cardiovascular diseases rises according to how far from the clinic the patient lives .
In this regard , the EU varies enormously and what we are proposing is a path towards a more systemic solution .
Although I do not wish to go against the subsidiarity principle and tread on the toes of the various national governments , I should like to ask the Commission how it intends to bring about an exchange of information and experience , because we certainly have the resources for that , and it is one of the ways in which we can make substantial improvements this area .
What steps does the Commission intend to take to reduce the economic burden and the impact of cardiovascular diseases on the economies of the Member States ?
What funding possibilities does the Commission have which can be recommended ?
In one of the amendments to which I put my name today , I called for a study into the option of mass public provision of defibrillators .
We know that this has proved to be extremely effective in Japan , and I have also learned of defibrillators being made available in public places in a number of other countries , including the United States .
I am aware that this is a very expensive option , and that opponents of such an indiscriminate approach would argue that a certain amount of prudence is called for .
Yet this approach will in many cases save lives before the ambulance arrives .
This is why I should be interested in the Commission 's response to this additional question .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to start by extending my warmest thanks to all the honourable Members for the interest they have shown in the Commission proposal for the adoption of a second programme of Community action in the field of health .
I should like in particular to thank the rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , and the shadow rapporteurs for their efforts , which will allow us - and I am sure of this - to reach an agreement at second reading .
We have before us today an overall compromise which is the outcome of a number of very positive unofficial contacts between the three institutions .
The compromise amendments strengthen the text in numerous sectors which are of particular importance to Parliament , such as the follow-up to Community initiatives on cancer and the more accurate wording on action for the environment and health .
As far as the budget is concerned , which we have also had the opportunity to debate in the past , unfortunately the room for manoeuvre was very limited and the Commission is strictly bound by the agreed financial framework .
Nonetheless , according to the text of the tripartite statement , the special requirements of the programme will be taken into account during the annual budget procedure .
In addition , the present text will provide the legal basis , which will safeguard the more effective disposal of resources for achieving the aims of the programme .
I do not think that anyone can doubt that Parliament , the Council and the Commission made a great deal of effort to reach an acceptable compromise .
I honestly hope that the vote to follow will express this positive and constructive stand , so that we can start to finance plans relating to important new public health sectors from 1 January 2008 .
I should like now to turn , on the basis of Mr Ouzký 's question , to a more specific aspect of public health and one of the most serious problems ; I refer to cardiovascular diseases , which are certainly one of the main causes of early death and disability of the citizens of the European Union .
The causes and the risk factors are well known ; they include smoking , a poor diet and obesity , lack of physical exercise and excessive consumption of alcohol .
I know that Parliament has an acute interest in this sector and that a motion for a resolution on cardiovascular diseases is being submitted to plenary by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
As you know , the Commission puts particular emphasis on prevention .
Within the limited resources at our disposal and within the balance of competences set out in the Treaty , we put particular emphasis and expend a great deal of effort on prevention .
We also do this on the question of smoking and you are all well acquainted with the ' Help ' strategy , which has also been received in Parliament , the various laws and the Green Paper we have adopted on banning smoking in public places , and I really do impatiently await the view and opinion of the European Parliament .
As far as diet is concerned , we published very recently - in May - a White Paper on diet and obesity and , as you know , we have already started applying and implementing the strategy on alcohol , starting with the Alcohol and Health Forum , in cooperation with non-governmental organisations and private-sector undertakings in the aim of combating this new problem .
Through public health programmes , the Commission supports activities and networks relating to cardiovascular diseases , including an extensive catalogue of data on cardiovascular diseases in the Member States and the development of indicators for monitoring cardiovascular diseases .
The creation of centres of reference , the exchange of best practices , the combating of the inequalities which unfortunately exist in the European Union - not only from one state to another , but also within the Member States themselves - are the objectives addressed by the new programme .
However , I must emphasise for the sake of accuracy that we simply provide possibilities ; they must be used by the Member States , which are responsible for providing health services .
As far as research is concerned ( because the question also refers to research ) , the European Union has made over EUR 100 million available for research into cardiovascular diseases through the Sixth Framework Programme on research and development .
These diseases are still one of the priorities of health research within the framework of the Seventh Framework Programme on research and development which started this year .
Consequently , there is the facility to continue research in this sector under the Seventh Framework Programme .
I shall not comment in detail on the European Heart Health Charter , because an event and debate were held on the subject here in Parliament and we all remember the presentation event in Brussels last month .
However , this cohesive document is important , because it unifies all the bodies which can help to combat this problem and , of course , it is safeguarded by the public health programme .
More action to combat the decisive factors which cause cardiovascular diseases and inequalities in health will be included in the new health strategy of the European Union which I hope - and I am sure - will be adopted later , before the end of this year .
As far as the financial part is concerned - because this too is important - there is the European Development Fund for developing countries , where the Commission is responding to the priorities set by the countries themselves through dialogue and , of course , the health sector is one of the priorities .
The same applies to the Structural Funds which exist in the European Union for the Member States and which can be used for health even more extensively in this period than in the previous period , but there is still a need for health to be a priority issue in the take-up of Funds by the Member States themselves .
We provide possibilities , by which I mean that I do not fail to raise the issue with the ministers of health whenever we meet but , at the end of the day , the decision will be taken collectively by the governments of the Member States .
I advise and urge the Member States to make use of the Structural Funds in the health sector , but I must say that there is still a great deal of room for improvement .
However , it is also our priority to strengthen the national health systems which allow for the management of public health priorities , which cover not only communicable diseases , which of course are the first and obvious threat , but also non-communicable and I hope here that I shall have the support and cooperation of Parliament .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , there is no wealth without health .
That is the theme of this debate and the sub-plot is that we have both to care and cure , but also to prevent ill-health and promote wellbeing .
The Commissioner recognises this and has come forward with an ambitious programme , as our rapporteur has said , but the budget was savaged by two-thirds .
So it is clear we must do better on budgets in the future ; it is clear we must use our limited resources now wisely ; it is clear we must target the non-communicable diseases that cause 86 % of deaths in Europe and devastate lives and families - cardiovascular disease , cancer , mental illness , diabetes , respiratory and musculoskeletal conditions .
That of course links into the resolution that you have before you : 42 % of deaths in the EU come from CVD problems .
Our emphasis must be on lifestyle .
Some 80 % of heart attacks , stroke and diabetes , and some 40 % of cancers could be avoided by changing lifestyle and cutting out the risks that come from a bad lifestyle .
We will sometimes need education or legislation on smoking , drugs , alcohol , salt , saturated and trans fats , lack of exercise , as well as things like stress management and all the causes of hypertension .
We need partnerships between people , governments , health services and employers .
And we need ideas such as the one on the defibrillator that my colleague referred to .
I could end by saying the road to hell is often said to be paved with good intentions , but the health promotion case studies show that , as in North Karelia , if good intentions are translated into action , then the road can lead not to hell but to health .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , my first thanks go to Mr Trakatellis for his excellent work on getting agreement today on a package of amendments on the public health programme .
It has not been easy : we have had lots of meetings over the course of the last few months , but we finally have a package that the Socialist Group welcomes .
We welcome the very clear commitment to tackling health inequalities which is contained in the package .
We welcome , as Mr Bowis said , the action on major diseases which are the biggest killers in Europe .
We want to see better use made of the centres of reference across Europe and we are also pleased that NGOs and patients ' organisations will have better access to funding thanks to this programme that will see emphasis placed on the wider environmental determinants of heath .
We all know that health suffers because of environmental issues and we want to see that tackled .
Like the other speakers , I think it is regrettable that we have a lower budget than we had thought in the first place but , as the Commission has said on many occasions , there are other framework programmes where health can be investigated so this is not the only money made available for health research in the EU .
I want to draw your attention to Amendment 19 , which the Socialist Group has tabled separately from the package .
In recital 14 we talk about increasing healthy life years , and we want to delete the words ' also called disability-free life expectancy indicator ' .
We have had many approaches from disability organisations , which make the point that you can have a disability and be healthy and that , therefore , this terminology seems to suggest that if you are a disabled person you are automatically somebody who is unhealthy .
Therefore , we would like the Commission and the Council to look at that when they look at the final wording for the document .
Finally , I want to put on record my thanks as well to the German Presidency negotiating team who helped us to reach agreement today and took on board so many of our parliamentary amendments from first reading .
I look forward to getting the programme up and running on time next year .
That is what everybody wants at this stage and that is why we have been prepared to compromise on the budget , but we are very pleased with the content .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I should like to express my congratulations to the rapporteur for his excellent report .
Professor Trakatellis has spent many years dealing with health issues , both as a clinician and as a politician ; therefore , he knows the subject matter of this report very well and it is thus not surprising that he has tackled the issue with efficiency and wisdom .
Most of us share the rapporteur 's views on the main issues brought up in this report .
One of the most important of these is the problem of health inequalities .
Such inequalities occur not just from one Member State to another but also within Member States .
They can be very substantial indeed and , in many cases , such differences exist right across the whole range of healthcare , from prevention and diagnosis to treatment .
It is well known , not just amongst medical professionals but also amongst ordinary citizens , that such discrepancies more often than not make the difference between life or death .
The right to life should be accompanied by the right to health - equal health , not one health for the rich and another for the poor .
In a fair and humanistic society such as the one we aspire to achieve in the EU Member States , all citizens should be equal in terms of healthcare .
I agree entirely with the rapporteur that this issue should become a very major aim of the health programme and I am sure that the Commissioner also agrees with this .
A second area referred to by the rapporteur on which I would like to offer some brief comments is that of cancer .
Cancer is the second commonest cause of death in Europe and the world in general , yet it is absolutely unthinkable why in this day and age no proper Community system for cooperation between centres of reference is fully functioning unhindered .
And it is shameful that shortcomings exist in the establishment of a Europe-wide register for those cancers which are covered by the Council recommendation on cancer screening .
The rapporteur addresses both of these issues and many others adequately and proposes appropriate amendments which we fully support .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Commissioner , we must indeed congratulate the rapporteur , Professor Trakatellis , on achieving today 's compromise .
I , however , shall comment on the financial problem because , as we all know , the biggest bone of contention between Parliament and the Council from the outset was the budget to support this policy .
The compromise between the Member States in December 2005 on the new financial framework for the period 2007-2013 left funding for numerous policy areas at much lower levels than initially proposed by the Commission .
One of the policy areas which suffered the biggest cuts was public health and the biggest victim was the health programme .
The consequences of the negotiations between the Commission and the Council were very unfortunate in terms of financial support for the action programme .
The budget was reduced to EUR 365.6 million , a very small sum for such an ambitious programme .
Nonetheless , the rapporteur , with the support of the shadow rapporteurs , explored every way of improving the situation .
However , given the rigid stance of the Council , he accepted that the room for manoeuvre as far as the budget was concerned was very limited and accepted the compromise between the Council and the Commission .
Although the limited budget for the programme is not of course to our liking , we welcome the rapporteur 's efforts in managing to keep a plethora of Parliament 's recommendations and amendments intact and to avoid the conciliation procedure .
We are most relieved to see that the rapporteur 's compromise includes the need to reduce inequalities in health and a reference to alternative medicine .
Nor does it omit the strengthening of cross-border care and patient mobility or better access for citizens to information , which will make them better able to take decisions which are in their interests .
It is worth noting that a large part of the budget will go to non-governmental organisations , which are non-profit-making and independent of industry , trade and the undertakings which specialise in the promotion of health and the aims of the programme .
Let us hope that it will be possible to meet the ambitious actions and expectations we all have of this programme , which will finally enter into force in 2008 , despite the reduced budget .
Commissioner , I should like to emphasise at this point , as my honourable friends and previous speakers have indicated , the importance of prevention and of prompt diagnosis .
We must invest in this sector .
You cannot imagine not only the lives we shall save , but also the money that the Member States will save by applying programmes which address this specific sector , especially heart disease and cancer .
You mentioned cancer as the second cause of death .
I tell you with mathematical accuracy that , in a few years ' time , cancer will be the first cause of death as a result of the progress being made with cardiovascular diseases .
Commissioner , we are with you and we shall support you in applying the programme .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the 2007-2013 Community action programme in the field of health aimed to set a course for European health services .
From the outset , however , the programme has generated controversy .
This was due not only to the lack of clarity in the provisions on funding but also to other reasons .
The funds allocated relate only to international NGOs , and other programmes have been cut out .
Pursuant to the document , substantial sums amounting to 60 % Community input and to as much as 80 % in exceptional circumstances are to be allocated to non-governmental organisations at international level .
The programmes of many such organisations include pro-abortion policies .
In some cases the organisations are offshoots of pharmaceutical concerns .
Funding laboratories without establishing the type of research they are engaged in is also cause for concern .
Unfortunately the programme only deals in a cursory manner with access to health services and the care of the elderly .
It makes no provision for supporting the family , combating the diseases of contemporary society or for access to highly specialised advice .
The programme does , however , deal with healthy food and a healthy lifestyle .
The issue of cross-border health care arises again , along with its negative impact on certain health care systems .
It would seem that in view of the limited funding available , this programme cannot deal with the whole range of problems affecting European health care services .
- ( SK ) With regard to this report , I subscribe to all of the observations made by the rapporteur .
Out of an original budget of EUR 969 million , the Commission has cut healthcare allocations to EUR 365 million .
It did so despite the fact that Parliament had not regarded EUR 969 million as sufficient and had topped it up to EUR 1.5 billion .
I view this cut of nearly 60 % as highly irresponsible .
It is all the more shocking in the current climate , with healthcare systems across Eastern Europe weakened by the exodus of large numbers of physicians and nurses , who are leaving to seek work in the EU-15 .
In a situation where other programmes have been cut to the tune of a mere 2 to 5 % and when every third citizen in Europe develops cancer , I believe that in assuming this stance the Commission is ridiculing and disparaging the patients and citizens of the European Union .
It is therefore necessary to support the rapporteur in his efforts to have this small budget increased by at least 10 % , that is , to EUR 402 million , while keeping the variation ceiling at no more than 5 % .
At the same time , the programme should explicitly stipulate that structural funds , as you mentioned , Commissioner , can be used to finance healthcare projects , provided that Member States designate health care as a priority in their national programmes .
Until now , these funds have been primarily used to finance environmental projects or build up infrastructure , and only a few citizens know that the funds could also be employed to finance the modernisation of hospitals , purchase equipment and train healthcare professionals .
I very much welcome the establishment of European-wide registries for major diseases , notably cancer , which will be instrumental in collecting data and highlighting even more the fact that there are discrepancies of up to 30 % between Member States in the survival rates of patients suffering from certain types of cancer .
On the basis of statistics such as these , I believe that the Commission will review its healthcare priorities and endorse the appropriate allocations .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the action programme on health and the prevention of cardiovascular disease are very closely related subjects .
I would like first of all to offer Mr Trakatellis my sincere congratulations on his tireless fight for this programme .
Prevention is better than cure .
Prevention means longer life , better life , better quality of life , less medical care , less sickness , lower sickness costs .
I am sure we would have liked more resources than 20 cents per head of population per year .
We are however modest and conduct many action programmes for little money .
We can only set priorities of course , and I must make it absolutely clear that we are talking here about prevention , about educating people , and not about treatment , which after all is a subsidiary matter and the responsibility of the nation states .
Prevention means stopping diseases from occurring in the first place , especially in the area of cardiovascular diseases , involving heart attacks and strokes , of tumour diseases and their causes , as with lung cancer and smoking , of unhealthy lifestyles such as the wrong kind of food or even doping in sport , of accidents and accident prevention , and of research and statistics , where the aim is to detect and understand diseases better in order to develop better guidelines for treatment .
I will now reply to the oral question from Mr Ouzký , to whom I also express my thanks here .
Much can be done to prevent cardiovascular disease by changing one 's lifestyle : exercise , health , sport , balanced nutrition and ultimately also avoiding trans fatty acids .
We also need a catchy slogan for cardiovascular prevention , so that people know what is at stake .
We could say , for example , ' Save your heart , save your life ' or in German ' Herzlos kannst du nicht leben ' .
EUR 325 million for prevention over five years is not much .
I visited a German heart hospital this morning .
There , 200 million were invested in just one year !
Mr President , as my group 's shadow on the motion for a resolution on action to tackle cardiovascular disease , I would like wholeheartedly to endorse this worthy initiative and thank Mr Ouzký , Mr Andrejevs and Mr Bowis for all their hard work .


I feel I can but reiterate the content of the resolution and add my voice to the call for action and other points raised in the oral question .
I find it shocking that nearly half of all deaths in Europe are caused by cardiovascular disease and that it is the main cause of death for women in all European countries .
I welcome the specific mention of cardiovascular disease in the 2008-2013 health programme , but I am somewhat disappointed at the vastly reduced budget allocation given the fact that cardiovascular disease costs the European Union 's countries EUR 169 billion each year .
The EU has so much to offer in terms of added value which would surely repay many times any money spent on combating it .
Nevertheless , I fully support the compromise reached and recognise that it is necessary to have this funding in place as soon as possible .
Any further delay in adopting the programme would not be desirable .
There is much action at EU level where value can be added and it is for this reason that we need a tangible European strategy on cardiovascular disease which can help Member States to improve and coordinate their prevention strategies , identify those who are at high risk , raise awareness , inform the public and promote exchange of best practice .
A set of clear political guidelines should form part of this strategy .
I would like to conclude by reiterating my support for the motion for a resolution and I urge the Commission to bring forward without delay a comprehensive and coherent EU-wide strategy on cardiovascular disease incorporating the European Parliament 's suggestions .
( CS ) I too should like to congratulate Mr Trakatellis and thank him for his report and his proposals .
I would also like to make one or two comments .
I do not want to go into financial details , because this has already been done .
I should merely like to point out , speaking as a doctor , that if financial resources are cut , the common programme that we are debating will simply be less effective .
I firmly believe that healthcare cannot , in budgetary terms , be a peripheral issue .
I should like to support Amendment 1 , which contains proposals for Council recommendations as regards the necessary delivery mechanisms .
I feel that this is much needed , because we have often called for documents relating to healthcare or the fight against civilisational diseases , and we of course did not have the effective instruments needed to combat such diseases .
The second amendment that I should like to mention and support concerns patient awareness .
We need patients to be well informed .
This is not , however , solely a matter of improving access to information , it is also , in my view about access to better quality information .
Such information can help our citizens not only to become more interested in their own health , and in looking after themselves , but also to be less susceptible to advertising .
On the subject of advertising , I believe that we shall have a unique opportunity to show our fairness and honesty with regard to issues such as alcoholism when we debate the proposed measures in the Foglietta report on combating alcoholism .
On this issue , we will certainly table amendments regarding the advertising of alcoholic products .
I should like , if I may , to express my support for the initiative of Mr Ouzký , which applies to his question regarding cardiovascular diseases .
As a former cardiologist , I feel I have a fair amount of knowledge on the subject .
I should like to say that cardiologists today know much more about the causes and have put the conditions in place for patients to receive very effective treatment and to return to a normal working life .
The problem is the extent of the desire to invest in such programmes , in particular when it comes to prevention .
At the same time , there is a failure to understand that these resources can certainly be recouped .
In this respect , the Czech Republic is a very good example .
I believe that as MEPs we have a duty to call for a level playing field in the healthcare sector as well as the economic sector .
This is a matter of financial solidarity between the EU Member States .
Mr President , yesterday 's media revealed the shocking results of a study of children in a large area of England .
One in every 58 children has a form of autism .
How could a seriously debilitating condition have increased from 1 in 2000 to 1 in 58 children in 17 years ?
Mr Trakatellis 's work on the programme of Community action in the field of health 2007-2013 comes at a time when the need for some joined-up , collaborative thinking about Europe 's major health threats is urgently needed .
One of the most important contributions Europe can make to health is statistical research and investigation , establishing the true situation of disease threats - contagious or not , chronic or acute - because , in comparing disease treatment in the Member States , we get the overall picture that helps us develop a standard of best practice and clues to both treatments and even cures .
The Commission , I am glad to say , has made a start by funding the European Autism Information System project to establish an effective method to be used by Member State health authorities to gather the essential information on the autism epidemic in Europe .
However , we are very late in this .
The USA has been tracking this epidemic for a decade now .
On foot of the figures , the US Congress has passed 16 pieces of legislation channelling billions of dollars , but Europe has done nothing yet .
I urge the Commission to find a way to foster the highest quality healthcare in the Member States , a system that will never again allow an epidemic like autism to go unchecked as it ravishes children , robbing them of their normal development .
( SV ) The role and responsibility of the EU within the health sphere is , and must remain , limited .
Perhaps the most important contribution to be made by the EU , however , is to enable people to seek health care in other EU countries .
For many who are ill , health care in another EU country may be a matter of life or death .
It is therefore incomprehensible that so many Member States do everything they can to limit that very option .
European health care consumers should have access to the whole range of European health care , but that means having knowledge and information , and , where these are concerned , the health programme could play an invaluable role in disseminating information about health and health care to all patients throughout Europe .
I and many like me therefore think how unfortunate it is that , in many respects , precisely this area appears to have been curtailed when , for budgetary reasons , the Commission revised its proposal for a new health programme .
I understand , however , that there has been a very great deal of opposition to this happening .
Why , in actual fact , is increasing the transparency between different health care systems in the Member States such a delicate issue , however ?
Why not focus on measuring the likely results in terms of health care and of how many people would actually be helped to get better , rather than focus on available resources such as beds and days spent in hospital ?
The only explanation I can see is that there is a desire to keep patients uninformed and powerless .
It is equally incomprehensible that the EU Member States ' compromise with our rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , should have called , for example , for the removal of the wordings I included precisely in order to give patients more power .
Why , for example , is there no desire to confirm that patients have rights also in their capacity as health care consumers ?
They have deleted the sentence whose meaning was precisely to that effect .
I find that embarrassing .
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , health decisions must be made at the lowest possible level .
For me , that means at patient level , irrespective of what is said by politicians and bureaucrats in the Member States .
We must therefore use European cooperation to strengthen the position of patients and give them more knowledge and more power .
In a nutshell , patients should be allowed to take control of their own illnesses .
( NL ) Mr President , I should first of all like to congratulate Mr Trakatellis and our shadow rapporteur , Mrs McAvan .
Health is a great good , as well as an important political topic .
In the first instance , health falls within the national remit but , for Europe , it constitutes clear and important added value .
At present , the access European citizens have to adequate treatment is very unequal .
Cancer patients stand a considerably better chance of survival in some countries than in others .
Treatment methods differ and access to the health care is imbalanced .
Patients ' knowledge about their illnesses differs from one country to the next , and prevention does not in all countries have the attention it deserves .
This is why action is needed .
We must pool knowledge .
Member States , hospitals , patients ' associations and general practitioners can learn from one other .
We should combine our knowledge about the prevention and treatment of the most important diseases , including cancer , rheumatism , diabetes , lung disorders and obviously cardiovascular diseases , and we should learn from other countries where improvements can be made .
Knowledge centres and networks , which should be dedicated to the most important diseases , can be a vital source of information for doctors and patients alike .
( SK ) It is a proven fact that money invested in human health makes the best investment .
It offers the best return on investment .
I am therefore gratified that the Commission 's original proposal for a joint healthcare and consumer protection programme to be established for the period up to 2013 has been defeated .
Parliament did well to increase healthcare allocations to EUR 1.5 billion from the initial level of EUR 969 million , thus sending a clear signal and message to both the Council and the Commission .
In the meantime , the budgets for new multiyear programmes in all policy areas have been the subject of negotiations concerning the new financial framework for 2007-2013 ; in this context , ladies and gentlemen , I must express great dissatisfaction with the fact that many programmes , including the health programme , have been allocated far less than the Commission originally proposed .
Even though the European Parliament later managed to remedy the situation somewhat , in the spring of 2006 , the outcome is wholly inadequate from the perspective of some of the programmes , including healthcare .
I am referring to public health , where the topped up budget was cut to the scarcely credible figure of EUR 365.5 million .
It is a good thing that the political agreement in November 2006 for the area of health accepted the Commission 's revised proposal , including the budget .
I believe that the specific programmes designed for people and for patients , such as the screening programmes for cancer , cardiovascular disease , diabetes and many other disorders , will not be jeopardised .
Nor will we put in jeopardy the necessary cooperation across the Community between specialised centres , or the establishment of Europe-wide registers of such diseases .
I fully support the approach taken by the rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , and I believe that Parliament will again take a wise decision .
( LT ) I congratulate the rapporteur , who faced the challenging task of adapting the significantly reduced seven-year health budget to the growing expectations of EU citizens .
A coordinated Community approach in this field would significantly increase the effective utilisation of funds .
Now the programme has to be approved as soon as possible in order that at least the funds for 2008 are reclaimed in time .
In the expanded European Union , differences in medical care in various countries have become evident .
The programme under discussion ought to help reduce these differences .
Every EU citizen in any EU country has the right to receive quality medical services .
It is particularly important that the new EU countries participate in the European projects .
I would also like to underline the need for attention to preventive projects , which reduce the influence of risk factors and improve the health of the Community .
Preventing illnesses is always cheaper than treating them , especially at times like this , when resources are decreasing but needs are growing .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this Community action programme establishes priorities for projects , funded at European and national level , to address the biggest causes of death in Europe , including cardiovascular diseases , neuropsychiatric disorders , cancer , digestive diseases and respiratory diseases .
We all have to die of something , especially when we reach a certain age .
The high quality of European medicine , along with improvements in living conditions , and in particular people 's economic wealth , have led to longer life expectancy among Europeans .
There are fresh challenges that lie ahead of us .
One is how the health and social systems in Europe are to be funded in future from the public purse and the second is how to improve treatment for polymorbidity , which becomes more common as people live longer .
Such treatment is crucial to older people 's quality of life .
Both of these concerns are common to all Member States , and yet neither has been included in any detail among the main goals of the Union 's action plan in the area of health .
Perhaps next time .
Resolving the first of these economic concerns will entail , among other things , an assessment of priorities within the Community , both in terms of government programmes and in terms of people 's private lives .
My professional experience has taught me that the main priority is to make people much more responsible for their own health and disease prevention .
Patients are not stupid and are capable of making up their own minds .
They do need adequate information for this , however , and it must be formulated in an appropriate way .
I therefore strongly support the proposals in the second reading , including Amendment 2 , for example , which calls for the programme to provide citizens with better access to information , and Amendment 9 , which concerns policies aimed at leading a healthier lifestyle .
As regards the second problem , I would like to believe that the Member States will actively support the coordination of scientific activities aimed at achieving the complex treatment of associated diseases , despite the large and regrettable reduction in the European budget for the action plan in support of health .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Members once again for a very interesting debate and for the support expressed .
I do not want to repeat what has already been said and what I said in my introductory remarks , but I shall make some clarifications .
On the issue of cancer , I should like to clarify that cancer remains one of the Commission 's top priorities and is part of the health programme .
I referred specifically to cardiovascular diseases because that was in a question tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , but through research and other programmes we support many initiatives regarding cancer .
We had an opportunity to discuss this issue in this House quite recently .
I should like to correct one mistake .
Mrs Belohorská is not here and I think that she did not follow the debate closely on how the financial perspectives were adopted and how it was decided who took the decision .
It was not the Commission who reduced the budget - we are not that suicidal .
As you know , it was the Council who decided unanimously that there should be a reduction , and the areas that suffered most , unfortunately , were health and education and culture .
I have to say that it is regrettable and I have had the opportunity to express this on many occasions in discussions here and I understand the frustration of Mr Trakatellis when he had to deal with this issue .
However , at the end of the day we want to take action , we want to help our citizens and we want to move forward , and therefore we have to make do with what we have and make the best possible use of our limited funds and resources .
That is why I agree with many of you , and it is our priority , that prevention is one of the main targets because it has added value and a multiplying effect so that we can make better use of the funds by concentrating on prevention .
That is one of my main arguments .
I have been trying repeatedly to convince Member States that spending on health is not a cost but an investment .
It has to be viewed as such .
We will benefit in the long run , and that is a disincentive for taking measures when benefits will appear sometime in the future .
Nevertheless , I think that the time has come when we cannot expect to solve the problems only through reforms of the health systems or through patient mobility or through increasing the insurance costs but we have to invest in prevention and on health and this is one of the main priorities .
I am looking forward to working with you all in the next period .
Perhaps I could refer to just one specific amendment , that raised by Mrs McAvan .
We have no objection to agreeing to the deletion of that sentence .
You realise that for us it is a big achievement to have the healthy life years included as an indicator and this was the purpose .
It was just a way of expressing it differently , but we see the point so we do not object to removing it , especially because it is the wording that is the problem and not actually the validity of the indicator .
Regarding the point raised by Mr Fjellner on the issue of patients ' rights , we had the opportunity to discuss this issue in this House and we are looking into it through the healthcare initiative which should be adopted towards the end of the year .
There are different systems in different Member States so we do not always agree on a common approach , but at least the first step will be taken and many issues like information for patients and other aspects of patients ' rights will be tackled through the healthcare initiative .
I should like to conclude by thanking you all , in particular the Environment Committee , as well as Mr Trakatellis for being patient and persistent .
I am looking forward to working with all of you in the implementation of the programme .
I have received one motion for resolution pursuant to Article 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 10 July 2007 .
MON 863 - Risk Management ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on MON 863 risk management .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission has on many occasions declared - and , through its actions , proved - its commitment to ensuring that the legislative framework on genetically modified food and feed , which was approved by the European Parliament and the Council , is fully respected .
We have the obligation - and I believe we are delivering on this obligation - to make sure that the legislation is properly and fully respected .
Under the legislation , GM food and feed can be legally put on the market only if it is safe and appropriately labelled .
I would remind the House of how the legislation provides for the division of work between risk assessment and risk management .
The Commission has no discretion on the safety assessment of a GM product .
The legislation clearly distinguishes between risk assessment , which is carried out by EFSA , and risk management , which is carried out by the Commission .
This approach is defined not only by general food law but also by the Regulation on GM food and feed .
Whenever new scientific questions emerge , the Commission adheres to the separation of competences and asks EFSA to evaluate the information and its impact on the risk assessment of a product .
The Commission 's role is to take relevant risk management decisions , provided that , and only when , such a risk is identified by EFSA as the European Union 's body responsible for risk assessment .
In other words , we manage a risk once it has been identified and assessed by the body responsible .
It was a very specific decision , when the legislation was adopted , to give the risk assessment to a separate independent body .
However , if there is no risk identified by the Authority , then there will be no sound scientific basis for the Commission to take a risk management decision .
On this specific issue , MON 863 had already been evaluated twice in 2004 before the authorisation was adopted .
In both cases , EFSA concluded that MON 863 maize would not have an adverse effect , and this opinion was reached with the involvement of the national authorities of the Member States and was further reviewed and confirmed by the Authority in 2006 following a specific request to the Commission by the honourable Member Ms Breyer .
There were intensive repeated analyses , which were carried out as part of the authorisation procedure , and then there was the publication by Professor Séralini in March this year - that is the sequence of events .
The work presented by Professor Séralini was not a new study but only a statistical review of the existing rat-feeding study , which supported the authorisation of this product in the European Union .
Despite the fact that it was not a new study but only a statistical review , as soon as the Commission became aware of Professor Séralini 's paper , it immediately asked EFSA to analyse it to verify whether the newly proposed statistical interpretation was well founded and , more importantly , whether the statistical differences were relevant for food and feed safety .
In order to take into account all new elements and thus to eliminate any possible sources of uncertainty , EFSA conducted a new review asking Member States to provide any relevant analysis or comments , set up a specific task force of internal and external statistical experts and held a meeting with the author of the statistical review .
In the Commission 's view , the procedures set up by EFSA to evaluate the review of Professor Séralini 's report represent a sufficient guarantee of independence and expertise .
EFSA first responded to the Commission request in March by discussing the issue at the plenary meeting of the GMO Panel , before issuing a statistical report and a scientific statement by the Panel on 20 June .
In particular , the Authority underlines that the statistical analysis made by the authors of the paper did not take into account certain important statistical considerations and that the assumptions underlying the statistical methodology employed by the authors led to misleading results .
The conclusion of the Authority is that the paper does not present a sound scientific justification to question the safety of MON 863 maize and , therefore , it sees no reason to revise its previous opinions that MON 863 maize would not have an adverse effect in the context of the proposed use .
Parliament will be informed in more detail of the background I have outlined in the replies to the written questions on this subject by Ms Breyer , which are currently being finalised following the recent EFSA statement .
Against this background , two conclusions emerge .
First , and most importantly , there is at this stage no scientific basis to question either the safety of MON 863 or its status as a legally commercialised product .
Second , the conclusions of the EU official body for risk assessment , made up of some of the best specialists in Europe , have been drawn after consultation of the national competent authorities as well as external experts .
By trusting the outcome of this work , which confirms the previous evaluations , the Commission has , I believe , acted as a responsible risk manger , especially within the context of the legislation and the apportionment of responsibilities as I explained them during my introduction .
The Commission will continue to work along these lines on the basis of a precautious and science-based approach .
The Commission , I would emphasise , has full determination to make a case-by-case risk management decision taking into account any scientific questions emerging during the evaluation procedure or even after the authorisation .
We will always be vigilant ; we will always be ready to examine every new piece of scientific information that emerges .
But , of course , our final decision will have to be based on the risk assessment , which will be done by the body in charge of this responsibility based on European legislation .
We believe that our legislation and the Commission 's approach offer the best way to provide our citizens with the high level of safety they expect and demand .
I hope that I can count on the trust and support of the European Parliament as we continue our rigorous and impartial approach .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , was it not us , was it not the European Parliament that wanted to have an independent European Food Safety Authority ?
Was it not also the Council of Ministers that wanted to have an independent EFSA , an authority on whose findings you can rely , an authority where there is no risk of getting bogus studies ?
Did the European Parliament not at that time charge EFSA with making risks assessments of GMOs , and did the Council of Ministers not back that very thing in codecision ?
In April 2004 , EFSA assessed MON 863 maize to be just as safe as conventional maize .
A second EFSA safety assessment in October 2004 came to the same conclusion .
That is not of course what the green souls among us want to hear , and because what the Greens do not want simply cannot be , they commission their own study .
Then this eventually finds , surprise , surprise , that genetically modified maize is lethal , and woe betide anyone who finds that suspect !
The EFSA experts then asked for a repeat of the trial on rats .
Again there was no sign of acute toxicological effects .
Incidentally , the Greens ' study would have given the same result if the statistics had been evaluated correctly , but the statistical evaluation was not scientifically correct , as the Commissioner said .
Once again , the Green study 's supposedly scientific findings were therefore deliberate scare-mongering , deliberately sowing anxiety in the minds of the public and pulling the wool over their eyes .
It is the typical ideologically motivated policy of obstructiveness that they so much like to use in election campaigns as well .
They are wasting taxpayers ' money by always calling for multiple repeats of the EFSA risk assessments .
But will they also question the EFSA nutrient profiles under the Health Claims Regulation , for example ?
Of course not , because they fit in with their ideology .
The Council of Ministers is also at fault , however . The national ministers responsible lack the courage to agree to authorise GMOs that have been examined and found to be safe .
It is the small man 's fear of not being re-elected , neither more nor less !
We are wasting such great opportunities for the EU : GMOs can give us better food and feed with nutrition-physiological added value and efficient renewable raw materials that are carbon-neutral and therefore have no effect on the climate .
MON 863 is safe and must be approved just like the other useful plants that have been tested and found to be safe .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , in response to the previous speaker I would like to quote an Austrian proverb : ' blessed are those who believe , but you will still get to heaven if you do not ' .
Perhaps now I can challenge Renate Sommer 's world view a little . It was not only Green Members , but the majority in this House who wanted a consumer- and environmentally friendly solution for the authorisation and labelling of genetically modified food and feed .
Even a government close to you has questioned EFSA 's handling of the studies referred to today .
My question to the Commission is now : what concrete steps has the Commission taken to bring about a reform of the European Food Safety Authority ?
This is not the first time we in this House have expressed doubts about its independence .
And yes , Mrs Sommer , we wanted and we want an independent Food Safety Authority .
But democratically elected Members naturally also have the right to take a critical look at its independence and work to see that it is genuinely independent .
That is very much our responsibility , because we of course also know the mood and attitude of the public towards it in all the Member States .
We agree , Mr Kyprianou , that EFSA should continue to be responsible for risk assessment and the Commission for risk management . I am however convinced that both EFSA and the Commission need to take their responsibilities seriously .
As you know , next week we in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety will be dealing with the question of how the individual authorisation of genetically modified organisms should be handled in the context of comitology and the regulatory procedure with scrutiny .
Such cases do not help that discussion very much .
I hope that in future concrete steps will be taken to demonstrate that the Food Safety Authority really is independent .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I was instrumental in organising a conference that took place on 12 June at the European Parliament in Brussels .
The conference dealt with dangers related to the spread of GMOs , and was attended by distinguished scientists from many countries .
Their presentations clearly indicated that there is increasing evidence of the harmful nature of GMOs .
Alleging technological progress , large biotechnology enterprises are disseminating serious threats to civilisation the world over .
With all due respect to Mrs Sommer , I am more inclined to believe scientists than Mrs Sommer 's assurances on the safety of MON 863 .
At present , only a little animal husbandry and agriculture in the EU involves the use of GMOs .
We still have one last chance to protect Europe against this danger .
I have some questions to pose to the Commissioner .
Does the European Commission intend to do anything about this ?
Above all , does it intend to heed the wishes of citizens of entire regions of Europe , where the majority of the population wishes to protect itself against GMOs , or does the Commission intend instead to be seduced by the misleading publicity alleging technological progress ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Kyprianou , I am most disappointed , because , like Mrs Scheele , I was expecting answers this evening about when we will finally have higher standards for risk assessment .
I have been asking the Commission specific questions about these safety issues for months and getting no answers ; then officials tell me in private that they are not in a position to give those answers .
The French scientists ' independent study is not the only one to come to the alarming conclusion that Monsanto 863 is unsafe and is an alarming threat to health and that it is irresponsible to leave it on the market any longer .
A study has also been made in Austria .
There are alarming concerns in the Member States . We cannot just deny that and stick our heads in the sand .
I would have liked to receive answers from you today about the fact that the European Medicines Agency also sees a risk with the two antibiotic resistance genes , not only in MON 863 , but also in the Amflora potato , authorisation of which has now been applied for .
Even your own EU institution is contradicting EFSA .
We really must have answers from you on this , Mr Kyprianou !
You cannot simply say that you are not going to answer .
Even the Council has called on you to comment .
I find it curious that EFSA needed three months to evaluate the Séralini study .
Incidentally , Mr Séralini will be here in Parliament on Wednesday and will then tell us clearly whether EFSA 's all-clear , its whitewashing , is really justified . We do know that the EFSA studies make repeated references to Monsanto .
They contain statistical errors . That has been pointed out not only by the French research team but by many Member States as well .
We are looking to you for answers as to how these mistakes can be remedied in future , how we are to deal with them , what value , if any , should be put on the precautionary principle .
We need a reassessment .
I would like you to tell me , Mr Kyprianou , in no uncertain terms : will MON 863 be reassessed ?
All EFSA has done is to look at the old data again .
It has not carried out a reassessment at all .
That is a very crucial question , to which we need an answer !
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , scientists in France recently discovered extensive organ damage in the liver and kidney in animals raised on Monsanto 863 .
Three years before this , German studies were brought to the attention of EFSA by the German authorities that showed kidney damage in rats fed Monsanto 863 .
Yet , despite this , EFSA has reaffirmed their risk assessment on this and said that it is safe for European farm animals .
Where are EFSA 's studies ?
Why are they just looking at the industry 's tests and just going back over them ?
How difficult can it be for them to try to redo the French and German studies ?
The biotech industry in Europe alleges that GM farming is inevitable .
My fear is that this will just be a self-fulfilling prophesy .
Europe is capable of supplying its farmers with GM-free grain , but if we accept the inevitability , if we accept safety studies that are not really studies at all , then farmers will be forced into feeding their animals GM because otherwise there will be no other grain .
I would remind EFSA that many products , after years of so-called ' safety ' , have been taken off the market .
To give you one example , the polio vaccine we use today is the fourth polio vaccine , because the other three , after having been given to people for many years , were finally withdrawn because of mounting evidence of damage .
We are supposed to respect the precautionary principle in Europe , especially when we are talking about putting genetically-modified organisms into the environment , considering that , with GM , any resulting adverse effects may be irreversible .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I know that the GMO authorisations are a sensitive issue but , first of all , we have to remind ourselves that , based on European legislation adopted by Parliament and the Council , GMO products are allowed in the European Union , provided they go through the authorisation procedure I have just described .
That authorisation procedure provides for the risk assessment to be done by EFSA .
So , whether some of us agree or disagree with the concept of GMO products , we are all bound by the European legislation .
This is the rule of law so we have to follow it .
First of all , on EFSA 's work , as you know , Parliament was informed and I came along myself as well .
We have taken decisions on improving the work of EFSA to make it more thorough and to take more account of the views of the Member States and all scientific developments that may take place during the authorisation procedure .
The Commission adopted an action plan which has been put in place already and is being implemented and which will also be included in the legislative framework sometime in 2008 .
It is part of the Annual Policy Strategy for 2008 .
There we take into account how we can improve the situation and make proposals based on the views of the Member States and on long-term effects and many other aspects .
I also have to insist that in the European Union we have the highest standards and the strictest legislation when it comes to GMO products .
That is why you know we have continuously been taken to the WTO and are not doing so well there .
But nevertheless our legislation has been accepted by the WTO because it is science-based and the decisions are based on risk assessment so , in this way , we can fulfil our international obligations by taking into account primarily and foremost the safety of European consumers and European citizens .
So it is not a question of personal preferences but an issue of applying the existing legislation .
I know Mrs Breyer referred to those questions .
There is a procedure .
We have to get information .
You will be provided with all the details on these questions .
But again the questions arising are linked to the risk and the risk is not being assessed by us .
It is assessed by EFSA .
Therefore , we have to wait for the decision of EFSA on this issue before we actually provide the replies .
On this specific product there were many evaluations and many studies .
They all caused EFSA to re-evaluate and reassess its position and it came to the same conclusions .
So it was not something taken lightly .
It was not something that was ignored .
Whenever there was new science and new evidence , this was taken into account and we asked EFSA , which again is the risk assessor of the European Union , to take them into account .
It is true that EFSA 's latest opinion was based on the existing study but also Professor Séralini 's paper was on the same study .
It was a question of how you analyse , how you do statistical analysis of the existing data and that is why we had a special task force on statistical analysis , internally and externally , and it came to the conclusion that there were flaws in the analysis and the conclusions of Professor Séralini .
That does not always mean that he who is negative is always right .
Sometimes people who are positive as well may be accurate and correct .
Finally , as to the issue of which studies the authorisation would be based on , the decision was that we would continue with the legislation that was originally adopted ; that the applicant has the responsibility of providing the data and the studies information .
In this way , they have the burden of proof which is assessed by the authorities .
The authorities can ask for any further additional studies they would like and in this way they have the responsibility of proving their case .
I will not go into the issue of the cost of eventually changing the system .
The cost will eventually be a burden on the taxpayers of the European Union and not the industry .
But the main reason is they should have the burden of proof and therefore the authority can analyse this data based on a critical analysis .
I would like to remind you that a similar situation is used in the EMEA , the medicine authority of the European Union , where again the industry provides all the clinical trials and clinical studies and the decision is taken .
So I can assure you that we take into account and we will make sure that the EFSA takes into account and assesses and evaluates any new scientific evidence that may arise and the moment a risk is identified we will not hesitate to take the appropriate measures .
As you know , we have done that and I personally have done that in the past on many occasions with unauthorised products .
The debate is closed .
PNR Agreement with the United States ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the PNR Agreement with the United States .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , as you already know , the United States and the European Union concluded talks on a long-term PNR agreement .
I want to use this occasion to thank the German Presidency and in particular Minister Schäuble for his personal involvement in making this happen .
The unanimous mandate given by the Council of Ministers has been fulfilled .
The new agreement provides for a high level of data protection and important commitments on the handling of future European PNR data .
Several important interests had to be addressed .
Firstly , the fight against terrorism and serious international crime , and in parallel the right to privacy and protection of fundamental civil rights , the need for air carriers to be able to comply with diverse legal requirements at an acceptable economic cost , the wider transatlantic relationship and the true international scope of these issues .
The United States has agreed on a binding international agreement and by doing so they have understood the need for legal certainty .
The agreement is divided into three parts .
First , an agreement signed by both parties .
Second , a letter which the United States sent to the EU in which it set out assurances on the way in which it will handle European PNR data in the future .
And third , a letter from the EU to the United States acknowledging the receipt of assurances and confirming that on that basis it considers the level of protection afforded by the US Department of Homeland Security to be adequate for European PNR data .
In the past , the exchange of undertakings was not binding in character .
It was in my personal view , but also in the view of the Council , a major achievement of the new agreement .
This agreement will be valid for 7 years , thus providing for a considerable period of legal certainty .
There is not an extension of the time during which passenger data are kept from 3.5 to 15 years .
There is an increase from 3.5 to 7 years of the time during which data are kept in an active file .
The further period of 8 years that was already provided for in the previous agreements and that undertaking is not newly introduced in this new agreement .
The purpose for which data will be used remains the same .
The number of PNR data has been reduced from 34 to 19 as a result of rationalisation and merging .
Sensitive data will be filtered and made accessible only in exceptional circumstances which have been justified and will be deleted after 30 days .
Those air carriers not already pushing the data will go from a ' pull ' to a ' push ' system as soon it becomes technically feasible .
It is now up to air carriers to introduce new technologies as soon as possible , but both the United States and the EU agree that this system should be a ' push ' system and no longer a ' pull ' system .
The Commissioner for Justice , Freedom and Security and the United States Secretary of Homeland Security will be responsible for the review system .
Finally , the United States has accepted a review system which was likely to be agreed at the beginning of our negotiations .
Protection given under the United States Privacy Act will be extended through administrative procedures to non-US citizens , in particular with regard to redress and correction , and , therefore , EU citizens will be entitled to protection under that Act .
That was not the case under the previous agreement .
Common efforts are needed in order to protect our societies , including our human rights , from attempts by terrorists to undermine them .
The recent events in London and Glasgow have shown that terrorism will stay with us for some time .
That is why , as I have already announced , I will present a package in the autumn , which will include new measures - both legislative and operational - aimed at improving and increasing our capacity to cooperate at an international level against terrorism .
I shall also propose that the EU Member States establish a European PNR system at national level in as many Member States as possible .


on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Mr Frattini , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Frattini and the German Presidency on the effort they have put into concluding this PNR Agreement .
It was essential to avoid a legal vacuum that would have left European airlines in a difficult position and jeopardised the protection of our citizens .
We have always supported having an international agreement at EU level instead of 27 bilateral agreements , because the Union can put forward a stronger position not only on preventing and fighting terrorism , but also on protecting fundamental rights .
That is why the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats was in favour of granting the Commission a mandate to reopen negotiations .
We are well aware that the negotiations were difficult and also that the European side wanted to find a mutually acceptable solution more strongly than the US side did .
I find it regrettable , however , that this agreement is composed of three parts : an agreement and two letters , the binding nature of which is not all the same .
There are several points that have changed for the better , and Mr Frattini has mentioned a number of them , but there are others that have fallen well short of our expectations .
The points I would highlight are these : first , I welcome the reduction in the number of PNR data , and I welcome the switch from a pull to a push system , as mentioned just now .
We know that 13 airlines have implemented the system already , but many others have not yet done so .
I would like to know what kind of initiatives the Commission is preparing to help and encourage airlines to switch over .
I still cannot accept what I consider to be an excessively long data storage period .
I am pleased at the inclusion of the requirement to give passengers adequate information and I welcome the appeal procedures for passengers , whereby they can review and correct data held by the US authorities , although there is still no sound legal mechanism allowing European citizens to appeal if their personal data are misused .
I am afraid that the additional measures for protecting sensitive data are inadequate , and I regret that the use of data by other US agencies has not been fully guaranteed .
A lot has been done , Commissioner , but there is still a lot left to do , and I hope that the control mechanism that you have agreed upon will allow some of the negative points that remain to be corrected .

Mr Vice-President , I honestly wish I could congratulate you today on achieving an agreement with the USA ; my political group knows how hard you have worked , especially in the face of the USA 's threat that , in the absence of agreement , they would unilaterally impose even worse terms on the airline companies .
Unfortunately , what we have in our hands , first of all , is not an agreement with the USA .
It is in fact an agreement with the USA and with any other countries to which the USA unilaterally decides to transfer personal data on European passengers .
Secondly , it is an agreement that contains commitments only for Europe and not for the USA .
Thirdly , even where the agreement sets certain limits , these limits are so unclear and so full of legal loopholes that in practice it will allow the USA to do pretty much as it likes .
Let me be more specific : firstly , the agreement and the attached letter from the USA state that America will be able to transfer the information we send it to any third country it likes , with hardly any obligation to even notify us .
In other words , in practice , Europe is signing the PNR agreement not only with the USA but with any other countries on earth which the USA decides , countries which cannot today receive data on European citizens directly from Europe , because we have not signed an agreement with them .
Did your negotiating mandate from the Council really include the authority to allow the uncontrolled transfer of European data by the USA where Europe cannot do so ?
Secondly , while Europe has expressly declared that it is bound by the agreement , the USA has expressly declared that they are not bound by the agreement .
They are only bound by the unilateral assurances in their letter and by American laws which , if they change , will automatically bring about changes to the agreement .
Thirdly , as far as passenger information on the use of their data is concerned , there is no provision for an obligation by the governments to ensure they are informed ; the airline companies are merely urged to do so .
But information for citizens is an express dictat of European laws .
Why did you not mention this ?
Fourthly , if the USA infringes the agreement , the only solution open to the European Union is to abolish it completely .
How will this be done , Commissioner , when even if 26 of the 27 Member States consider that it has been infringed and one considers that it has not , the agreement cannot be abolished at European level ?
Fifthly , the legal intended uses of the data cited are uncontrolled .
While at the beginning of the letter they are limited to combating terrorism and serious crime , immediately afterwards any use is allowed in any criminal proceedings or however otherwise required under US law , that is , for almost anything .
This is not an international agreement ; at least not as the citizens understand the term .
I do hope it will be changed on these crucial points before it is signed .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all I note that the Council Presidency is absent during this important debate , which is remarkable as it was responsible for the negotiations .
I am therefore thankful for the presence of Mr Frattini .
However , I would like to start by objecting to the implicit link that Mr Frattini makes with the failed terrorist attacks in the UK last week .
I find that distasteful : it has nothing to do with PNR .
That brings me to an important point that this House has emphasised many times and that is the need for an evaluation .
We need evidence that the use of PNR data leads to greater security and that they are not used only to catch people who commit document fraud , drug smuggling or whatever .
We need evidence and not just anecdotes .
Mr Frattini says that this is a good agreement .
Well , it serves two purposes : firstly , to legalise the transfer of data by carriers and , secondly , to provide , as he has said , a high level of data protection .
Well , it fails miserably on the second objective ; it is not legally binding , it explicitly states that it does not confer any rights on any person or any party .
Well , how much clearer can it get ?
Then , it looks good superficially , but it is full of loopholes , open definitions and exceptions , when it comes to purpose limitation , for example , or the retention periods , which are going up to 15 years and maybe even more , and they will be applied retroactively .
I am not a lawyer , but that strikes me as distinctly funny .
The reduction from 34 to 19 data is an insult to our intelligence .
If you look at the data , it is not a reduction : the 34 are merged into 19 data fields .
I am not stupid .
We may not have any powers here but we are not stupid .
Then with pull to push : we got that promise back in 2004 .
We still do not have it !
It is technically feasible , so why do we not have it ?
Democratic oversight is completely lacking .
This House may not have competences any more , but the national parliaments are completely excluded .
Some of the national parliaments will get to approve the agreement , but they can only say ' yes ' or ' yes ' , because they do not have time , they do not get all the necessary information - only very summary information - and it has just been pointed out that if one national parliament says ' no ' then there is no agreement and no parliament will want to take that responsibility , so they have their backs against the wall .
With regard to the Privacy Act , it is good that it now covers European citizens .
We asked for that many times .
However , we all know that the Bush Administration uses all sorts of exceptions and exemptions to the Privacy Act , which , incidentally , affects American citizens as it does European citizens .
To conclude , concerning Mr Frattini 's proposal on a European PNR scheme - which is not a real proposal because he floated it at a press conference rather than putting a real proposal before this House , I think the timing - last week - was wrong and I would like to know what the justification is for such a scheme .
We do not even know what purpose the PNR agreement with the United States serves .
We do not know how many terrorists were caught , how many attacks were prevented and how many false positives there have been .
We have insisted on an evaluation before signing a new agreement .
Finally , I would like to recommend that the PPE-DE Group support the joint motion for a resolution that we will negotiate tomorrow , read the agreement very carefully and read between the lines , because it is not as good as it looks .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , this is the third agreement we are discussing in this Parliament on the transfer of passenger data to the United States , and things are not getting any better .
Commissioner Frattini , you claim that the data is only used for the fight against terrorism or against serious international crime .
As you know the agreement well , you will also be aware that Annex II stipulates , as Mr Lambrinidis said , or otherwise required by law , by US-law that is , which opens up its scope considerably , of course .
In general , I think that this is not the place either where you should make things out to be better than they really are .
This also applies to the data , as Mrs in ' t Veld said a moment ago .
I have the two annexes here in front of me : an old annex to the old agreement and a new annex to the new agreement , one of which contains 19 data fields while the other contains 34 .
I would very much like to hear from you presently what data , according to you , will no longer be transferred to the United States .
I want to know this very specifically because , as I see it , there is not one data field that will no longer be transferred to the United States , let alone 15 .
Turning to the other item of push and pull , here too , I am tired of people acting as if major progress is being made .
On two occasions , the Americans have moved this proposal , and you have had to negotiate once again with a view to them simply delivering on their own promises .
Surely this is unacceptable in transatlantic relations .
Finally , I checked the DHS [ Department of Homeland Security ] website today for redress inquiries .
It states that if you think you are under suspicion and that you are on a watch list of people who are denied airline boarding , they cannot let you know what the data is that they have on you , but you will have to inform them of the reason why you think you are under suspicion .
Surely this is not the way to let people seek travel redress !
So I would have to say to you , yes , I might be a vegetarian , but this will really not tell you anything .
It is too absurd for words that people do not have access to the data on which they appear to be judged .
( NL ) Mr President , following endless debates , pulling and pushing , I had hoped for an adequate explanation where effectiveness is concerned , or the supposed effectiveness of an agreement such as this one .
However , this hope soon evaporated when I read the agreement , one that was announced with so much pomp and circumstance by Mr Schäuble and others , including yourself .
Not a word was breathed about this supposed effectiveness .
How many terrorists have been stopped in their tracks on the basis of the existing interim agreement ?
Of course , like the Commission , I too understand the importance of having an agreement , not least on account of the position of the European aviation industry .
Legal certainty is important to everyone , but rules and regulations should not be there for rules and regulations ' sake .
What struck me , above all , having read this agreement , is that a great deal is coming out of our own pocket .
It remains completely beyond me why we as a Union allow ourselves to be pushed into such an underdog position .
Both the Council and Commission could learn from the perseverance displayed by our champion Mrs in ' t Veld .
All credit therefore to her and her unstinting efforts .
Finally , whilst the fight against terrorism is , of course , an important one , I cannot shake off the impression that we are at risk of losing sight of reality in this matter .
This agreement is not enough , not by a long shot .
Mr President , I am afraid that I am going to continue in a slightly sceptical line , but first of all a question to the Commissioner .
Could he please tell us what is the legal basis of this agreement from the EU side ?
The only reference I can find to any legal instruments in it are to US Statutes .
I do not find any reference to legal bases from the Treaties .
I remember talk of Articles 24 and 38 earlier on .
If Article 38 is one of them , then why is the European Parliament not formally consulted ?
Secondly , we hear a lot about needing this to fight terrorism .
If terrorism is such an important priority of the EU , why have we gone four months without a counter-terrorism coordinator ?
Thirdly , this agreement is about collecting a huge amount of data on everyone , as a basis for profiling , data mining etc . , but we have very poor implementation of targeted measures against terrorism .
The Director of Interpol has just launched what has been called in the press an ' unprecedented attack on the UK ' for failing to check visitors against the Interpol database of stolen passports .
When the Commission produced a report last year on the common position of January 2005 , it was distinctly unimpressed by Member States ' achievements .
Only a small number of Member States had established infrastructures for authorities to search the Interpol databases - 8 of the 25 Member States did not respond to the Commission 's inquiries - and very few Member States had made sure that their law enforcement authorities searched the database .
Member States are completely ignoring their obligations .
Finally , we have the EU APIS Directive of 2004 , which should have been implemented last year .
Could the Commissioner tell us whether the Member States have implemented this Directive , why it is concerned only with illegal immigration and why it does not provide for visitors to be checked against terrorist watch lists ?
There are plenty of measures out there which are being completely unimplemented by Member States .
Let us do that first before we have mass surveillance of the whole population .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank all those who have spoken , even though I do not agree with most of their speeches , but you know that I always speak my mind with absolute frankness .
Ladies and gentlemen , agreements are made between two parties .
The United States has the power to accept or reject an agreement .
We had a duty , first of all , to ask the Council of Ministers for a mandate , which we were given and within which we have operated .
The agreement has been approved by the Member States - after all , they granted us the power to negotiate - so they clearly thought that having this agreement was immensely better than the possibility of not having any agreement at all after 31 July this year , which is actually in a few days ' time .
Quite frankly , I should like to have heard those who criticised this agreement so harshly make at least one comment on the consequences of not having any agreement at all .
Can any of you imagine that the airlines would have negotiated bilaterally with the United States and achieved a better level of personal data protection ?
I do not think anyone can even imagine that that might have happened .
The protection of European citizens ' personal data would have been in serious jeopardy without the certainty of legally binding rules .
As you know , for the first time we have a binding agreement , unlike the previous one , which involved no binding commitments but just unilateral ones .
In this agreement , we have recognised the ' push ' principle as a fundamental criterion , as this Parliament has demanded on several occasions .
The fact that some airlines have said that they are not yet in a position to switch over from pull to push does not depend on either the United States or Europe , but rather on the fact that some of them have so far been unable to change system on technical grounds .
Since others have been able to do so , it must depend on their technical ability and willingness , and we shall help them to make the move .
We have set the ' push ' system as a criterion ; if , however , an airline says it is technically unable to implement it , other proposals need to be examined .
Can we deny that airline landing rights ?
I am ready to examine any proposals , but we have also set a deadline , which is the end of this year . That seems technically feasible , since IATA ( the International Air Transport Association ) has told us that it is reasonable to expect all airlines to be technically capable of introducing the new system within six months .
It is purely down to technical reasons .
We have established that sensitive data will be destroyed within 30 days , a measure that had not been agreed previously , and we have established that the US Privacy Act will apply to European citizens , something that had been mentioned in many debates here in Parliament as an essential condition : European citizens will be able to complain under the same law as US citizens if the US Department of Homeland Security misuses their data .
That is something that did not exist before , and I am giving you actual facts .
Mr Lambrinidis has rightly mentioned third countries .
It is true that the data in question can be passed on to third countries but , as you know , it is laid down that there will be the same power of control over the correct use of such data .
The fact that they are passed on to a third country does not affect the power of control : the third country will use the data in accordance with the very same rules laid down in this agreement and we shall retain the same power to check whether the data have been used properly or not .
Someone asked about the possibility of terminating the agreement .
The possibility does of course exist , in the event of a substantial breach , and you are perfectly well aware of the legal basis adopted .
Article 24 of the Treaty is an intergovernmental basis and not , unfortunately , a Community basis , because the European Union Court of Justice has so ruled .
An agreement had previously been negotiated on a basis that allowed for your full participation as the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , the Court of Justice ruling established that the legal basis was incorrect and , as you know , everything stems from that ruling .
It is a fact , Mr Lambsdorff , that many Member States are not complying with European measures , which instead ought to be fully implemented .
You know perfectly well not only that I published the state of the art country by country just a few days ago , but also that I have initiated infringement procedures , and I do not think I need to wait for the outcome of those to adopt useful proposals to combat terrorism .
I do not share the opinion of those who say , ' We should do other things first and then worry about terrorism . '
Terrorism is a serious and present threat .
I think this agreement could have been better if we had been negotiating it alone but , since agreements are made between two sides , it is a compromise and , in the spirit of compromise , the Council of Ministers approved it unanimously .
In my view it was right to do so , and the German Presidency was given due recognition for all the hard work it put into this agreement .
It is a binding agreement which will certainly help to fight terrorism or , better still , to prevent it .
No member of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs should forget that the US Secretary of Homeland Security came to Parliament and gave you some information and , in some cases , specific facts about terror suspects who were stopped thanks to PNR data .
There were just a few cases , but they concern people who were stopped thanks to PNR data and were later involved in bomb attacks elsewhere in the world .
Despite all the impact assessments that we have conducted and may yet conduct , I believe that the agreement in question , which provides legal certainty , is infinitely better than the absence of an agreement .
I am sorry that we do not agree on this point , but I have a duty to be sincere .
Mr President , we are lacking an important piece of information .
The PPE-DE Group is basing its positive opinion partly on the fact that the amount of data now being sent to the US is reduced from 34 to 19 .
I have challenged the Commission to say which of the 15 pieces of information are no longer being transferred to the US , because as far as I see it - and the rapporteur Sophia in ' t Veld also mentioned this - most of the fields are merged so that the change is mainly cosmetic .
I would like to be convinced that the opposite is true .
I would like the Commission to list the 15 information fields which are now no longer being transferred to the US .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 12 July 2007 .
Measuring devices containing mercury ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing of certain measuring devices containing mercury ( 05665 / 1 / 2007 - C6-0114 / 2007 - ( Rapporteur : María Sornosa Martínez ) .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we in this House all agree that it is necessary to reduce the demand for mercury in the manufacture of products and to speed up its substitution .
It would be appropriate to introduce Community level marketing restrictions on mercury-containing measuring and control equipment for consumer use , with some exemptions in the healthcare sector .
We want to prevent significant amounts of mercury entering the waste stream .
In that way , we shall contribute to guaranteeing a high level of protection of the environment and human health , whilst preserving the internal market , as required by Article 95 of the Treaty .
Mercury and its components are highly toxic to humans , ecosystems and wildlife .
Initially seen as a diffuse local problem , mercury pollution is now understood to be global , chronic and serious .
As regards a potential blanket ban on the use of mercury in all devices , which is the aim of this proposal , it should be emphasised that the experts the Commission consulted have come to the conclusion that hospitals need devices with a high level of accuracy to treat life-threatening conditions such as hypertension , arrhythmia and pre-eclampsia .
Mercury sphygmomanometers provide the appropriate level of accuracy and reliability to ensure patient safety . We are therefore currently proposing that these instruments be exempted from the ban until there are complete guarantees with regard to the functioning of possible alternative instruments .
I would also once again call upon the Commission to adopt short-term measures to ensure that all products containing mercury currently circulating in society are collected separately and safely processed . Otherwise , this Directive will be less effective in practice .
With regard to the production of new traditional barometers containing mercury , which has been the most controversial aspect in this Parliament , we proposed an agreement that there would be a transitional period of two years for manufacturers to enable them to adapt to the new rules .
Unfortunately , not all of the political groups have agreed to this , though I believe that we will have a sufficient majority in this House to adopt it .
With regard to the manufacturers of these barometers , I would like to say that they will have this transitional period of two years in order to stop using mercury in their industrial processes . They will not suffer any competitive disadvantage or economic harm , since we know that they have been manufacturing this kind of barometer without using mercury for some time .
We must remind our citizens that this equipment may pose a risk to health and the environment , since it can break easily and end up being dumped , or , worse still , if it is burnt , the mercury is dispersed into the atmosphere , polluting the air , the soil and water .
Mercury thereby enters the food chain , mainly into fish , and then us human beings .
As this House is well aware , at second reading , a majority in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has rejected the amendments intended to make it possible to continue manufacturing new mercury barometers .
I believe that it would be irresponsible for us to accept that request and I therefore call upon all the honourable Members to vote against it , as the Council and the European Commission also propose , and I thank them for all of their efforts to avoid a possible conciliation procedure .
Finally , I would once again call upon the Commission to increase awareness within the population through the organisation of information campaigns on the health risks resulting from exposure to mercury and the environmental problems it may cause , since I fear that the citizens are not yet sufficiently well-informed about its toxicity , unfortunately .
I would like to end by thanking the Commission for its work and for the possibility of reaching an agreement at second reading .
Thanks , too , to the Council and to the political groups that have supported this proposal .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to begin by offering my sincere thanks to Mrs Sornoza Martínez , the rapporteur , on her work on this proposal .
We are discussing a very important directive this evening .
It is an important part of our strategy for banishing mercury from our environment for ever - a strategy that has long been backed by the European Parliament .
Mercury and its compounds are highly toxic to human health and the environment .
The directive will therefore bring a major step forward , it will restrict the marketing of certain new measuring devices containing mercury and in that way prevent some 30 tonnes of mercury entering the environment through waste every year .
The proposed directive aims to cut the use of this hazardous material in measuring instruments to a minimum and to allow exceptions only where the risks are negligible or there are no substitutes .
Thus , the marketing of mercury-containing fever thermometers will be banned completely , for example , and the sale of all other mercury-containing measuring instruments to the general public will be prevented .
I believe it is right that there will be an exception for blood pressure meters in the health sector and for antique measuring instruments .
The proposals were drawn up on the basis of a risk assessment and detailed impact assessment that were developed for the mercury strategy .
This directive does not only safeguard human health and the environment , it will also serve to maintain the internal market , since it will introduce harmonised rules for the marketing of mercury-containing measuring devices everywhere in the Community .
The rapporteur recommends approval of the Council common position without further amendment .
The Commission agrees with this entirely , since the common position has adopted some of the amendments tabled by Parliament at first reading and represents a balanced compromise between the effort to ban the use of mercury to the greatest possible extent in order to safeguard human health and the environment on the one hand while ensuring the safety of patients in the health sector on the other .
I must confirm what the rapporteur has already said : the majority of experts still consider mercury-containing blood pressure meters , sphygmomanometers , essential in the treatment of certain life-threatening diseases .
We shall have to look into this matter , however . If there are safe alternatives available for these instruments , too , then mercury should be banned here as well .
The Commission will therefore be reviewing the derogation in two years ' time .
A further derogation means that antique measuring instruments , that is those that are at least 50 years old , will still be able to be sold .
The Commission is able to agree with this because antique instruments are predominantly collector 's items which , because of their value , are handled very carefully and come onto the market in only very small numbers .
In the Commission 's view , however , there is no justification for an unlimited derogation for the further sale of new mercury barometers to consumers .
Since there are alternatives to mercury barometers that are just as decorative and reliable , there is absolutely no need for this hazardous substance to be used in the manufacture of barometers .
An unlimited derogation for such instruments would be in stark contradiction to the stance taken by the European Parliament in relation to highly dangerous substances when adopting the new REACH legislation on chemicals .
A transitional period of two years , as now provided in the directive , is perfectly adequate to allow the few remaining manufacturers of mercury barometers to convert to alternatives .
In any case , many of those manufacturers , if not all of them , already offer alternative products .
Under no circumstances , therefore , will the Commission agree to the amendments that have been tabled seeking permanent derogations for barometers .
I urgently request your assistance in backing the common position so that the directive can now be adopted at second reading .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , we have been through these arguments on a number of occasions so I shall keep my argument as brief as possible .
The only remaining issue to be resolved , as the Commissioner and Mrs Sornosa Martínez pointed out , is that of barometers .
I have to say that I remain deeply convinced that both the Commission and the Council , and some Members of this Parliament , have got the argument completely wrong .
There is no justification whatsoever for a ban on barometers .
They are only being singled out because there is only a relatively small number of companies which still produce them in Europe and they are an easy target as far as the Commission is concerned , to make it look as though they are actually doing something about mercury , whereas the big sources of release of mercury - from power stations , crematoria , etc . - are not being tackled because , of course , to tackle them would be very expensive for Member State governments and local authorities .
This Parliament passed an amendment to exempt barometer-makers at first reading in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and in this Parliament .
The Council then rejected it , albeit with a two-year phase-out period .
The Environment Committee did not support the amendment this time round , I am sorry to say , but I have retabled the amendments in order to give Parliament a further opportunity to make a decision on this and , as Members are no doubt aware , a very vigorous campaign is being fought by a number of independent operators and distributors throughout Europe .
It is a completely illogical position to say that antique instruments will be exempted but new instruments will be banned .
There are probably more antique instruments being circulated and placed on the market in Europe than there are new instruments being created .
It is a very small minority specialist market and Europe brings itself into disrepute by delegitimising , by banning , by forcing out of business , a small number of very entrepreneurial and gifted craftsmen .
They can be controlled by a proper licensing and control regime which they have said that they are willing to pay for .
That would be by far the most sensible solution rather than an outright ban and to force a number of small companies out of business , thereby losing the skills and traditions that have existed in Europe for several hundred years .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I am indebted to Mrs Sornosa Martínez , who has our warm and unqualified support .
Mercury , and particularly mercury compounds and mercury vapours , is toxic .
Mercury can accumulate in brain tissue and the nervous system , where it can wreak great havoc .
This , in turn , can lead to reduced intelligence .
An intelligent policy , therefore , prohibits the use of mercury in unnecessary applications .
Given that alternatives are available , it is to be welcomed that the mercury thermometer is consigned to the past .
Barometers are the subject of much debate .
In the Netherlands , the use of mercury has been banned since 2003 , but barometers were exempt until 2005 and then , pending fresh European rules , until 1 January 2006 .
We are willing to extend the exemption period by another two years for traditional barometers , which are , it has to be said , delightful things .
As this brings the total delay to 1 January 2010 , there is enough time to develop alternatives , which , as the Commissioner confirmed , are already available to a large extent .
Whilst I can , of course , imagine that this is hard for producers of barometers to take , if we want to banish mercury altogether , we must in any event ban consumer products that contain it .
Barometers may break or leak , so that mercury ends up in the environment anyway .
I therefore agree with the producers of barometers that the use of mercury in low-energy light bulbs is , of course , also very harmful .
It is a good idea to change over to LED lights as soon as possible , but this Directive is about mercury in measuring devices and not about low-energy light bulbs .
I would therefore once again like to express my warm support to Mrs Sornosa Martínez , who I believe has chosen a very good line of attack .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mrs Sornosa Martínez on her excellent report .
This legislative report follows the mercury strategy report adopted by this House last year .
It aims at restricting the placing on the market of new measuring devices containing mercury .
Mrs Sornosa Martínez rightly agrees in the main with the proposal before us and reserves only some derogations in cases where there are no appropriate substitutes yet available .
My group strongly supports this proposal and considers the rapporteur 's amendments useful and appropriate .
Overall , the proposal meets with widespread agreement across Parliament , apart from the single , well-known issue of the barometer controversy .
The difference , as you know , is that the Council has agreed to the compromise proposal to grant a two-year derogation after the entry into force of the directive to a small number of producers of traditional-looking , present-day manufactured barometers .
This , we feel , is a reasonable solution and gives those manufacturers time to implement mercury-free substitutes into their products .
This view is not shared by some colleagues who hold the opinion expressed in Amendments 1 and 2 that there should be a permanent derogation for traditional-looking barometers .
The matter is not of huge importance in substance , as the amount of mercury used in these instruments is tiny and safety measures are adequately implemented by the manufacturers .
At the same time , as a question of principle , no long-term derogation is necessary as the manufacturers have ample time to adapt in the case of safe alternative chemicals without the need to introduce a risky precedent in safety directives .
The issue has , unfortunately , been blown out of all proportion by a section of the national press that want to portray the matter as one of heartless and bureaucratic big-brother-style EU interfering with poor , honest-to-goodness traditional instrument manufacturers and trying to destroy them .
This , as you will appreciate , is not true .
The position of my group is to follow scientific logic and not to accept permanent derogations for barometers but , realising the strength of feeling amongst some MEPs , we will not be unduly strict with those in our group who choose not to follow the group line , although there is always the risk of the barometer amendment going through and jeopardising the whole proposal .
Let us hope that this will not happen .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the directive of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to restrictions on the marketing of certain measuring devices containing mercury is an important document as it limits the amount of mercury released into the environment .
Mercury enters the food chain in the form of methylmercury in an aquatic environment , affecting fish , fruit , vegetables and eventually human beings .
It accumulates in our bodies and poisons us .
Every year , 33 tonnes of mercury enter into circulation in new equipment and 27 tonnes in used equipment .
Technical advances have reduced the use of mercury in industry and manufactured products .
In dealing with mercury it is essential to recover it from used equipment and to drastically reduce imports of such equipment from countries outside the Union .
All European Union Member States should impose a ban of this kind following early amendment of Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing of certain dangerous substances and preparations .
I would like to thank Mrs Sornosa Martínez for her work .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) I used to play with mercury as a little boy .
Hopefully , this directive will mean that future generations of children will not do so .
There is now a compromise with the Council , and it is high time that we accepted it .
We know that mercury is harmful both to people and to the environment and that it can almost always be replaced by less dangerous substances .
The compromise in the Council of Ministers is a balanced one and comes 14 years after Sweden introduced its national ban on mercury thermometers .
There is no more time to lose .
Those who are now considering voting through a technically unjustified proposal from the barometer lobby should know that the whole ban will be in danger of being delayed and made more difficult to implement if the proposal is approved .
It would be irresponsible to vote through such a proposal .
Dentists , laboratories and hospitals have phased out mercury .
There is no difficulty at all in measuring air pressure without mercury .
Anyone nostalgic for an old barometer will be able to buy one .
Even with this ban - which does not apply to antiques - it is still legal to do so in the internal market .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , it has long been known that mercury compounds are harmful to human beings and to the environment .
Mercury enters the food chain easily .
The groups most at risk are children , including unborn children , and people in direct contact with mercury .
Mercury damages the human body by impairing the nervous system , coordination , and also sight , with negative consequences for health and the environment .
It is therefore right and proper to introduce provisions restricting the use of mercury in certain measuring devices .
Medical devices containing mercury should , however , be withdrawn from the market gradually , especially in new Member States that have only limited resources available for their health services .
By way of example it is estimated that the additional public expenditure required pursuant to a ban on the use of mercury thermometers will amount to around PLN 3 million a year .
Sudden withdrawal of measuring devices containing mercury will not only be very costly , but may also dissuade people from measuring temperature and blood pressure .
This is particularly serious as cheap electronic devices are not very accurate .
We proposed extending the transitional period , which would reduce the costs significantly .
We also believe that the ban should exclude thermometers for premature babies because of the specific range of measurements , their reliability and precision , and also ovulation thermometers used to diagnose irregularities and for reproduction as part of the basic natural family planning method .
In addition , veterinary thermometers are required for use in the diagnosis of animal diseases .
Finally , I should like to say that such hurried changes to legislation tend to arouse suspicions that vested interests are involved .
In this case , withdrawal of equipment containing mercury might not be due exclusively to a desire to protect health and the environment .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this measuring devices directive is intended to remove around 30 tonnes of mercury from circulation , not very much but nevertheless an appreciable quantity .
The dangers of mercury are well known , its neurotoxicity undisputed .
Where human health is at risk , I believe the strict principle of substitution applies .
Where mercury is absolutely necessary and there are no alternatives , it can be retained under strict conditions .
Exceptions are therefore permitted only where there are no significant risks or where no alternatives are yet available .
The exceptions include sphygmomanometers for special applications and old measuring instruments , and it goes without saying that the number of old measuring instruments will continue to fall of its own accord .
I believe the transitional period of two years for barometers is quite sufficient .
The decisive thing for me is the harmonisation of the internal market , which is taken a step further here .
I approve the common position .
( SV ) It is , in actual fact , astonishing that we are forced to have this debate .
Mercury is one of the most dangerous poisons in our midst .
Of course it should not be used unless absolutely necessary .
I am amazed that anyone at all can believe that it is more important to go on manufacturing old-style barometers and thermometers than to protect public health .
As a pregnant woman , I am all too aware of all the risks that mercury entails .
I know that no one who is to give birth should eat the fish that I myself and others like me ate throughout the period when we were growing up .
Is that how things should be ?
Should it not be possible for young women to eat ordinary food ?
Should pregnant woman have to worry that their unborn children have been damaged by mercury from , for example , products that quite unnecessarily contain that substance ?
In the run-up to this debate we received letters to the effect that we must safeguard the manufacture of traditional barometers .
That is genuinely embarrassing .
How can anyone believe that I attach more importance to whatever pleasure there may be in owning a barometer than to the risk posed to future generations by the use of mercury ?
I hope that , by voting tomorrow against all the amendments aimed at retaining the use of mercury , all my fellow Members will show how embarrassing those letters are and demonstrate that we are taking our responsibility for the environment and public health seriously .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree : mercury is highly toxic .
It is harmful to the environment , to animals and , through the food chain and by other routes , to human beings .
It is right that this element should be replaced where it is possible and sensible to do so , but not always and at any price and not because of the properties of the substance itself , but whenever its use really does present a hazard to the environment .
We cannot remove mercury from circulation completely in any case , because then we would also have to say goodbye to another product that is much valued by many Members of this House .
The energy-saving light bulb , which many would prefer to impose by law in order to protect the climate , also contains mercury .
If energy-saving light bulbs were universally used , we would have at least as much of it in our households as at present with traditional barometers .
I do not think much of banning mercury and a whole group of craft businesses from the EU market tomorrow while at the same time wanting to screw mercury lamps into our light fittings .
I would be interested to hear what the Commissioner has to say about these conflicting aims .
( SK ) Mercury is used in many measuring devices , thermometers and barometers .
Mercury has also been used successfully , and without major health implications , in dentistry in the form of amalgam fillings .
On the other hand , however , under certain circumstances mercury is known to be harmful and can accumulate in living organisms , including the human body .
We are all aware that the Council 's joint position includes most of the amendments already adopted by the European Parliament on 14 November 2006 .
This was reflected in the text , where the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs see almost eye to eye , so that we were close to finalising the legislative process during the first reading .
There is a major point of difference between the Council and Parliament , however , concerning the production of devices which use mercury , notably barometers .
As we know , Parliament voted in favour of a complete exemption , whereas the Council is proposing an exemption limited to two years , which appears to be appropriate .
A ban would apply to new mercury barometers , but it seems sensible to regard second-hand barometers as acceptable , as this would make possible their continued sale , repair and maintenance .
As a citizen and consumer , I support the type of compromise backed by the rapporteur , which will not jeopardise the overall health of the general public and will enable conventional barometer manufacturers to adapt more quickly to the new situation .
Mr President , I think we should remind ourselves that this is part of a wider strategy to phase out mercury .
No sector has been singled out - not thermometers , nor barometers - because there is going to be a set of actions over a number of years .
I think Mr Ulmer got it right : we have agreed under the REACH Directive that if there is a safe alternative to dangerous chemicals , we should move towards that alternative .
We have all agreed on that in this House ; all the major political groups signed up to REACH .
So to say ' let us make an exemption for barometers ' at this stage is totally inconsistent with the REACH Directive .
What is more , the REACH Directive would cover barometers .
There is an amendment about licensing barometers .
Well , that does not address the issue of spillages , accidental damage or waste disposal , landfill and incineration .
In the United States in May , somebody found a broken barometer in a storage cupboard in a school .
The school was closed for a week .
The whole school had to be evacuated and there was a clean-up bill amounting to thousands of dollars .
Sixteen US States are moving towards mercury prohibitions on barometers and other equipment .
In fact , they are going much further than the European Commission is proposing to go here today .
So anybody who is talking about nanny-state Europe is totally misplaced when they are looking at the barometer issue .
The PSE Group pushed for the two-year phase-out for the barometer industry .
We know these are small companies , we know it will pose some difficulties for them , but I think they were aware of the REACH Directive coming their way anyway , and I think this is a sensible compromise .
Finally , Mr Schlyter talked about how he used to play with mercury when he was a child .
Many people have said this to me during the course of this debate .
We used to play with it in the past .
I always point out that we used to drive in cars without seatbelts ; we used to breathe in leaded petrol ; and at Christmas time I used to get sweet cigarettes in my Christmas stocking .
There are things to change and I think now is the time to change them .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will be glad to once again clarify the Commission 's policy with regard to the handling of demonstrably highly toxic substances in our environment .
We cannot rule out risks in our society , but whenever the conditions for substitution are present , substitution must take priority .
I fail to understand how anyone could see it differently .
If it is not necessary to work with highly toxic substances in our environment , then we simply must not do it .
That also applies with regard to the energy-saving light bulbs that Mr Krahmer mentioned , which do indeed contain very small quantities of mercury .
There are as yet no substitutes for that . But work must be done on it , and as soon as there are substitutes , manufacture without the use of mercury must of course be preferred here too .
May I conclude by talking about barometers again .
No one is a greater friend of beautiful old instruments than I am .
I am a great friend of traditional production methods , a great friend of traditional firms , especially small firms .
And no one wants to drive even one small traditional firm off the European market .
I have here a catalogue from one of these manufacturers .
There is no doubt at all .
Even today they offer beautiful barometers that show not the slightest external difference from the barometers that were manufactured in the past , but they no longer contain mercury .
Even the famous Prince of Wales barometer , a copy of John Russel 's royal barometer , nevertheless costing GBP 795 , is already available without the slightest trace of mercury .
The argument that even one firm could be forced out of business is simply not correct .
I can therefore tell you quite clearly that we are not acting in these small firms ' interests if we prevent them from doing what is necessary to give their products a future .
And these traditional barometers will only have a future if they are made without mercury .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 11 July 2007 .
Mr President , I wonder if you could check that the interpretation came out correctly .
I said I played with mercury as a child and I hope future generations will not be exposed to that risk .
Just to be absolutely clear .

That is how I understood it , Mr Schlyter : I can assure you , I did the same thing and I hope to live to an old age .
European Critical Infrastructure ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive on the identification and designation of European Critical Infrastructure and the assessment of the need to improve their protection - C6-0053 / 2007 -
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur for this important report , which follows the presentation of an initiative by the Commission .
The protection of critical infrastructure is , of course , a priority for the European Commission as well as for the Member States , not least because the need to protect critical infrastructure from the eventuality of a terrorist attack , for instance , derives from the very nature of such infrastructures and the interconnection and interdependence between them .
Indeed , if a physical or technological infrastructure is attacked in one Member State , the effect will inevitably be felt in other Member States .
That is why we need a common European prevention and protection framework .
Our view was that the best way forward was to involve the private sector first of all , which means drawing on currently available technologies and stimulating more technological research .
We would then call on companies and research laboratories to collaborate by placing the outcome of such research at the disposal of the common European framework .
The idea is to have proper security schemes devoted to the various infrastructure sectors and a real network of liaison officers to ensure that this common European framework functions .
Our idea is to take into consideration only those infrastructures that are truly cross-border in nature and not of course those confined to the territory of just one Member State , unless that particular critical infrastructure has an influence that goes beyond the borders of that Member State .
As you know , we adopted a communication last December to set up a European programme for critical infrastructure protection , together with a proposal for a directive to identify which infrastructure needs protecting .
I am therefore grateful to Parliament for having examined all the proposals on such an important subject .
The communication , of course , identifies principles and processes to be carried out as well as the instruments for carrying out the processes , while the directive lays down rules for identifying those infrastructures which , according to a common European approach , require protection .
It is our intention to develop this action plan through a broad web of public-private collaboration .
We think that the Member States should be assisted in developing the various initiatives included in the action plan ; we are also convinced that the international dimension must be taken into account and that financial measures must be put in place .
Of course , we already have a financial programme for the prevention , preparation and management of the consequences of the terrorist threat , which may be able to provide appropriate funds for critical infrastructure protection measures .
I can say straight away that I can accept certain important amendments that Parliament is preparing to examine .
The first concerns the need to emphasise in the text of the directive that it is the responsibility of each Member State to identify the most appropriate forms and methods of implementing it : in other words , we must stress the principle of flexibility in the implementation of the directive , on the basis of which the measures , whether mandatory or not , should be put into practice without an excessively rigid approach .
The second point that I think is acceptable concerns the need to clarify the procedures for exempting certain sectors from some of the obligations laid down in the directive .
The Commission has foreseen the possibility of exempting certain sectors , and Parliament 's draft amendments substantially seek to specify more clearly when a particular exemption applies to a given sector .
I believe I can agree on the need to introduce some specification , thus making things clearer .
I also agree with the proposal to amend the list of critical infrastructure protection sectors given in Annex I to the proposal for a directive .
I think Parliament 's proposal to amend that annex is acceptable , as is the introduction of certain changes to the sectors where resorting to the comitology procedure is envisaged .
There is a specific proposal on that , although we should be aware that by limiting the use of comitology we would be increasing the time it would take to implement the directive .
Basically , comitology is perhaps a rather complicated instrument , but it does save time in implementation , However , I am not against accepting the idea behind those amendments .
To conclude , Mr President , I can say that I am happy and pleased with the report before us , and I hope Parliament will adopt it by a large majority .
We need to show that we are speaking with one voice on a strategic measure such as this European initiative to protect critical energy , transport and technological infrastructures , which require strong prevention and protection measures , because the terrorist threat is unfortunately directed first and foremost at critical infrastructures .
I am therefore grateful to Parliament for the contribution that it has already made and is yet to make to this work of ours .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , back in June 2004 , the Council tabled a request in which the Commission was asked to prepare a general strategy to protect critical infrastructure .
In the past three years , the topic has not been off the Commission agenda , quite rightly so .
In line with the wishes of the Council and the European Parliament , the Commission finally moved a proposal for a European programme to protect critical infrastructure , which culminated in the Directive we are debating today .
As rapporteur , I support the idea of a common framework in this matter .
The effective protection of vulnerable critical infrastructures and services requires communication , coordination and cooperation in which all interested parties are involved , both at national and at European level .
The complex processes and interfaces of critical infrastructure with a transnational dimension are , as I see it , also legitimate areas for consideration .
As Commissioner Frattini has already explained on several occasions , damage to , or loss of , a certain infrastructural provision in a Member State can impact badly on various other Member States and even on the European economy as a whole .
Thanks to new technologies , for example the Internet , as well as the far-reaching liberalisation of the market , for example where the supply of electricity and gas is concerned , many infrastructural provisions are already part of bigger networks .
Indeed , in these circumstances , the effectiveness of all these protective measures is determined by the weakest link .
I do take the view , though , as Mr Frattini already observed , that the Commission has been slightly too proactive or overenthusiastic in some sections of the Directive .
It must be clear that the primary and ultimate responsibility lies with the Member States and the owners of this critical infrastructure .
From that point of view , I consider a bottom-up approach to be of critical importance .
Common action can , in my view , only be justified if at least three Member States were to experience adverse effects , or at least two Member States other than those in which the critical infrastructure is located .
After all , much has already been agreed upon bilaterally , which , to be honest , is also the most flexible solution .
In addition , I take the view that overlaps or inconsistencies with existing legislation and / or provisions should be avoided at all costs .
Existing criteria and mechanisms must therefore be taken into consideration .
It is equally important to me that the private sector is not faced with an unnecessary administrative burden .
I would urge them to make use of the expertise that is already available and would , above all , counsel against re-inventing the wheel .
I would therefore argue in favour of this pragmatic , yet structural , approach .
Following the debates in the parliamentary committees , certain groups of Parliament have also agreed to focus on so-called priority sectors .
It has , indeed , also been decided to scrap the proposed comitology procedure .
In the past , the use of the comitology procedure has too often led to shaky situations .
I am therefore very grateful to the Commissioner for his observations on this matter and on the other amendments and for the fact that he has shown his satisfaction .
I would like to have a reaction , however , to the definition of two to three Member States , because this is the most important amendment in my view .
I should like to finish off with an observation for the Council , which is once again conspicuous by its absence .
The agreement on a common position appears to be a bridge too far for them .
This is quite remarkable , given the fact that the Council asked for this common framework itself , and out of character too , because , if anything happens , then the Council is all too keen to be the first to immediately announce all manner of rules without really taking the quality of the proposals into account , their ramifications for the internal market , for example , or the European citizens for that matter .
After all , vision and power are two skills that can be expected from the Council in this matter .
At the opening of the plenary sitting earlier today , President Poettering spoke wise words .
Nobody is waiting for ad hoc rules and regulations that are dictated by panic .
A structural line of attack , on the other hand , taking the principles of rule of law into consideration - and the latter is vitally important - is very welcome .
I thank you and I thank the Commissioner .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , cross-border crises , whether caused by terrorism or natural disasters , call for Union-wide protection of critical infrastructures .
Critical infrastructures cannot be kept secret by not mentioning them .
It would be completely naïve to think that .
From a psychological point of view , the destruction of critical infrastructures leads to a loss of public confidence in the European Union .
Crisis protection is not therefore only a national matter but requires European crisis management , as the Commission proposes .
Moreover , as the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has clearly pointed out , moving elements of European infrastructures outside the EU increases the risk of terrorist attacks and access to data in particular makes the entire infrastructure more vulnerable .
This is also true of banking and insurance .
Even if security and controls are constantly being improved in these areas , there is still a need for additional coordinated European action .
Nobody will want double regulation .
What we need is greater security .
The Directorate General for the Market must be guided by that and not by short-sighted wishes expressed by industry .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Committee on Transport and Tourism is of the opinion , for its area of responsibility , that with this proposal for a directive the Commission is exceeding its powers , because it is misunderstanding its instructions .
It speaks of stabilising the internal market , but the directive is supposed to be principally about protection against acts of terrorism .
Moreover , the Commission proposal contravenes the principle of subsidiarity , because it seeks not only to complement Member States ' existing measures , but to replace some of them .
Finally , the proposal does not address the real task , but delegates it to a comitology committee .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism therefore rejected the Commission proposal , although we know that we do of course need European cooperation .
The question is simply how .
My main concern is to ensure that the Member States are not obliged to notify their critical European infrastructures to the Commission so that it can then make a complete list of sensitive EU infrastructures , attach security plans to it and then store everything in some office in Brussels .
That would be against national security interests .
Such a list would be an interesting source of information for terrorists .
All that should be done by the Commission is to define and list in general terms the most important sectors at risk .
It should be left to the Member States to identify those sectors , because it is they who are primarily responsible for the protection of critical infrastructures and they carry the ultimate responsibility for measures to protect critical infrastructures within their national borders .
In the interests of national security , that must continue to be the case .
Only a devolved management of sensitive infrastructures can reduce the level of risk .
I believe the narrower definition of critical European infrastructures , according to which at least three Member States , or two others than the one in which the critical infrastructure is located , must be affected , is the right one .
We must ensure that the directive covers only European infrastructures and no national ones .
I also consider that bilateral cooperation between Member States is more sensible in this area on security grounds .
Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert , most sincerely and assure her of my support .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , indisputably , we have raised a very difficult issue with critical European infrastructures .
There can be no doubt , however , that we need to get to grips with this question at European level and find and develop solutions jointly with the Member States , because the potential threats which the Commissioner has just described do exist and must therefore be taken seriously .
It is , however , extremely difficult to say where the European competence lies in this matter , what must be organised at European level and where particular devolved tasks must be dealt with .
This question occupied us in committee for a very long time .
We have tried - and I would like to thank the rapporteur most sincerely for her very fair and open cooperation - to find a way that will ensure the exchange of best practice between the Member States with EU-wide coordination , while at the same time keeping the subsidiarity principle central .
Neither , as Mrs Sommer has already said , do we want to notify specific critical infrastructures and collect them somewhere , rather we want to ensure that secrecy is guaranteed .
That is why we agreed that the Member States should notify the Commission of their respective critical sectors but not specific infrastructures .
It was important for us not to go for a comitology procedure , and I am grateful to the Commissioner for accommodating Parliament on this .
As the rapporteur has already pointed out , the procedure 's inefficiency in the past does not encourage us to go further down that route .
We suggest another way .
I also want to say that it was important for us that unnecessary bureaucracy should be avoided , that a contact point in the Member States should do the designating and identifying and that no new bureaucracies should be created , that administrative costs should be reined in and that there should be plenty of flexibility .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the President of the European Parliament , Mr Poettering , referred today to this very report by Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert when he condemned the latest terrorist attacks , both on European territory - where airports were the targets - and in third countries , such as Yemen - in the case of the murdered Spanish tourists .
In the latter case , the target was not a specific infrastructure , but rather tourists travelling in a vehicle along a road .
This reference once again demonstrates or reinforces the importance of this exercise proposed to us by the Commission and for which I would like to thank the Commissioner most warmly .
This is not a single measure but rather part of a long process - which began in 2004 - which is now taking the form of increasingly interesting and effective measures .
Furthermore , in view of the complexity of our European society , based on these complex and open networks of communication , supply and services on which , additionally , the economy is founded , we must defend them and defend ourselves in view of their potential vulnerability to terrorist attacks .
I wish to point out that my group was more in agreement with the Commission 's original proposal relating to the definition of critical European infrastructures , in the sense of infrastructures shared by two or more countries , or cases in which a State is affected by an infrastructure of another Member State .
For example , for us , the Eurotunnel could be a good example for the application of this optimum protection from possible attacks , not to mention airports , etc . , where we have already suffered such attacks .
Tomorrow , therefore , we shall maintain this position in favour of the Commission 's original proposal , because we want to remain hopeful that we may find more support in the Council .
In any event , we prefer to continue moving towards more integrated and European approaches , and we prefer to avoid savings that appear to reduce costs but that we could end up regretting in the future .
We do support everything that Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert proposes in terms of protection with regard to third countries ; we support everything relating to the protection of the individual data involved ; naturally , we support everything relating to the necessary confidentiality - we have long experience of dealing with this confidentiality , both at national level and at Commission level , and we do not believe that it is going to be violated in this case - and we also agree that we should avoid any duplication of what has already been done within the Member States and what the Commission is now proposing .
In this way , we hope to overcome the backward-looking position that we had to accept in the Committee on Transport and Tourism and with which my group still does not agree .
We hope that , with the proposal that will be put to the vote tomorrow , we will be able to continue moving forward and that with both what Parliament is proposing - and I am grateful for the great work by Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert and all of the honourable Members - and with what the Council is proposing , we will be able to achieve better protection of our critical European infrastructures .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) I would like to thank the Commission member and the honourable rapporteur for their suggestions ; however , I would like to stress that these suggestions should be interpreted as only the beginning of the discussion .
I do not know whether the Internet can be described as critical infrastructure according to the definition used by the Commission .
It is hard for me to know , if a website was blocked in one country , would that mean that it was no longer critical infrastructure ?
One need only block the website of a large bank that has its headquarters , let us say , in Germany , France or Great Britain , and all the residents of Europe will feel it .
We are talking about the consolidation of the financial sector , the consolidation of economic activity , even the consolidation of hotel chains .
In other words , we have to acknowledge that critical infrastructure has spilled into cyberspace , and I believe that Estonia is the first country to have experienced elements of cyber-war .
I regret that little attention has been paid to this , and now this topic is getting beyond the scope of the concerns of the Commission Member responsible for communications .
However , I would like to say that this topic has to be highlighted from a security point of view , because it is hard to imagine what the lives of European citizens would be like without the Internet .
Whether the Internet is European or whether it belongs to one country we cannot say - it is a world-wide web , and of course , to define how to protect the web from an attack that could be carried out at any minute is rather complicated and the level of debate has to be quite different .
We are presently talking mainly about physical infrastructure and , without a doubt , tragic scenes upset us , but life is becoming ever more virtual and this needs attention .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , no one in this House disputes that close cooperation between the Member States is very important and necessary for countering terrorist risks .
Our criticism is of how this is to be done .
More bureaucracy will not help us against terrorism !
I would like to thank the rapporteur for at least bringing the proposal back down to earth and greatly improving the Commission 's version .
She has also made a number of very practical suggestions .
We are all agreed that improved cooperation and information are good things .
That can be done bilaterally or multilaterally .
But compiling a list of all at-risk infrastructures will bring no gains in terms of security and may even be counterproductive .
In the end , however , competence lies with the Member States in any case , and there is no point at all in shifting it to the European level .
I hope that when we come to the vote tomorrow we will all proceed with the same realism as the rapporteur has shown and go on to secure what we now have : a sensible way forward that takes account of reality and fosters no illusions !
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , those who already wanted more government pressure in the areas of the army , police , security services , all kinds of other control system and the prison system in the past have been able to reinforce their position since the turn of the century .
They can now refer to the advent of a new kind of terrorism , which , as it came as a shock to everyone , creates scope for ill-thought-out solutions .
At all administrative levels , proposals have been moved to subject democracy , the freedom of association , the freedom of demonstration , the right to strike , the freedom to travel and privacy to the proposed guarantees for security .
The trouble with this line of attack is that it does nothing to remove the seedbed from which terrorism springs , including the utter inequality in wealth or power that divides the world .
Instead , we collect more intelligence , monitor more objects , organise more bureaucracy and bring about more displeasure .
In the European Union , in the area of critical infrastructure , there are already 32 directives , regulations , treaties and decisions that make a European approach possible .
This is why adding a new directive with yet more powers and obligations has raised a few eyebrows .
In January , the committee for the subsidiarity test of the Dutch Parliament drew my attention to this very subject .
This committee is calling into question Article 308 of the EC Treaty , which focuses on the interim enhancement of powers , as a legal basis , and considers the protection of critical infrastructure to be first of all a national affair .
As shadow rapporteur on this subject in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I was delighted to find that this committee decided to invite the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs to emphatically reject the proposal .
The main reason for this request was that everything that is in the draft Directive can be regulated more effectively on a smaller scale , in other words by the Member States or their regions .
In this case , more interference from the European Union means , above all , more unproductive bureaucracy .
Unfortunately , the groups that voted ' no ' unanimously in the Committee on Transport were divided in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
My group was no different .
Most smaller national delegations consider this to be a poor proposal , partly because unnecessary interference obscures the division of tasks between the Member States and the Union , and partly because it may be used inappropriately in order to cut down on civil rights , such as the freedom of demonstration , by referring to the protection of infrastructure , in which case it does not affect international terrorism , but rather domestic democracy .
By contrast , the members of our larger delegations from Germany and Italy also see positive points in the proposal .
They expect a reduction in the powers that are already being exercised by the Commission anyway and better parliamentary control of the application of the remaining powers .
Those in favour and against in my group applaud the fact that the amendments predominantly weaken the effect of the draft and confine the application to matters that affect at least three Member States .
( DE ) Mr President , unlike the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy or the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the committee responsible , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , failed to recognise the importance of the European level for the protection of critical infrastructures .
The focus is no longer on the protection of individual infrastructures but on the consideration of sectors .
I think the procedure proposed in the report lacks resolve .
The added value that comes from including the European level has been almost completely abandoned .
It is clear that responsibility for critical infrastructures must rest with the Member States . However , if we leave designation entirely to the nation states we will not identify the weaknesses and structural dependencies , and that is precisely what is needed for the designation of critical European infrastructures .
The idea that a list would be as good as a textbook for terrorist attacks is downright naïve .
The Member States have had such lists for a long time .
One of the most important structural errors was , for example , not having checked those lists with NATO .
In the military sphere , NATO has had such lists of critical infrastructures for 40 years and relevant scenarios have long been provided for in anticipation of military crises .
( SV ) I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur for a constructive report and an efficient piece of work .
It feels as if we in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs are systematically wading through all those areas of society that have bearing on the terrorist threats to our citizens .
The President too addressed this issue today .
It is very important that we not look at each individual measure in isolation but review all areas together so that we obtain common security regulations covering everything from visa regulations and security checks in aviation to better ways of protecting ourselves against the threats to airports , public transport and harbours and to the whole of the infrastructure which , because of the huge number of passengers involved , could be hit by a huge disaster if a terrorist attack were to occur .
The issue from the rapporteur 's proposal that I wish to address is that of whether three or more Member States should have to be affected by disruption or destruction , or whether it is enough that two be so affected .
The rapporteur 's proposal involves an increase to three Member States from the two referred to in the original proposal 's directive .
I consider this increase to be unreasonable because a threat , disaster or instance of devastation may affect a lot of people , despite few countries being involved .
Moreover , the incident may make more impact on the place affected than it would have done on more centrally located places in the EU .
This proposal makes it still more difficult to take account of smaller EU Member States , in spite of the fact that they are in danger of being hit by equally serious crises on just as large a scale .
I also believe that as we plug the holes and make it more difficult to attack aviation , the terrorists will concentrate on other targets and on central locations within the infrastructure , to which a huge amount of damage can be caused .
We should not be naïve . Instead , we must be as well prepared as we possibly can be .
That is our responsibility .
( ET ) The cyber attacks against Estonia that took place in April and May of this year were the first such events that gained global attention .
Yet these were not the first attacks against the essential infrastructure of Europe .
Until now , cyber attacks had been directed against individual companies , primarily in the financial sector , where the Internet has become an indispensable environment for transactions .
For understandable reasons banks prefer not to make a lot of noise about attacks .
Lack of confidence in the reliability of banking systems would have serious consequences for the entire European economy .
Fields of activity in which the Internet has become an essential part of infrastructure include public administration and the media .
The inability to repulse a cyber attack could in the worst case scenario throw the European Union back in time to the last century .
Imagine today , in the 21st century , a situation in which communication between ministries is interrupted , and both the government and the media are unable to inform the public .
This is precisely what happened in Estonia , as Mrs Starkevičiūtso correctly stated .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and emphasise her excellent timing .
Cybersecurity is the best example of the need for cooperation in the defence of the essential infrastructure of the European Union .
During this hitherto unique cyber attack against an independent state , Estonian IT specialists were supported by experts from both the European Union and beyond .
May this cooperation be an example and a lesson in internal security to the responsible parties in all the Member States .
Neither wealth nor military force can help repulse a cyber attack .
The only defence is cooperation .
Once again , many thanks to the rapporteur .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while I am grateful to all the speakers , including the rapporteur , I am afraid I have a few concerns about accepting the rather restrictive approach that the Committee on Transport and Tourism has tried to put across .
As certain Members have rightly pointed out - Mrs Segelström was the last , and there were others - restricting the minimum threshold for defining a European infrastructure to just three or more Member States would , in my view , have two drawbacks , the first of which would be to prevent the smaller European Member States from taking part in the critical infrastructure protection programme .
We , of course , want to avoid any such eventuality .
We want to offer all Member States that are potential targets for terrorist attacks a way of taking part in this European strategy .
I must also raise objections to the restrictive attitude that is hostile to the idea that Europe should concern itself with a common infrastructure protection framework .
This is not a matter of subsidiarity , which we are extremely careful to respect .
The problem is that infrastructures nowadays are closely interconnected , and the last speech by the Member from Estonia , who recalled the cyberattack on her country , provides the most obvious proof of that : it was an attack that affected an entire countrywide system .
Even though only a single countrywide system was involved , can we have any doubt that that attack indirectly affected Estonia 's entire network of relations with the other countries of Europe ?
If the banking system of just one country is paralysed for a certain number of days , then one of the basic structures of the European Union is inevitably affected .
I therefore believe that the Commission 's original proposal , for which I confirm my support , is better in that it provides a wider range of opportunities .
With regard to cyberattacks , I do not rule out the possibility that terrorists may plan an attack on a countrywide system , such as a banking system , a ministry or an administration system : we are examining what happened in Estonia and our information security agency will be producing a report after the summer .
I obviously intend to publish its report but , leaving aside the analysis of this particular incident , we cannot rule out the possibility that terrorist organisations may be thinking of knocking out an entire countrywide system by means of a cyberattack .
That is why I believe a rather less restrictive interpretation is absolutely essential .
To conclude , I once again thank the rapporteur and all the Members of this Parliament .
I believe that adopting a rigorous report on the initiatives undertaken by the Commission would show very clearly that we are concerned about prevention .
As someone rightly pointed out , the European Commission and the European Union 's institutions have been acting to strengthen our policies on prevention ever since 2004 .
It is only by doing so that we can provide a truly effective and coordinated response to the threat of terrorism .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 11 July 2007 .
Law applicable to non-contractual obligations ( ' Rome II ' ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Wallis , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the law applicable to non-contractual obligations ( ' ROME II ' ) ( PE-CONS 3619 / 2007 - - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , this is , for us , the final chapter of a very long-running play that started with a Commission proposal in July 2003 , but had a longer period of preparation stretching back beyond that .
It has very much been a first for the European Parliament , with there being no previous international convention to work on ; it was the first time we had codecision in this area and it was the first time that we experienced conciliation in this area .
I , for my part , would like to thank all those in Parliament 's conciliation delegation who participated .
We left a clear mark , on behalf of Parliament , on the final text - a text which , thanks to Parliament , goes beyond the mere technical and legal , bringing private international law into the open to serve the practical needs of our citizens , particularly in the area of road traffic accidents .
However , we also dealt with technical issues : clarifying definitions on the environment or supplying a solution on the issue of unfair competition , and then grappling with the relationship between European conflict of law rules and internal market instruments .
I am not entirely sure that we got it right .
I find I have been congratulated from many quarters , which makes me a little nervous .
Then we are still trying to have the same debates around Rome I and the review of the consumer acquis .
We have , at some point , to get this relationship correct .
It was heartening to us , as Parliament , to have representatives from no less than three DGs of the Commission present at the conciliation and working together .
I hope that in future we will be able to reinforce that and see civil justice as a thread that runs through many of the issues that we deal with in the internal market .
There are many leftovers from Rome II that form the basis of studies that I hope the Commissioner will mention in his declaration - studies on road traffic accidents , on defamation , and on the treatment of foreign law .
All these issues are absolutely integral to the relationship between civil justice and the internal market .
Indeed , we could say that the internal market will function only if we have a coherent system of civil justice .
Civil justice cannot just be an add-on to the internal market - some sort of limited competence where we tread only reluctantly at the invitation of Member States .
I seem to remember a long time ago in 1999 in Tampere that there was a vision of an area of civil justice .
Rome II was part of that .
We need to refocus , to question whether we have a civil justice system in Europe that functions for all the users of the internal market and for our citizens , and is accessible and understandable .
Rome II plays its part as forming the basis - the initial roadmap - but the following studies give us the chance to re-evaluate and make the next steps forward .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , in particular , on having helped make a success of the conciliation meeting .
She has enabled us to arrive at a balanced text after four years of discussions .
I believe that Mrs Wallis should be congratulated on the effectiveness with which she has largely helped to make a success of this matter .
In my view , this text is key to the completion of the European area of justice and to the proper functioning of the internal market .
It would seem that its implementation in practice is now keenly awaited by the legal and judicial fields as well as by economic operators at EU level .
On the one hand , ' Rome II ' will help to increase legal certainty in the area of civil obligations , which is crucial to the proper functioning of the internal market .
On the other hand , this regulation will also facilitate the mutual recognition of decisions - a pillar of the European area of justice - and that , in turn , will make it possible to promote mutual confidence among the Member States ' judicial systems .
A key issue for Parliament concerns the improved compensation for victims of road accidents .
In this regard , I can confirm my commitment and that of the Commission to launch an exhaustive study as soon as possible at EU level and to take the necessary measures , which will enable us to reach the stage of adopting a Green Paper .
I can also confirm the Commission 's commitment to submit another study to the colegislator before the end of 2008 on the situation in terms of the law applicable to invasion of privacy , which takes account of the rules on freedom of the press and on freedom of media expression .
As I promised during the conciliation phase , should it prove necessary , appropriate measures will be taken , on the basis of consultations .
Finally , with regard to the complex issue of the application of foreign law by the courts , the Commission - which is aware of the existence of different practices in the Member States - is going to publish , at the very latest four years after the entry into force of ' Rome II ' , a comparative analysis and will be ready to take any appropriate measures that follow on from it .
To conclude , I should like Parliament to confirm this agreement reached in conciliation as the climax to the long-awaited adoption of the ' Rome II ' regulation and I hope that the text will be endorsed by a large majority of Members .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , in the debate on second reading we said that we want to keep as much room for manoeuvre open for Parliament as possible .
I have no doubt that tomorrow we shall at last find a broad majority , Commissioner .
I was present at the conciliation procedure right to the end and must therefore say that in my opinion we - not only Parliament , but everyone involved - made hardly any use of the room for manoeuvre .
We could have wished for something more on one or two points .
Mrs Wallis has already mentioned that .
I am convinced that a broad majority of the public would be prepared to go a lot further than the statesmen in the classic areas in particular , in road traffic accidents or such areas as punitive damages .
When I look at the results of the summit , I can already see something of a gap here .
We are trying to fight people 's disaffection with Europe with things they do not at all want , but the statesmen are often unwilling to bring in the things the public really wants .
It is also apparent that our meetings will show greater transparency in future , and I have great hopes of that .
It is also apparent that officials often have their own hobbyhorses and are much more reserved and restrained than necessary .
Unfortunately , politics is not up to speed here .
It would be good to have bold political decisions more often , even in the conciliation committees .
A Member State that proved obstructive at the last minute might then in fact often not be so politically obstructive .
As Parliament , we have now set out down this road with one of the first cases where codecision has been used in this area , and we ought in future to be even more self-confident in using the room for manoeuvre and demonstrate that we are also capable of allowing such negotiations to fail .
In the long run , all the studies and assessments with which we have been prevaricating for three or four years are not enough when the citizens want a decision here and now !
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Wallis on the work that she has done .
I believe that we are going to achieve a good agreement , that a majority in Parliament is going to support this proposal and that we will have a new Regulation in the field of non-contractual obligations .
I would like to point out , however , that this Regulation is only going to be the beginning .
There is a fundamental difficulty throughout the field of international private law and in the field of conflict of laws , which is simply the judges ' inability to apply a law that is not their own .
In the European Union - and in general - we have trained judges to apply their own law .
When an issue arises in which they have to apply a foreign law , there are immense difficulties .
It is clear that , if two English people have a road accident in France , they are going to apply France 's traffic laws - they would not be able to see someone driving on the left as being in the right .
In the second part , with regard to the civil liability to be determined , if the judge is English I find it very hard to believe that he would accept the application of the restricted liability rules that exist in French law and not apply the English law .
I therefore believe that this work is only just beginning , as I said before .
Commissioner Frattini mentioned a subsequent study by the Commission - which is also mentioned in the draft Regulation - which is on the applicability of the law by the jurisdictions .
I believe that this is the second part , a crucial second part .
Those of us who have worked in this field have seen that the courts have a general tendency to apply their own law , the ' lex fori ' .
This agreement or this Regulation cannot therefore be interpreted without taking account of which jurisdiction is applicable at a particular moment .
The jurisdiction is largely going to determine the law applicable because judges normally resort to any kind of subterfuge .
Here , for example , we have eliminated the subterfuge of referral , but there is still the whole issue of public order - the public order clauses - which take up the crucial provisions of national law contained in the draft agreement .
I therefore have the impression that , working on the basis that this Parliament is going to approve the proposal presented to us by Mrs Wallis by a large majority , once it has been approved we are going to have to carry on working in this field .
We eagerly await the Commission 's studies on this subject and in particular an important element , which is the work with the people who are going to have to apply this Regulation : the judges themselves .
We wonder what the attitude of the judges is and how this Regulation will be applied in practice , since experience with international agreements and with the application of the rules of the States ' international private law demonstrates this tendency on the part of judges to apply their own national law .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur and also those who have contributed to the draft before us .
Clearly , even partial harmonisation of provisions concerning conflict in the area of non-contractual obligations will have a positive impact on the operation of the Community 's internal market .
Harmonisation and regulation of the principles of procedure in situations arising in a cross-border context will make it possible to refer to a single legal basis common to all Member States .
Cases in point include road accidents , unfair competition , environmental damage , the treatment of foreign law and infringement of personal rights .
This would undoubtedly increase certainty regarding the choice of the appropriate law and the expected outcome of conflicts .
It will also facilitate recognition of court rulings .
It should be emphasised , however , that the regulation is an instrument of international private law .
It does not therefore harmonise the substantive law of Member States .
The latter retain full autonomy .
What the regulation does do is harmonise conflict with internal law .
The regulation will ensure that the same national law is applied in similar cases , but will not impact on decisions concerning the cases themselves .
Mr Medina Ortega rightly pointed out that the decisions and practices of the courts will be the most important element in this area .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 11 July 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) This regulation is truly a great step forward in the process of Community harmonisation .
In a Europe that is in the process of unification , it is indispensable for the judicial fora always to use the same national law in similar cases , regardless of which national court is hearing the case .
This measure does significantly increase the legal security of private individuals and business actors involved in cross-border disputes , and avoids ' forum shopping ' - that is , the possibility for the plaintiffs to file their lawsuits in whichever Member State they like - while at the same time upholding the autonomy of national law .
I consider it important that we were able to make insurance cover cases of cross-border traffic accidents , and to ensure that the court would take into account the actual circumstances of victims with regard to the payment of damages .
Simply to choose the law of the country where the accident took place could have led to unsatisfactory situations on account of the vastly divergent amounts of damages awarded by the various national courts .
The specific rule concerning unfair competition is very important for judges and lawyers .
The same rule also limits to a large extent the practice of ' forum shopping ' .
It is regrettable , but in the interests of a comprehensive compromise it is acceptable to leave out regulations concerning the infringement of personal rights - and in particular concerning the rules of libel in the press .
It is our hope that as part of the examination of the regulation , we will succeed in resolving this question as well .
It is important to define the notion of ' environmental damage ' , which is in harmony with other European Union legislation , and in particular with the Environmental Liability Directive .
All in all , I find the final text a satisfactory and balanced compromise .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m.
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.00 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Modernising labour law to meet the challenges of the 21st century ( debate )
The next item is the report by Jacek Protasiewicz , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on modernising labour law to meet the challenges of the 21st century .
, rapporteur . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , with this debate we are winding up several months of discussions in the European Parliament on the issue of modernising labour law to meet the challenges of the 21st century .
It has been quite an emotional and sometimes heated debate , but this is not really surprising , seeing as it is an issue affecting almost every European , regardless of their age , walk of life or place of living .
However , intensive discussion has not been confined to this House .
The publication of the Green Paper has given rise to wide public debate throughout the European Union , and has involved numerous trade unions , employers ' organisations , local businesses and workers ' organisations and various non-governmental initiatives both in the old and in the new Member States .
During these months , I have gained the impression that the majority of the participants in the debate agree that changes in labour law are necessary because of the challenges brought by this century .
What challenges were they referring to ?
There were four main challenges .
Firstly , the positive and negative consequences on European economies of advancing globalisation .
Secondly , the rapid development of the service sector , which is rapidly giving rise to new jobs both in the new and old Member States , although these differ in nature to the jobs once created by industry .
The third challenge is the sea change in technology , and particularly new communications technology , which is having a major effect on our present way of working .
Another great challenge is demographic change , which even now has radically changed the situation in the European jobs market , and will change it even more radically in the near future .
Whilst there has been broad agreement that change is necessary , what direction these changes should take is not quite so clear-cut .
Some MEPs have been in favour of greater flexibility in European regulation , arguing that this will increase employment and reduce unemployment .
Others , by contrast , support a greater protective function for labour law .
Some MEPs support greater harmonisation of national legal systems , saying that this is a requirement of the process of creating a single European market .
Others steadfastly support the principles of subsidiarity , citing differences in the traditions and models prevailing in various Member States , and underlining that such diversity is a good thing because it allows best practice to be found through a practical exchange of experience , and is preferable to new , usually inflexible community regulation .
The initial draft of the report that I prepared as a draft position of the European Parliament , favoured greater flexibility and opposed harmonisation .
It also proposed clauses giving a positive assessment of the influence of ' atypical ' forms of employment on job creation in the European Union and challenged Member States to apply active employment policy methods and support adaptability designed to protect people rather than specific existing jobs .
In the introductory draft report , I also pointed out the need to improve EU and national regulations to free businesses and citizens from unnecessary costs and red tape .
I pointed out in addition that excessively restrictive labour law may discourage enterprises from taking on new employees , even at times of economic growth .
Furthermore , I drew attention to the key significance of education to improve the chances of workers and the unemployed of finding new jobs .
In this context , I proposed that we appeal to the European Commission , Member States and employers to invest in lifelong learning and improve the quality of education for young people , in particular as regards the needs of local and regional jobs markets .
Finally , I drew attention to the great importance of mobility in improving the situation on the European labour market .
That is why I proposed challenging Member States to remove the barriers imposed on the citizens of other Member States and opening up their domestic labour markets .
The first draft of the report provoked a lively reaction from fellow MEPs .
The heated debate and the 490 amendments proposed to the original text were subjected to further discussion and negotiations with all political groups .
At this point , I would in particular like to thank my colleagues from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , and in particular Ole Christensen and his advisors , for their contribution .
The result of the negotiations was put to the vote at an extraordinary meeting of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on 18 June in Strasbourg .
I must admit that the result of the vote was not completely what I myself had wished for .
I also have the impression that we lost a considerable contribution put forward by myself in the initial draft which , in my view , was not properly addressed in subsequent debates , which was that any reform of the labour market , including the reform of labour law , should serve to create new jobs in Europe in order to effectively face up to the challenge of the 17 million people who are currently out of work .
These high unemployment levels are a direct threat to the values on which the European social model is based , and we must do everything we can to radically reduce them .
There are over 60 amendments to the report in its present form .
Almost half of them support the approach of creating new jobs .
I hope that the results of the voting will be satisfactory enough to enable me to recommend that this House adopt this report , and that it will be an important vote in the debate which the European Commission started by publishing the Green Paper in November last year .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Green Paper has created a good opportunity for discussion on the need to improve labour law to meet the challenges of the 21st century .
It elicited a huge response from a broad range of interested parties .
These responses contain useful information on national legal systems and on fresh problems in the European labour market caused by cross-border mobility and the expansion of international trade throughout the EU .
The quality of responses to the Green Paper was astonishing , and I believe that this is the outcome of consultations and discussions led by the governments and some parliaments of Member States , along with the social partners and other interested parties at both EU and national levels .
Some of the problems that emerged during the course of this public consultation had already been the subject of European Parliament negotiations and resolutions .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , the political groups and the MEPs for their contributions to the wording of this own-initiative report .
The report attempts to establish how to make practical use of the debate on the Green Paper , in the form of practical measures that would enjoy broad support .
The Green Paper also fully recognises the Member States ' competence in labour law and their own labour relations and traditions , and progress on collective bargaining .
The debate has brought to the fore how useful labour law can be in resolving issues relating to cuts to the workforce in a fast-changing world with large mobility of capital and technologies .
Labour law and collective bargaining are intrinsically linked .
Labour law provides a basis on which the social partners at all levels can negotiate compromise agreements on employment relations , lifelong learning , flexible working time arrangements and the organisation of the labour market , which would facilitate movement between jobs and from one type of contract to another .
It will come as no surprise to anyone that , in responses to the Green Paper among social partner organisations , there has been a wide variety of opinion on how to move forward .
Sharp divisions emerged during Parliament 's negotiations on this report and in parallel negotiations at EU and national levels in relation to the following points :
the status of full-time , standard contracts of indefinite duration in comparison with new flexible forms of work and the emphasis on measures to resolve labour market segmentation ;

the approach when amending non-standard contracts , some of which lack appropriate guarantees of employment security ; this mainly involves cases of multilateral employment relations ; flexibility is often called for without suitable employment protection and without any actual chance of achieving genuine security in the framework of more stable labour relations ;
the Green Paper 's emphasis on individual employment relations has raised the issue of whether sufficient attention has been given to the collective dimension of labour law and the benefits of social dialogue ;
it has been said that the Commission should have restricted this debate to the social partners at EU level and should not have opened up public debate in which EU bodies , EU Member State governments and EU- and national-level social partners were involved ;
there were also arguments over the contribution the EU could make to supporting labour law reform and to developing minimal social standards applicable to all forms of labour contract .
I feel that the report in principle advocates :
an examination of flexibility and security as two mutually reinforcing factors contributing to improved productivity and job quality ;
adopting an approach that , when it comes to developing employment security , takes account of the life cycle ;
providing basic protection for all workers regardless of the type of contract that they have signed ;
help for workers to change jobs quickly and sustainably ;
ensuring that efforts to modernise labour law are in keeping with the approaches of better lawmaking and of cutting the excessive administrative burden , in particular as regards compliance with legal provisions on small businesses ;
proper implementation of EU legal provisions on work and on improving information for employees and workers concerning the minimum EU provisions in force , with particular regard to the fight against illegal work .
We believe that the principles of non-discrimination , gender equality , flexible working time for the purposes of reconciling work and family life and the opportunities to gain an education and vocational training are the very cornerstones of employment security , essential for a smooth transition from one job to another , and from one type of employment contract to another .
The report acknowledges how complicated it is to distinguish between categories of worker and self-employed persons .
There is a prevailing fear that increased cross-border mobility may affect the correct implementation of the Community acquis .
I welcome Parliament 's positive attitude to finding ways of resolving the problem , whilst respecting the Member States ' right to establish whether employment relations are involved in a case .
I feel that the report also emphasises the benefits of dialogue between the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) and the EU in this regard .
We must make the most of the ILO 's expertise and experience , and use its efforts to establish basic labour standards enabling flexibility and security to coexist .
The Commission faces the task of assessing the main themes of this policy , and the alternatives to it that have emerged through a number of the answers we have received , including those that were recently incorporated into Parliament 's own-initiative report .
Honourable Members , I await with interest the debate on this extremely sensitive and complex issue , and expect that it will bring further initiatives and will lead to the successful adoption of the report before us .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament is giving a good account of itself .
The work carried out so far in committee - the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - has been of a good standard .
It has escaped the bottleneck of ideological clashes and opposition and has focused attention on the actual subject of the Green Paper on employment policies and on the actual possibility of planning innovation .
Globalisation and demographics are only two of the main challenges .
Sustainable development also requires changes in the way in which work is organised and in the use of time .
Very careful thought shows that there is no non-working time , but rather time for personal life in addition to family life ; that we have been wrong to identify the new frontier in social conflict as a conflict between insiders and outsiders ; that the relationship between flexibility and security is a two-way relationship and includes the needs of employers and the needs of workers ; that extending rights is an action that must not be so many words on a piece of paper but that requires change and transparency , action against undeclared employment , a coordination of policies and renewed vigour in harmonisation towards the goal of European employment law .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( NL ) Mr President , I am pleased with this debate , but not with the method .
Commissioner , labour law is first and foremost a competence of the Member States and particularly of the social partners .
It guarantees the right to a decent wage , good working conditions and protection in the case of dismissal , and makes for a stable social climate which we need for economic growth and productivity .
In this , the normal contract of employment , as opposed to assorted , precarious statutes , is the point of reference .
I am therefore pleased that the report of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs underlines these two crucial elements and that the suggestion from my opinion by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection for a European initiative for chain responsibility has been adopted .
The discussion on relaxing dismissal conditions is sending the wrong message to European employees .
In recent weeks , I have met with a great deal of indignation in my country about the level of redundancy payments made by Opel Antwerp , but I have noticed that there is little indignation among those selfsame people about the immoral restructuring plans which companies are carrying out .
Both Parliament 's report and the European Trade Union are very critical of the Green Paper , and this is why I hope , Commissioner , that you can address this criticism .
If one party in social consultation levels criticism of this kind , then we owe it to them to give them a decent answer .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( NL ) Mr Protasiewicz , Commission , I am not opposed to the reform of labour law if it leads to more certainty for adequate health care , unemployment benefits , pensions for everyone : including those on the lowest incomes .
The Commission is turning this argument on its head , though .
Instead of arguing in favour of reinforcing employee rights , the Commission intends to turn Europe into a paradise for employers , in which the right not to be able to be dismissed without any justification will be consigned to the nostalgic past , where you no longer have the right to refuse unpaid overtime and collective labour agreements are deemed old-fashioned .
The Commission calls this flexicurity .
Sounds nice , but the translation of what the Commission is hoping to achieve with it is simple .
More flexibility for the employer and more uncertainty for the employee .
This will have a particularly disastrous impact on women , young people and minorities , who already suffer a disadvantage within the labour market and are disproportionately represented in part-time jobs and temporary contracts .
They will be the first victims if this proposal is adopted intact , and the rest will follow .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to commend rapporteur Protasiewicz for his efforts .
However , I must say that the report , such as it has been presented to us , is unbalanced .
It is unbalanced because it covers , above all , aspects relating to social protection - which are undoubtedly important - but ignores the other fundamental perspective for a reform of the labour laws for the twenty-first century , which must take into consideration greater flexibility in the functioning of the labour markets .
In addition , the text rests on a very conservative view further fuelled by a culture based on suspicion and conflict . Well , what we need today is the opposite : a culture based on trust and cooperation between the sides .
This paradigmatic amendment , which is absolutely essential if the values of social justice and human dignity are to be reconciled with increased competitiveness , does not appear to have been assumed in this report .
A clear expression of the balance to which I refer , and which is absent from the text of the report , would be fundamental in encouraging a change in behaviour and attitudes on the part of firms and workers , with a view to encouraging confidence levels .
In short , the text of this report is , in some way , a disappointment because it gives no indication that modern-day Europe has the spirit , talent and capability to become more competitive whilst simultaneously demonstrating the capacity to preserve the values that are representative of its social model .
The truth is that the text under discussion shows no signs of spirit , and no evidence of either talent or reform capability . For this reason , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has put forward a series of amendments which will , if approved , ensure that this report does not become a lost opportunity .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Protasiewicz , for his constructive cooperation in preparing the report .
If the EU is to tackle the challenges of the 21st century and create sustainable growth with more and better jobs , we shall have improved the quality both of jobs and of work per se .
Labour law has a crucial role to play in this area .
If we compete on the basis of poor working conditions and low wages , we shall lose out against a background of increased globalisation and competition .
Security of employment is a factor in production .
A high degree of security promotes flexibility , employment and competitiveness .
This is a consideration that should be reflected in future labour law , and I reject any attempt to undermine the social and economic security for which employees have had to fight hard over a great many years .
In recent years , we have witnessed a clear increase in the use of atypical employment contracts , but this is unfortunately also a sign of companies wanting to circumvent labour law and their social obligations .
There are , unfortunately , still too many employees who have no choice in being offered such contracts and who do not enjoy protection and security .
They are often forced into jobs without pensions and without sick pay or maternity leave .
There are also still many employees working without basic social rights .
The International Labour Organisation has on quite a number of occasions pointed out the connection between , on the one hand , reduced security and poorer health in the workplace and , on the other hand , short-term contracts .
That being said , however , we also think that standard full-time contracts should be the norm .
Contracts of indeterminate length are good for both employees and companies .
They provide security , predictability and increased opportunities for development .
Flexibility and security of employment are not opposites but , instead , preconditions of each other .
This is something that needs to be reflected in future labour law .
Flexibility is basically about developing constructive cooperation and about mutual trust within companies .
It means that the collective bargaining system and the social dialogue have a major role to play in developing flexicurity .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament rejects the Commission 's narrow focus on individual labour law .
The best balance between flexibility and security is achieved in many countries through the signing of collective agreements that are constantly adapted to developments in terms of both employees ' and companies ' needs .
The Commission must therefore promote the social dialogue both at national and European levels .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to welcome the work that has been done , not only by the rapporteur but , I believe , by all the groups as a whole .
This has produced the text we are considering , which was adopted by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , but I would like to try to clarify one point .
I do not think that conservative and disappointing ideas prevail in the text adopted .
I believe that this text is a contribution to overcoming every resistance and ideological barrier to forms of flexibility in the employment relationship that today often not only exist but constitute a need to allow the system of companies at European level to respond to the competitive challenges posed to them on a worldwide scale .
In order to protect these needs , however , it is necessary for these forms of contract to be genuinely finalised .
A more flexible contract - whether it be part-time , fixed-term , or with temporary employment agencies - responds to a need for flexibility in the just in time response to peaks in demand and to production supply needs , which exist in the competition on the employment market .
It must not be , on the other hand , an inappropriate instrument for introducing forms of discrimination on costs and safeguards , which would transform the flexible contract into a kind of basis or short cut for social dumping that has nothing to do with the requirements of competitiveness and that transforms the challenge of competition into a challenge of mere competition on costs .
This is why I believe that , while we are affirming the need to accept the existence of these contractual forms and not to oppose them on ideological grounds , we also need to raise the level of specific protection , and guarantees , linked to these forms of flexible working .
The rest follows : the primacy of collective regulation over individual exceptions ; the fact that there are European areas of responsibility that respect national prerogatives in the social field and that there is a Community dimension , governed by subsidiarity , of specific regulatory competence , to guarantee minimum standards , which give a meaning to the European dimension , not reducing it to mere squeezing onto the market ; the fight against the underground labour market ; and , finally , the rejection of the logic of trade .
The problem is to achieve these objectives in a balanced way , and certainly to avoid trading safeguards , such as safeguards in companies for the safeguards of the employment market .
We need to push everything that promotes high-quality forms of mobility and transition and , once again , forms that are not linked to contradictions regarding social safeguards .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the Green Paper proposed by the Commission and the report we have discussed is in my opinion a valuable introduction to a longer debate on the adaptation of labour law to the changing realities both in Europe and in the world .
This is only the beginning , and we are facing an extremely complicated task .
We need to achieve results which are hard to reconcile , such as increasing the number of jobs while preserving their quality , guaranteeing social security for workers and keeping as many standard contracts of employment as possible , while at the same time looking after employers ' interests and dealing with competition in the global market .
One issue is paramount : regardless of whether a contract of employment is full-time or not , or whether there are more atypical forms of employment or conventional contracts of employment , every EU citizen must have the right to work or to provide alternative services , and definitely the right to guaranteed health services .
My political group will gladly vote in favour of this report in tomorrow 's voting .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , The debate on liberalising the postal services has taken up a lot of our time today .
It also shows that it is typically in the field of services that liberalisation is attended by an increase in precarious labour relations .
In the face of such developments , everybody expects the Commission to support workers ' rights in a Green Paper on workers ' rights , to set minimum standards at European level to prevent workers ' rights from going into freefall , and to strengthen trade union representation and social dialogue .
Instead , the Commission 's Green Paper starts talking about ideas of Flexicurity , which opens the floodgates to social dumping , which has caused bitter disappointment and will lead to a rise in Euroscepticism .
This House has made a clear amendment here : worker 's rights are not exclusive , but apply to all employees , regardless of what their collective bargaining situation is .
It is the situation on the ground that is decisive . More flexibility is only possible if there is greater security .
This is the only way in which the report can be further developed .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe concerns itself too little with employment problems , and , when it does concern itself with them , it does so totally inadequately , as if employment were not at the heart of building democracy and of the European social model .
Certainly , many of the reasons for the problems of Europe lie in this culpable and deliberate undervaluation .
Within Europe , job insecurity is very widespread and is hindering social cohesion , constituting a real tragedy - in fact , the major social tragedy being experienced by whole generations of young people , as well as older workers who have been prematurely ejected from the labour market .
All this has an effect on our cities , our families , and on all of us .
Combating job insecurity is vital when it comes to building a future and to providing certainty and hope .
This is our main task .
The Commission , instead of combating job insecurity , seems to be adopting it and almost using it to reduce individual and collective rights , to further reduce the role of the trade unions and to set against each other those who have rights - who are in fact becoming increasingly few - and those who do not , in the name of a so-called employment policy .
This is unacceptable .
What needs to be said is that Europe considers employment to be the basis of true democracy and social cohesion and that Europe has its own concept of what constitutes normal work : stable employment , for an unlimited period , protected by contracts and by the role of the trade unions and with a requirement for equal conditions for standard and non-standard jobs , as part of employment equality .
This idea of employment is a healthy idea , which benefits production as well , because it says that competition is not based on exploitation but on quality and innovation .
Saving on employment costs and making workers compete against each other garners easy profits in the short term but does nothing to make the economy or society grow .
This is the social model that Europe should present to the world , and it should put itself forward as an example .
The right to work is a fundamental element of democracy , because it demonstrates the rules for activity upon which society rests .
Within these rights we should build a social unit of young and old , instead of placing them in a ridiculous opposition .
The employment contract should contain these rules and rights , which cannot be delegated to others or replaced by external action , which would leave the employment contract at the mercy of the law of the jungle .
This is why we are not convinced by the concept of flexicurity , of weak contracts replaced by welfare benefits : no , the benefits must be in the contract and they must act as safeguards for the worker , as a European citizen .
The text that has been submitted to Parliament is a compromise ; it has ambiguous points , but important elements , too .
Attacks on this employment , such as those contained in some of the amendments , would be negative and would lead us in a backwards direction .
I say this in particular to my socialist comrades , especially with regard to those amendments that distort the nature of normal employment .
We would consider the approval of these amendments to be a breach of the compromise agreed on in committee .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , the rapporteur 's first draft was not well received in committee , because he was trying to cut back on red tape and to reduce the regulations meant to protect workers but which , in fact , cause unemployment .
We are debating the second draft , which was more acceptable : he had toned it down .
A pity , because it means we are to continue with many of the restrictive practices in the name of harmonisation , while all the time that which you fear - globalisation - is stealing up on you .
For that , the EU will have to cope with competition on the free world markets , but you are not prepared for that .
Unless you learn to compete in Europe , you will not be able to compete globally .
Footballers continually practise ball skills and teamwork ; they do not prepare for a match by playing cards in a backstreet bar !
Likewise , continued practice in Europe 's protectionist systems will mean defeat in the most competitive matches played away on hostile , global playing fields .
- Madam President , it is the policy of my party , the British Conservative Party , to reinstate the opt-out which was agreed at Maastricht and to withdraw the United Kingdom from EU employment and social legislation .
I trust that my Conservative colleagues in this House will have the full support of their political group , the PPE-DE , in implementing this policy .
Turning to the report , I was astonished to read in recital C that ' the EU is not only a free trade area ' .
Anyone who knows the first thing about international trade will know that the EU is not a free trade area at all : it is a customs union .
They will also know that the customs union or Zollverein is a 19th century Bismarckian concept which should have no place in the 21st century .
All the evidence from around the world shows that free trade areas work , while customs unions work far less well .
Indeed , the EU is the only group of developed countries still operating in this outdated mode .
If this House wishes to convert the EU from a customs union with political pretensions into a modern effective free trade area , it will have my full support .
The Commission 's proposals on modernising labour law and our first draft report show a belated recognition of the huge damage that intrusive and inflexible labour market rules have done to European economies .
They made the first tentative steps towards liberalisation .
However , amendments passed in the Unemployment Committee reverse the direction and turn the report into a regressive socialist wish-list of deeply harmful proposals .
Today 's amendments restore the balance , and so long as they are maintained the report 's timid measures are better than nothing and deserve our support .
Paragraph 2 quotes the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
That Charter was signed off twice by Tony Blair , yet after the Brussels summit of 22 June he came back like Chamberlain from Munich declaring he had protected his red line and that the charter would not affect UK labour law .
Could the Commission please give me a clear ' yes ' or ' no ' answer ?
Is Blair 's opt-out legally defensible ?
I look forward to the Commission 's reply .
As we have reached voting time , the debate is now suspended .
It will be resumed at 3 p.m.
1 .
Election of a Vice-President of Parliament ( vote )
2 .
Request for consultation of the Committee of the Regions on the role of volunteering in economic and social cohesion ( Rule 118 ) ( vote )
3 .
EC-Algeria Euro-Mediterranean Agreement ( vote )
- Recommendation : Jacek Saryusz-Wolski
4 .
EC-Moldova Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( vote )
- Report : Jacek Saryusz-Wolski
5 .
EC-Ukraine Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( vote )
- Report : Jacek Saryusz-Wolski
6 .
EC-Armenia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( vote )
Report : Jacek Saryusz-Wolski
7 .
EC-Azerbaijan Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( vote )
Report : Jacek Saryusz-Wolski
8 .
EC-Georgia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( vote )
- Report : Jacek Saryusz-Wolski
9 .
Accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Convention on the use of information technology for customs purposes ( vote )
Report : Jean-Marie Cavada
10 .
Direct insurance other than life assurance ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
Report : Pervenche Berès
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , it is about an important dossier in the area of commitology .
I shall not trouble the House for long , but I should like us to be able to vote against the first part of the European Parliament 's amendment and in favour of the second part .
I think all Members will have understood the importance of this vote .
Thank you , Mrs Berès .
So we are voting only on the second part .
11 .
Undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
Report : Pervenche Berès
12 .
Reinsurance ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
Report : Pervenche Berès
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , in the interests of efficiency , and so that our text allows the Council to align itself with our wording , we should vote here against the amendment of our Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
13 .
A new statistical classification of products by activity ( CPA ) ( vote )
Report : Guntars Krasts
14 .
Labour force sample survey ( vote )
Report : Jan Andersson
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( SV ) I just want to direct Members ' attention to the fact that Amendments 1 to 3 have been withdrawn in order to facilitate an agreement with the Council at first reading .
Members of the committee have been informed of this measure .
I therefore move straight to the single vote .
15 .
Energy Star ( vote )
Report : Nikolaos Vakalis
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Mr President , I would like to emphasise that a positive vote by the European Parliament today will be a huge leap forward and will break a taboo that has prevailed in Europe for decades .
For the first time , public money will have to be used , through public procurement , to increase energy efficiency , which is quite rightly considered to be a basic pillar of sustainable energy policy .
I trust that this will mark the start of taxpayers ' money being used for high-priority issues .
Finally , I should like to thank Commissioner Piebalgs and the German Presidency for making approval of the regulation at first reading possible .
16 .
United Nations Convention on a Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences ( repeal of Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 954 / 79 ) ( vote )
Report : Corien Wortmann-Kool
17 .
Fishing activities in the Antarctic ( vote )
Report : Rosa Miguélez Ramos
18 .
Accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Europol Convention ( vote )
Report : Genowefa Grabowska
19 .
Accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters ( vote )
Report : Genowefa Grabowska
20 .
Accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Convention on driving disqualifications ( vote )
Report : Genowefa Grabowska
21 .
Accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Convention on the fight against corruption involving officials of the European Communities or officials of Member States of the European Union ( vote )
Report : Jörg Leichtfried
22 .
Corrigenda ( new Rule 204a of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure ) ( vote )
Report : Richard Corbett
23 .
Application and interpretation of the Rules of Procedure ( amendment of Rule 201 ) ( vote )
Report : Richard Corbett
24 .
Immunity and privileges of Alessandra Mussolini ( vote )
Report : Klaus-Heiner Lehne
25 .
Request for defence of the immunity of Ashley Mote ( vote )
Report : Francesco Enrico Speroni
26 .
Draft amending budget No 4 / 2007 ( vote )
Report : James Elles
27 .
Translation expenditure ( vote )
Report : Alexander Stubb
28 .
Minimising administrative costs imposed by legislation ( vote )
Report : Jan Mulder
29 .
Law applicable to non-contractual obligations ( ' Rome II ' ) ( vote )
Report : Diana Wallis
30 .
Community action programme in the field of health ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
Recommendation for second reading : Antonios Trakatellis
31 .
Measuring devices containing mercury ( vote )
Recommendation for second reading : Sornosa Martínez
32 .
Common authorisation procedure for food additives ( vote )
Report : Åsa Westlund
- Before the vote
( DE ) Madam President , allow me to point out an error in the voting list of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
In the vote on the legal basis , Amendment 39 , we should be listed with a minus instead of a plus .
33 .
Food additives ( vote )
Report : Åsa Westlund
34 .
Food enzymes ( vote )
Report : Avril Doyle
35 .
Flavourings and food ingredients with flavouring properties for use in and on foods ( vote )
Report : Mojca Drčar Murko
36 .
Rates of excise duty on alcohol and alcoholic beverages ( vote )
Report : Astrid Lulling
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to draw your attention to this report for just a moment , as the procedure is very complicated .
For the sake of clarity , I shall make it clear to all those who want to avoid any increase in the minimum rates on beer and spirits that they should vote against all the amendments adopted in committee except one , adopted in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs by a small , chance majority of 21 to 19 .
I am asking you , in any case , whatever the result of the vote , to reject all of my report and so maintain the status quo in relation to excise duty on alcohol , until we have the Commission 's report , given that Mr Kovàcs wishes to make proposals on the whole excise duty policy at the end of the year .
I would remind you again that Winston Churchill said :
' There is no such thing as a good text ' .
( Applause )
( FR ) I should like to add to that there is nothing worse than pointlessly increasing taxes at the wrong time .
Therefore , please , follow me with regard to this vote and anyway , reject the report !
( Applause )
Thank you , Mrs Lulling .
The House is obviously grateful for your advice .
Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( FR ) Madam President , the House will recall that we had to refer this text back for further discussion because , following conflicting votes , our rapporteur had called for a vote against .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs carried out a serious piece of work , which , obviously , does not correspond with our rapporteur 's opinion and no doubt she ought to have withdrawn her name from the final result .
It was not obtained by a small , chance majority but following very thorough work , with the Commission and with the Council , for an extremely reasonable proposal which , I hope , this House will be able to support .
( Applause )
37 .
European Critical Infrastructure ( vote )
Report : Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
38 .
Internal gas and electricity market ( vote )
Report : Alejo Vidal-Quadras
- Before the vote on Amendment 2 :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would like to speak with regard to Amendment 2 , which refers to the role of transport system operators .
In the text of the report there appears the word ' institutional ' .
In the language of the European Union , ' institutional ' has a very specific meaning which is too high for what is intended here .
My suggestion , therefore , is that we replace the word ' institutional ' with ' official ' .
It would thereby read thus : ' Welcomes the proposal to grant existing associations of TSOs an official role with formal obligations and objectives ( the ETSO + \ GTE + solution ) ; ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
39 .
Production of fishmeal and fish oil ( vote )
Report : Struan Stevenson
Madam President , on a point of order , you are obviously having trouble seeing me at the moment .
I asked twice for a check on my own report , which was refused .
I just want to put it on record that perhaps this has happened because you cannot hear a woman sitting at the back , perhaps you will not give the floor or listen to that kind of request .
You and your colleagues have been wrong several times , and although you listened to the request for a check , you did not in the case of my report , and I asked for twice .
I think that should be put on record .
Thank you .
( Applause )
We have heard what you say , but believe you me everybody here does their utmost to listen and to watch , but we take note of what you say .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote , see Minutes . )
Convening of the Intergovernmental Conference : opinion of the European Parliament ( deadline for tabling amendments ) : see Minutes
Explanations of vote
in writing . - ( DE ) Kiev is by no means as far along the ' road to Brussels ' as some may believe .
An unambiguous retreat from Moscow which Lukashenko has for some time given the appearance of preparing would have consequences , not least regarding oil and gas supplies .
Any instability in this area would also have consequences for the European Union .
Although the latest round of enlargement has taken us to the limit of our capabilities , it has not yet been resolved whether we will respect Russian influence in the post-Soviet territories , or whether we will continue to blindly ape the US striving to expand in Eastern Europe .
Despite the resulting zigzag course and political tension in Ukraine , it is in our interests to deepen neighbourly relations with Ukraine .
In the confidence-building measure of easing visa restrictions , we should nevertheless ensure that the old scandal is completely cleared up , and there will be no further abuse of the system .
Under the terms of the 2005 Treaty of Accession for Bulgaria and Romania , a simplified system was created allowing their accession to conventions and protocols concluded under Article 34 TEU or Article 293 TEC without the need to negotiate or conclude specific accession protocols to these conventions , thereby reducing the huge bureaucracy which would result from the need for ratification by the twenty-seven Member States .
Thus , the annex sets out a list of seven conventions and protocols relating to justice and internal affairs where the present convention can be found .
I welcome this kind of initiative aimed at reducing Community bureaucracy and the exaggerated amount of time taken up over such simple matters as this .
I , therefore , support this Council Decision determining the date on which the Convention of the 26 of July 1995 on the use of computer systems in the field of customs , and respective protocols , should enter into force in Bulgaria and Romania .
I am voting in favour of Mrs Grabowski 's report on the Accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Europol Convention of 26 July 1995 .
According to the act on the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the European Union , these states are able to join conventions made by the Member States on the basis of Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union according to a simplified procedure .
For this reason there is no need for negotiations and special accession protocols , which would also involve the need for them to be ratified by all members of the Community .
All that is required is that the Council , after consulting with the European Parliament , adopt a decision setting the date on which the Europol Convention becomes effective , along with the necessary protocols .
The Council should also take into account the new deadlines for the effectiveness of the three protocols , dated 30 November 2000 , 28 November 2002 and 27 November 2003 .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the excellent report by my colleague , Mr Stubb , on the special report of the European Court of Auditors concerning translation expenditure incurred by the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
I am pleased to have been able to table an amendment deploring the fact that more and more documents and communications - not least compromise amendments when they are voted on in committee - and , for example , annexes to reports , are being submitted in just one language .
This trend goes against the need to maintain a democratic functioning model of our Union involving various peoples from different cultures and language backgrounds .
Our model can be of use to other regions in the world , not least the Mediterranean area , and we must fully respect the use of languages .
I regret that I was unable to prevent the report from encouraging the parliamentary committees and delegations , as far as possible , to submit texts solely in the languages of their full and substitute members and from demanding that other language versions be provided on request .
The latter restriction will result in Members being deprived of the opportunity to follow the work done in committees other than their own .
Respect for the official languages of each Member State of the European Union is laid down in the Treaties .
However , the idea that some translations are dispensable is being encouraged on grounds of the financial question , and by appealing to the need to define priorities and restrictions such as the size of documents .
We do not accept these guidelines , as they counteract respect for multilingualism .
We , therefore , reassert our firm rejection of any effort to limit the use of any official ( and working ) European Union language on the grounds of high costs , an example of which , as we pointed out at the appropriate time , are the current criteria that determine the languages used during the EU-ACP parliamentary assemblies , which make the use of Portuguese unfeasible in a discriminatory manner .
We also reject a reduction in numbers of interpreters and translators on the pretext of fallacious budgetary arguments , and any precariousness or degrading of their working conditions in Parliament , Commission or Council , namely by promoting the outsourcing of these services which are essential to the adequate functioning of these institutions and to guarantee the citizens of the different Member States of the European Union access to pertinent information in their own language .
in writing .
We abstained on today 's report from Mr Stubb as we are concerned that the term , ' controlled full multilingualism ' , could be used to restrict the amount of written material available to Irish speakers in comparison to speakers of other official and working languages .
At present a range of services which could be made available in Irish are not made available because the European Parliament administration shows no wish to do so .
Such unnecessary limitations placed upon the Irish language as a working language should be removed .
Some of the suggestions in Mr Stubb 's report with regard to respect for multilingualism , quality control , user satisfaction , translation memory systems and a common database for terminology are positive .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Court of Auditors ' criticism of the 25 % rise in the cost of translation , which cannot be explained solely by the increase in the number of official languages from 11 to 21 , should be examined in detail .
For this reason it is worth considering whether it would not be advantageous in future to break down the costs of translation by target languages in order to better evaluate need , demand and translation output .
We also need a strategy for the ongoing pre-accession negotiations , because if Macedonia alone has six official languages , we will soon have our own Tower of Babel .
When all the information is made available , the potential for any rational savings will become clear .
However , this audit should not be misused so that even more important EU documents are classed as ' working documents ' or ' annexes ' to close the door on the obligation for complete translation .
In particular , the use of German , due to its importance as the most widely spoken mother tongue and the second most important foreign language in the EU , should be promoted .
in writing . - ( NL ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the Stubb report on the grounds that I agree with its gist .
Our actions should remain based on complete multilingualism , out of respect for the principles of equality of all citizens , and for the benefit of the best possible communication and democracy .
At the same time , however , we should exercise caution where costs are concerned because , if not , we run the risk of losing the social support for the multilingualism of our institution .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my fellow Member , Mr Mulder , on minimising administrative costs imposed by European legislation .
The European Commission 's objective of better regulation must be encouraged and monitored .
Pointless administrative costs are the scourge of our societies based on the rule of law , which , at times , do not realise that the inflation of law results in its depreciation , for Europeans do not apply pointless and costly rules .
It is not illusory to envisage a 25 % reduction in administrative costs by 2013 , provided that we conduct a thorough analysis of what is at stake and do not lose sight of the fact that false economies can be far more costly .
Everyone knows that mediocrity is far more costly , in the long term , than quality .
If we must constantly fight against all pointless laws and their associated administrative costs , we must ensure that we regulate economic activities carefully and with proper judgment , in the best interests of consumers and manufacturers .
in writing . - ( DE ) If we continue to conjure up new EU agencies just to assuage national sensibilities , and their tasks overlap with existing ones , we really should not be surprised at increasingly vociferous criticism of burgeoning red tape , unchecked organisational nonsense and creating unnecessary jobs .
Citizen-friendliness needs more than e-government and similar publicity stunts , and we have to avoid and cut down on duplication .
We should also make use of the present savings potentials .
These include : reducing the seats of Parliament to one single location , assessing expenses on the basis of the actual costs incurred , a top-class anti-fraud system and the real recovery of grants that have been improperly paid out , along with the millions to be saved by not foisting enlargements on reluctant citizens .
In no way should the EU follow the example of some Member States , where increasing numbers of migrants are taken up in the administration .
This will cause irreparable damage to the creation and development of a European identity .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my fellow Member , Mrs Wallis , on the draft regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the law applicable to non-contractual obligations ( ROME II ) .
This extremely complex matter is a step in the direction of harmonising the Member States ' conflict of law rules applicable to non-contractual obligations , that is to say , the consequences of road traffic accidents , unfair competition , environmental damage , defamation and , more generally , violation of personal rights , etc .
Overall , the European Parliament has not been sufficiently heard by the Member States , and the countless studies and reports that are to weigh up the consequences of this agreement will be crucial when we return to this important matter .
For example , regarding road traffic accidents , how can we be content with applying the law of the country of the accident , and not that of the country of residence of the victim , and are we sure that recitals of this regulation on their own will make it compulsory for the courts to assess losses ?
How are we going to manage defamation in the context of a globalised and dematerialised press ?
The examples go on .
A considerable amount of work awaits us on these issues .
in writing . - ( FR ) I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the balanced text that she is proposing to us .
The object of this text is the setting up of a coherent legal framework for relations between international civil laws and other Community instruments .
This regulation on the law applicable to non-contractual obligations ( ' Rome II ' ) , seeks to harmonise national rules of conflict of laws .
These rules determine the law applicable to non-contractual obligations such as , for example , road traffic accidents , product liability , unfair competition or environmental damage .
We are in favour of the principle of adopting standard rules in relation to conflict of laws , although they still need to be , let us remember this , sufficiently clear and precise .
This was not the case with the controversial provisions on defamation by the media .
Freedom of speech and of the press must be protected and be able to be fully exercised .
In the absence here of rules for the protection of editorial independence , it was reasonable to exclude the provisions relating to violation of personal rights by the media from the scope of ' Rome II ' .
We shall , therefore , vote in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am very pleased about the adoption of the compromise negotiated with the Council concerning the second programme of Community action in the field of health 2007-2013 .
The European Union can no longer do without a common programme for health with common public investment .
It is unfortunate that the budget has been revised downwards .
A large number of investments are needed before we can have preventive and technical resources .
Prevention is better than cure and good information on lifestyle or a healthier diet in order to reduce mortality due to serious illnesses is an essential prerequisite .
It is necessary also to make generally available technical solutions for emergency situations .
Widespread availability of defibrillators is one of many examples .
Health , however , does not come down to a simple matter of accountancy .
It is also and above all a benefit for everyone .
Making patients more responsible is a central factor .
Setting up clear and applicable provisions everywhere in the European Union is undoubtedly the most essential way forward for the future .
The action programme proposed as the common position of the Council of the EU does not seek to protect and upgrade public health , but to manage its problems , extend the commercialisation and privatisation of health services and help private groups of companies penetrate what is a profitable sector for capital .
The responsibility and obligation of the state to protect and improve public health is being transferred to local authorities , to NGOs , to ' civil society ' , while personal responsibility is being promoted as the basic determining factor for public health .
Capitalist restructurings in the public health sector come under the general anti-working class policy of the ΕU , the deteriorating terms of insurance and the increased retirement age of the workers .
We are radically opposed to the anti-labour proposals included in the Community action plan in the public health sector .
The Greek Communist Party is fighting for solely public health and welfare services which meet the contemporary needs of working families .
( NL ) Madam President , I am right here in the centre .
Allow me to make a brief observation with regard to reducing the use of mercury , of which everyone is in favour .
It is a good thing because , in many sectors , the use of mercury has been superseded and , indeed , has to be replaced by other materials , but a total ban on traditional objects , including the traditional mercury barometer , is taking matters too far in our view .
I recently paid a visit to the Dingens company in the Belgian town of Leopoldsburg , where , for decades , they have proved that mercury barometers can be produced in a sustainable and ecologically responsible manner .
Moreover , these traditional barometers have an unlimited lifespan , unlike their digital successors , which work on batteries and therefore use energy .
Also , since the producers of traditional barometers have become skilled in maintaining these devices in a sustainable manner , mercury from barometers no longer ends up in the waste cycle .
I would therefore call on the Commission - and this is my final comment - and all those involved to send out a signal at this stage to the sector involved and for the benefit of the assessment , which has taken two years , to give due account to this justified specific situation of the mercury barometer products so that they , hopefully , continue to qualify for exemption schemes .
( NL ) Thank you , Madam President .
I voted in favour of Amendments 1 and 2 , because I take the view that the production of traditional barometers must remain an option .
I resent any kind of European interference which leads not only to traditional customs and production methods , but also employment , falling by the wayside .
Moreover , it is very much the question whether the ban on mercury barometers would be an effective measure .
Other forms of mercury use are far more extensive and far more problematic than those in the production of barometers .
Also , as mercury barometers do not require any batteries , they have an unlimited life span .
This House has once again managed to miss out on an opportunity to give due account to a specific reality , namely that small and medium-sized enterprises occupy a critical position in our economy and in Europe .
The last thing these SMEs need is even more European busybodying and interference .
in writing . I voted in favour of the amendments to exempt barometers from this overly prescriptive legislation and , upon defeat of the amendments , I voted against the report .
The total ban on mercury instruments destroys a long-standing craft industry in the UK and is the product of obsessive meddling by Brussels in matters far beyond what is necessary or sensible .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the wise decision taken in relation to the Council common position , which takes up most of the amendments adopted by the European Parliament .
The main difference between the positions of Parliament and of the Council concerns mercury barometers and the derogations to be implemented , in view of the fact that the ban that would subsequently be introduced would only apply to new mercury barometers , as barometers that are already in circulation can always be resold , repaired and maintained .
Given the very hazardous properties of mercury and the much larger amount of mercury contained in traditional barometers in comparison , for example , with fever thermometers , the solution proposed by the Council to grant a limited derogation is a balanced compromise : the aim , in fact , is to grant a temporary derogation in order to allow the manufacturers of traditional barometers to adapt to the new arrangements .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the adoption of the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing of certain measuring devices containing mercury .
I am in favour of restricting the marketing to the general public of measuring devices containing mercury , which have been banned in France since 1998 .
The Council common position accepted by Parliament establishes a balance allowing both a reduction in the release of mercury in the environment while allowing a transition period for certain articles such as traditional barometers .
A transition period of two years after the date of entry into force of the directive will allow the industries concerned to develop their technology to produce mercury-free devices .
in writing . I am appalled that we are still producing legislation which puts jobs at risk for no real environmental benefit .
UK barometer-making , like that in other Member States , is a traditional industry dating back several centuries .
It is clearly necessary that the use of mercury is properly controlled and we have made substantial progress in recent years on related matters such as storage and export .
However , it should be possible to safeguard traditional barometer-making by ensuring that proper safety warnings etc. are used .
There is no need to destroy a long-established craft simply because it is easier to have ' one size fits all ' legislation .
Social Europe means nothing if it means putting people in traditional crafts out of work .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , mercury is a dangerous product that should be handled with the necessary caution .
Nobody in this House is in any doubt of this .
Unfortunately , this House has pursued this position today with regard to the vote on the Sornosa Martínez report to absurd levels , something which I deeply regret .
By holding firm to a total ban on the production of traditional barometers , the Commission , backed up today by a majority of this House , has sounded the death knell for a sector that stands for 360 years of European tradition .
The fact that all barometer manufacturers in the European Union only account for a few tenths of percentages of the annual mercury consumption , mercury which , by the way , is recycled 100 % , makes the matter only worse .
Today , we were clearly not guided by common sense in our decision .
in writing . ( SV ) The votes on Mrs Westlund 's reports are not just about which food additives may be used .
They are mainly about who is to decide on individual issues concerning food additives .
In contrast to the rapporteur , we Swedish Conservatives do not believe that the European Parliament should evaluate , and take decisions on approving , individual food additives , for example on the basis of details such as the risks posed by individual food additives to people with allergies .
That would involve a politicisation of important issues that should be decided on a scientific basis and at the level of the relevant authority .
We therefore reject the proposal concerning increased powers of codecision for Parliament .
As a consequence of this , we have voted against unduly detailed regulations in today 's vote .
( CS ) Commissioner , I supported the more flexible authorisation of food additives .
The Commission should look specifically at the impact of these additives on the environment and on health .
I should like , if I may , to draw your attention to the high number of people with allergies , whose lives depend on keeping to a gluten-free diet .
In addition to specially made goods , they buy normal foods that do not normally contain gluten .
Additives must be properly labelled so that consumers are not misled .
Manufacturers and supervisors often ignore the fact that the labelling of every product must explicitly show whether it contains gluten .
Statistically Europeans suffering from food allergies are unfortunately not provided with the necessary information when they make their purchases , so either their choice of food is restricted or , much worse , they put their health at risk .
I therefore call on the Commission to oversee a proper investigation into gluten in additives and to promote the comprehensive labelling of all foods so that those Europeans on a gluten-free diet are also able to understand it .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the excellent report by my Swedish fellow Member , Mrs Westlund , on food additives .
While it is normal to simplify the European Commission 's task by agreeing that decisions on authorisation of food additives should come under the comitology procedure , the Commission must , for its part , take account of the comments that Parliament has been making non-stop for years now in the new regulation on food additives , and in the new regulation establishing a common food authorisation procedure for food additives , food enzymes and food flavourings .
These comments chiefly concern the environment , public health and allergy sufferers .
We should be pleased that the current legislation stipulates that the authorisation of additives must not mislead consumers .
However , colourings sometimes give the impression that a foodstuff contains fruit , when that is not the case .
Consumer protection must therefore be strengthened on this point , without this affecting manufacturers .
in writing . Although I agree with the principles contained within the amendments on the labelling of GMOs , I abstained because I believe these matters should be addressed by national governments and should not become an EU competence .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the excellent report by my esteemed Irish colleague , Mrs Doyle , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on food enzymes and amending a number of existing texts .
In order to remove the barriers to trade and to prevent not only legal uncertainty , but also differing health and consumer protection standards among the Member States , it is vital that we harmonise , at Community level , the rules on the use of enzymes in the food processing sector , which has developed considerably over the last few years ( baked goods , cheese , beer , fruit juice , starch , etc . ) .
Major scientific and technological developments , which make it possible to have new enzymes made from genetically modified micro-organisms , must lead us to accept this prospect of harmonised legislation on the use of food enzymes within the European Union .
This is in the best interests of consumers and manufacturers , provided that we do not have too costly a form of legislation .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the excellent report by my Slovenian fellow Member , Mrs Drčar Murko , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on flavourings and certain food ingredients with flavouring properties for use in and on foods and amending a number of existing texts .
At present , all natural tastes and odours can be copied synthetically from 2 600 molecules with flavouring properties , with the possibility being there to create new tastes that do not exist in nature .
Technological developments in the flavourings sector and the rapidly changing tastes of our fellow citizens must encourage us to monitor food safety and consumer protection and to give the industry concerned the opportunity to pursue technological development , with the aim of all this being to strengthen the internal market .
Many questions have been raised , and I welcome the compromises reached by the rapporteur , which ensure that the proposal for a regulation represents an effective initiative aimed at modernising and simplifying the legislation on flavourings .
in writing . I will be voting for this report .
I welcome in particular the commitment to labelling GMOs .
I do not share entirely the concerns expressed by some of my colleagues as to the safety of GMOs .
My judgement is different .
As a scientist I believe GMOs have a role to play .
Nevertheless , I do accept that others have the right to make their own choices .
Therefore , labelling enables those whose judgement differs from mine to avoid products they chose to reject .
in writing . Although we agree with the principles contained within these amendments on the labelling of GMOs , UKIP has abstained because these matters should be addressed by national governments and should not become an EU competence .
in writing . Amendment 38 - providing that GMO-derived content of food be indicated by labelling - attracts abstention ( rather than support ) despite its inherent desirability , owing to its dangerously and irreformably undemocratic source ( EU institutions ) .
In other words , I consider centralist EU rule , without democratic accountability , to be more of a threat to civilisation than are unlabelled , GMO-derived food additives .
Therefore , I abstain rather than voting for this amendment .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the package relating to the rationalisation of procedures for the authorisation , use and consolidation of directives relating to additives and flavourings , as well as the harmonisation of legislation relating to enzymes .
A certain number of additional guarantees have been introduced to ensure the transparency of decisions and the protection of consumers and I am very pleased about that .
The aim of future legislation will be to ensure consumer protection and food safety while preserving innovation and competitiveness in the food processing industry .
The food industry uses many natural and artificial flavourings : no fewer than 2 600 are listed .
More and more enzymes enter also into the manufacture of food stuffs and the texts adopted seek to improve the safety of the use of these substances .
The competitiveness of the food processing industry in the market should be preserved .
Natural flavourings are wholly made up of natural flavouring agents .
The ratio of 90 / 10 proposed by the Commission made it possible to produce a natural flavour with tastes differing according to the products , targets or the culture of Member States .
The 10 % came from natural sources other than the substance concerned .
I regret therefore the adoption of the arbitrary rule called 95 / 5 which could penalise the food processing industry but without giving the consumer better information .
in writing . I voted against the report on excise duty on alcohol and alcoholic beverages .
The ECON Committee voted for a 4,5 % increase in minimum rates .
As I am against any tax harmonisation or increase , no matter how small , I have had to vote against Astrid Lulling 's report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , emotions run high each time we discuss beer , wine or other alcoholic beverages in this House .
This was also true of the brewery agreements .
Today is no different .
Fifteen years ago , the Council agreed on minimum rates for excise on alcoholic beverages .
The intention was clear : bring the vastly different rates in the Member States into line with each other .
So many years later , we have to conclude that the decisions taken at the time have overshot the mark .
Accordingly , for public health reasons , some Member States , including the Scandinavian countries , apply rates that are much higher than the minimum rates .
Which is not a bad thing at all .
Every Member State is entitled to adopt excise policy that is commensurate with its national traditions and policy preferences .
Let us , however , also admit that the inflation correction of existing rates , proposed by the Commission , will not make any difference .
As the current excise straddle between the Member States and the existing competitive distortions will persist without any sign of let-up , I supported rapporteur Lulling in her no-vote .
- ( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert 's target for the proposed directive should be supported because it is quite simply a matter of protecting important infrastructure which affects several countries against terrorist attacks .
That is why we need to identify and define the infrastructure , as well as security plans .
The Commission 's proposal goes too far , though .
It undermines the principle of solidarity by confusing anti-terrorist activities with economic instruments .
The Commission should also ask itself whether the centralised compilation of critical infrastructure will not serve the terrorists and thereby increase the risk .
This House has made constructive amendment proposals , which , thank goodness , we have approved with a large majority .
I therefore propose that the Commission revise these .
I have voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the excellent report by my Dutch fellow Member , Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , on the proposal for a Council directive on critical infrastructure .
Firstly , I applaud the vision of the European Council of June 2004 , which is behind this proposal for a directive .
It is , in fact , imperative that the European Union support the Member States in protecting critical infrastructure from the risks , including terrorist risks , that we face .
Although the responsibility for this type of infrastructure lies with the Member States and the owners / operators who are generally linked to them , it is logical to communitise certain aspects of prevention , identification , designation of critical infrastructure , as well as the evaluation of the need to protect this infrastructure better .
Internet development and the liberalisation of certain markets ( electricity , gas , telecommunications , rail freight , etc . ) must lead us to be more vigilant regarding our critical infrastructure , which is becoming more and more interconnected throughout Europe and of which the interruption , whether on a permanent or temporary basis , or destruction could have serious repercussions for health , security and the economic and social well-being of Europeans and for the proper functioning of the Member States ' governments .
The establishment of a common framework for action to protect European critical infrastructures means that we are once again faced with the central question of transferring competencies that lie at the heart of the States ' sovereignty to the sphere of the EU .
The definition of the protection of these infrastructures at Community level , in the name of the so-called ' fight against terrorism ' , will mean that the Member States will be faced with the responsibility of implementing binding measures , as , indeed , is mentioned in the justification of this proposal .
Despite the rapporteur 's having mitigated the scope of the initial proposal , by underlining , for example , that ' the responsibility for the protection of critical infrastructures lies solely and exclusively with the Member States ' and considering ' that a Community approach is only justifiable if at least three Member States , or two Member States besides the one in which the critical infrastructure is situated , are affected ' , the fundamental objectives are not called into question .
It should also be emphasised that , as recent events have shown , measures which compromise the rights , freedoms and guarantees of the citizens have been implemented on the pretext of the said ' fight against terrorism ' .
Let us hope that the concept of ' protection of European critical infrastructures ' does not come to be used as an argument in favour of curtailing legitimate industrial action by workers defending their rights .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting for the report on the identification and designation of European Critical Infrastructure and the assessment of the need to improve their protection .
Damage to , or the outage of , an infrastructure facility in one Member State may have negative consequences for other Member States and on the European economy as a whole .
For this reason , protecting critical infrastructure is essential for the internal security of the EU .
I also agree with the report 's proposal for setting up a list of priority sectors containing critical European infrastructure be made subject to common criteria .
However , the Member States should not be obliged to disclose their critical infrastructure in great detail , as this would go against the interests of national security .
Horizontal legal provisions at EU level , which would take into account the complex processes and the interfaces of critical infrastructures with a trans-national dimension is a justified concern .
It should , however , be recognised at the same time that the EU should support , not duplicate , the work done by the Member States .
For this reason I also approve of the proposal for a bottom-up approach , as national authorities know best what is going on in their own countries .
in writing . There is no European critical infrastructure , it is national .
Its protection is the responsibility of national governments , particularly given the threats facing the democracies from terrorism .
I am , of course , in favour of measures that would genuinely enhance security .
However , the directive is a further step in the EU 's attempts to extend its reach into the security and defence sphere .
This is its most objectionable element .
The Commission seems to view security as a means to ensure that the , ' stability of the Internal Market is maintained ' , which misses the point .
The proposed system of reporting risk and threat assessments to the Commission merely creates additional bureaucratic burdens and structures .
The requirement for Member States to notify the Commission of specific critical infrastructures is counter-productive , as it would produce a list of targets that would be of great interest to the wrong people .



( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against Mr Vidal-Ouadras ' report , not because I oppose opening up the electricity and gas markets - quite the contrary , but I cannot agree with one of the core requirements , which is ownership unbundling - or rather , I cannot do so at present - for three reasons : firstly , because we have to give national regulatory authorities more time to build up effective regulation for competition ; secondly , it has by no means been satisfactorily demonstrated to me that ownership unbundling will promote investment in supply networks , and thirdly , because the unbundling proposal does not apply where networks and generation facilities are still under state ownership .
This is the point where we should impose those strict liberalisation conditions that have so far been denied to competition , instead of undermining those that are on the right market economy track through unbundling provisions .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my Spanish colleague , Mr Vidal-Quadras , on prospects for the internal gas and electricity market .
The report has made it possible for us to review this matter after a long process of energy market liberalisation and , above all , for the European Council of March 2006 to adopt an ' energy package ' aimed at safeguarding security of supply , competitiveness and environmental sustainability in relation to EU energy policy .
I regret that the amendment tabled by my colleagues , Mr Reul , Mrs Laperrouze , Mrs Trautmann and others , for which I voted , has not been adopted by Parliament , since it provided for a balanced alternative to the mere ownership unbundling of energy networks , while safeguarding the independence of that unbundling .
These are subjects on which the political debate is far from over .
The same is true of the role of the regulators , the lifting of the barriers to interconnections , the development of new massive generation from renewable energy sources , the substantial investment in infrastructure to meet growing needs and so on .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against the Vidal-Quadras report on the prospects for the internal gas and electricity market which prepares for the presentation next September by the Commission of a third ' liberalisation ' package .
First of all I am opposed to the liberal dogmatic principle of ownership unbundling ( ownership and management of the network ) , because it brings no guarantee in relation to investments , supply , safety or access for third parties and renewable energy to the network .
It does not ensure availability of energy at the best price for citizens and it does not fulfil public service obligations either .
Why then disrupt the present organisation , which works well and ensures the effective independence of system operators , thanks , in particular to strong intervention by the regulator and putting in place strict rules to guarantee equality of treatment and a quality service to all users of the networks , even those who live in regions with a natural handicap and very remote regions .
Furthermore , I think that the problem of the independence of the transmission system operators does not relate to the issue of the system of ownership , but to that of regulation .
Why , therefore , ask for the elimination of the public character of energy operators ?
in writing . - ( FR ) I regret the adoption of ownership unbundling defended by the fierce defenders of the dismantling of large companies .
In my opinion , the liberal right has struck another blow to the principle of public service mission , which is so dear to European citizens .
I think that ownership unbundling brings no guarantee in relation to investments , safety or third party access ( including renewable energy sources , which could be penalised because of their high costs ) .
Nor does it ensure availability of energy at the best price for citizens .
I believe it would have been preferable to retain a system like the French one , which integrates into its working the legislative rules from previous European directives .
This is another one of the steps towards the liberalisation of the internal gas and electricity market in the wake of the Lisbon Strategy .
The keywords in this report are ' liberalisation ' and ' market ' .
The basic idea from which they set out is always the same .
The premise , already refuted by innumerable examples , that the market alone will resolve the problem of energy supply and consumption , is defended with growing fervour in an effort to conjure away what is increasingly difficult to ignore : that the ' market ' has only been a success for some , who have accumulated fabulous profits , but not for the consumers , who find themselves confronted with ever-higher energy bills .
Its strategic nature means that the energy sector is vital for a country 's independence and sovereignty .
To subject it to private national and transnational interests is an affront to the sovereignty of the peoples and the rights of the workers and populations .
We , therefore , once again , reject the liberalisation of gas and electricity , advocating that they should remain in the public sector as the sole guarantee of access to a continuous service offering quality and accessible prices .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against liberalisation of the gas and electricity sectors because I do not consider that transmission ownership unbundling is the most effective way of stimulating investment in these infrastructures .
As the report recognises , ' this model might not address all of the issues at stake , such as interconnections and congestion points ' .
The fact is that the electricity market and the gas market require significant investment .
It is not by eliminating the big operators in the market that the European Union will be able to guarantee its security of supply .
A strange fact remains that the European countries that have liberalised the most also have the highest prices for consumers .
in writing . Sinn Féin rejected the Vidal-Quadras report on the internal gas and electricity market because of its emphasis on privatisation and " unbundling " .
Member States should retain the right to fully own and operate their energy systems if they see fit to do so .
As an all-Ireland party we look forward to the development of an all-Ireland energy market which is fully integrated and managed in an accountable way .
Interconnections between north and south are important infrastructural elements in the creation of an all-Ireland economy .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Union for the Presidential Majority ( UMP ) delegation wishes to point out and highlight the fact that ownership unbundling is not the best answer to current market dysfunctions .
In a context of strong competition , which sees the emergence of powerful non-European operators , we feel it is dangerous to dismantle the European energy companies in the name of a dogmatic approach to competition policy , far removed from the industrial strategies that ought to strengthen the European Union in global competition .
European energy supply is a strategic long-term issue that requires its security to be guaranteed beyond the duration of a single contract .
This security of energy supply depends upon investments that are already clearly inadequate .
They will , however , have to increase significantly in order to meet our future needs whether for gas or electricity .
Ownership unbundling means that our traditional energy operators will not be able to realise these investments in the energy networks .
Handing over this opportunity to new entrants , who will not necessarily have the financial resources needed , or to non-European companies , who do not necessarily share our assessment of our future needs is very dangerous and very worrying .
In these circumstances , the UMP delegation expects the European Commission to develop an alternative approach to ownership unbundling .
Animal proteins are not a natural part - and I emphasise the word ' natural ' - of the diet of , for example , an adult bovine .
Currently , many appear to have forgotten - or make out that they have forgotten - the consequences of the ' mad cow ' crisis - BSE - on human and animal health , and the socio-economic consequences underlying the intensive production model which caused it .
The current report supports the lifting of the ban on the use of fish oil and flour in ruminant fodder .
The intention is to further increase the profits of the agro-industry and large-scale farmers .
We should reject this intention .
Not only because this measure is linked to the development of intensive production and the verticalisation of agricultural production , and because it would encourage fishing on an industrial scale to obtain fish flour and oil for fodder , namely for ruminants - when , at a time of scarcity , maritime fishing resources should be put to better use as foodstuff for human consumption - but , above all , because there are still risks for human and animal health .
Thus , we consider imperative the application of the principle of precaution .
We therefore regret the rejection of our proposal to reject the lifting of the current ban .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Posting of workers ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission on the secondment of employees . ( 0-0041 / 2007-B6-0312 / 2007 ) by Mr Andersson on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) I believe it was Jacques Delors who said that the internal market for goods and services would never succeed without a strong social dimension .
Why did he say that ?
What he meant was that we must not use poor working conditions , low wages and so on to compete with each other in the internal market .
Why not ?
Because European workers would never accept such a policy .
The flexicurity debate also shows that we cannot use low wages and poor working conditions to compete with countries outside the EU .
Nor , then , can we adopt a similar approach within the EU .
It is in that perspective that we should view the Posting of Workers Directive .
The Posting of Workers Directive has come about with a view to guaranteeing fair and decent working conditions for employees : wage conditions , working times and other working conditions .
Minimum rules have been talked about , but if we are to proceed on the basis of the Advocate General 's opinion in the Laval case it is not minimum rules but , rather , normal rules that should apply .
That is what the Advocate General goes so far as to say in his opinion .
That is important for employees .
It is important if they are to have decent conditions , and it is also important for companies .
If we had not had these regulations , we should have benefited those companies that pay poor wages and those that have rotten working conditions .
There would have been no competition-neutrality - something that is important for both employees and companies .
The Commission has produced an interpretation .
I can say that there are parts of it with which we agree , but that there are also parts with which we disagree .
Allow me to begin with those parts with which we agree .
A better exchange of information is needed between the authorities in the various Member States .
Those companies that happen to operate in another country need to be significantly better informed of the conditions in that country .
This is an area in which we can do a lot in the future .
The Commission has looked at case law and has sometimes come up with over-interpretations , but sometimes also with correct interpretations .
When it comes to third-country citizens , we have no views on the interpretation produced by the Commission , but when it comes to a number of other matters we do not share the Commission 's approach .
Allow me to give two examples .
The first concerns the requirement for a representative .
In this area the Commission has produced an over-interpretation of the existing conception of justice .
The case that exists is about the need to force the representative to be resident in the country in which the activity is taking place .
We are not laying down that requirement .
That being said , it is important that countries be able to make demands of a representative who is not just anyone but who has a genuine mandate to represent the company .
That is important in my country , where we have collective agreements , and it is also important in other countries from the perspective of the authorities and in terms , for example , of the conditions of the working environment .
It must be possible to make demands of a representative who has a mandate to speak on behalf of the company .
The next issue is that of social documentation .
There are legal cases to which the Commission refers .
We are concerned here with Belgium and with the issue of whether documentation should be kept for five years .
That is an unreasonable length of time ; I can agree about that .
However , documentation is needed to show who is employed and working and what wages and working hours they have .
Such information is undoubtedly needed during the period that the work is being carried out and also for a reasonable period thereafter .
We are , of course , aware that a certain amount of cheating goes on in these matters , so a reasonable period after the work has been carried out is needed .
The mistake made by the Commission is to have over-interpreted in its communication .
It has over-interpreted the case law .
The requirement for a representative is important , as is the demand for social documentation .
The Commission states that we must not challenge any labour market model within Europe .
That is an important statement , but that is precisely what is being done when criticism is directed at those Member States that lay down requirements in terms of representatives and social documentation .
If it is not permitted to lay down such requirements , it is of course impossible to have a regulated labour market and impossible to maintain our labour market model .
It is , then , another model that we are speaking of , and that is something that the Commission should take on board .
Germany has put forward precisely the same criticism as the Nordic countries have done .
Finally , I should just like to address the issue of balance .
Those countries that do not exercise any control at all should also be criticised .
There are countries that do not have sufficient controls in place , which means that employees perhaps work in conditions that do not comply with the requirements of the Posting of Workers Directive .
These countries should come in for criticism .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Madam President , honourable Members , on 13 June 2007 the Commission adopted the final communication relating to the 2006 communication , in which it expressed its full support for the Member States ' objective of stamping out illegal practices in the labour market .
The Commission acknowledges that national bodies must carry out appropriate checks in order to ensure that service providers comply with national working conditions .
Nevertheless , assessments of the progress made since 2006 , which the Commission carried out on the basis of information from the Member States and the social partners at EU level , indicate that some measures implemented in some Member States are disproportionate and overstep the mark in terms of what is needed in order to guarantee effective protection for posted workers .
As the June 2007 communication pointed out , it appears that this situation has arisen from ineffective cooperation between the relevant bodies in the Member States and from inadequate access to information .
In its communications , the Commission points out that as regards the free movement of services , which is enshrined in the EC Treaty , rules can be restricted only on grounds of overriding public interest , for example the protection of workers , and these reasons must be appropriate .
We should assess on a case-by-case basis whether particular national measures can be viewed as justified and appropriate - for example the requirement to have a representative who is resident in the host country or the obligation to hold certain documents relating to social and labour conditions in the host territory for monitoring purposes .
The Commission is looking very carefully at the situation in every Member State so that it can determine which control measures might be deemed unjustified and inappropriate .
Where necessary , the Commission will initiate proceedings on grounds of non-compliance with obligations , so that Community law can be enforced .
Let me stress that the Commission is also examining the possibility of whether measures adopted by individual Member States are adequate and effective .
If not , they will proceed in the same way , because the objective is to protect workers effectively without hindering the internal market .
The Commission does not currently intend to publish any further guidelines .
The final decision on compliance with national measures rests with the Court of Justice , which has already issued a number of rulings , and not with either the Commission or Parliament .
As regards cooperation on information , checks carried out by the Commission demonstrate that there has been an encouraging improvement .
Yet further improvement is essential .
The Commission is therefore proposing to enhance and strengthen administrative cooperation with the Member States , above all to bring together other interested parties - in particular the social partners - that play an important role in monitoring compliance with the rules .
Assessment of enforcement measures indicates that although the implementation of the directive has not led to many formal complaints or legal proceedings , there are some problems that require further consideration , such as the effectiveness of cross-border enforcement of sanctions or the protection of workers in the case of multiple subcontracting .
The Commission would like to involve the social partners and the Member States in that work .
Lastly , I should like to stress that the June 2007 communication demonstrates that , as a matter of principle , the Commission does not in any way wish to undermine the various social models of the Member States nor the way in which Member States organise their systems of labour law relations and collective bargaining .
It is of course the Commission 's job to guarantee that European Community law is strictly complied with , and in cases where inappropriate measures have been adopted , leading not to the protection of workers but rather to restrictions on the freedom to provide services in the internal market , the Commission has to take action , as enshrined in the Treaty .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , one of the challenges of trying to produce an oral question followed by an immediate resolution in a very short space of time is to get it to reflect fully everything we want it to say .
I think on this occasion , as in maybe some others , the very rush has meant that not all of us agree with the wording of every detail of the resolution .
That is not meant to be a criticism of political opponents on the other side of the House .
It is just meant to be a comment , a statement of where it is .
I would like to add - unofficially in any response and consideration the Commission gives to this - the following question .
If the current directive is not being implemented satisfactorily in all Member States , could the Commission please consider taking a bit more time out to understand why ?
Are there some intrinsic problems with the directive ?
Are there some issues that certain Member States still have with it ?
So rather than us just forcibly saying ' the directive is the directive is the directive , thou shalt implement it without delay ' , please can we look at listening a little bit more , because I am sure there is something we can learn .
In principle , we are all for having a directive in this area so that there is clarity .
The final thing I would just say is certainly from this side of the House .
We are interested in helping workers being posted .
We are interested of course in their security of work conditions , but we are interested in promoting their mobility .
We are not interested in using this as a device for protectionism to prevent workers being posted .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I can tell you that my group has very mixed feelings about this new communication by the Commission .
On the one hand , it is , of course , good that the Commission wishes to continue to focus on the implementation of the Posting of Workers Directive , because , almost weekly , we get to hear about new cases of social exploitation of employees posted elsewhere , a situation which , moreover , has placed a considerable strain on our working conditions in our countries .
On the other hand , we have the distinct impression that the Commission still has not managed to strike the right balance between guaranteeing the freedom of provision of services on the one hand and protecting employees on the other .
It should be clear to you , Commissioner , that a number of control measures which Member States have taken , including the requirement to keep documents in the workplace , imposing posting of workers declarations or the presence of an authorised representative , are essential in order to be able to protect the working conditions of workers posted elsewhere .
It is , moreover , abundantly clear , Commissioner , that Member States can only rely on their own national measures , because the desperately needed transnational cooperation between administrations and access to the necessary information is virtually non-existent , and international force mechanisms simply do not work .
Nevertheless , the communication suggests that a host of these measures are incompatible with Community legislation , and you even threaten to institute infringement procedures , even before the desperately needed steps have been taken to guarantee the flow of information , to allow cooperation between the Member States to really function and to put an effective system of penalties in place .
Needless to say , my group welcomes the Commission 's intention to set up a permanent high-level committee to help the Member States enhance their cooperation .
Administrative cooperation is not enough , though , Commissioner .
What we also ask for is a European platform for cross-border cooperation between the competent inspectorates of the Member States .
Until this aspect has been addressed , a crucial instrument to enforce compliance with the Posting of Workers Directive will be lacking .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , Commissioner , I wish , on behalf of my group , to support the approach chosen by the Commission in connection with this directive , namely that of putting its faith in the provision of better information and in enhanced cooperation between Member States and , in cases of serious infringement , in taking Member States to the European Court of Justice .
Unfortunately , we do , of course , have to recognise that , in an enlarged EU with large differences in income , there is a lot of insecurity , including insecurity associated with this subject .
On the one hand , there is the fear that employees posted to another Member State will work under poorer social conditions than normal in the host country and that this situation will create a threat to security of employment .
On the other hand , there are still many bureaucratic obstacles to the free exchange of services in the EU .
These factors impede competition and mean that people receive poorer services .
What , of course , the Posting of Workers Directive is precisely designed to bring about is a proper balance between the freedom to provide cross-border services and the simultaneous maintenance of labour market protection in the host country .
At consultations in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we have previously been told by employers ' representatives and unions that the Posting of Workers Directive is , in actual fact , good enough , but it is very complicated .
Employers and employees do not , therefore , have a good enough knowledge of their duties and rights , and that is a situation that we must do something about .
It needs to be simple and straightforward to do things in a law-abiding way , and such a state of affairs needs to be brought about through the provision of information - understandable information , mind you - in people 's own language . People also need easy access to help in solving problems .
The Commission has observed that the Member States do not always have confidence in the information exchanged between countries , and I therefore think it a good idea now to strengthen the ongoing cooperation between the Member States in this area .
Moreover , the Dublin Agency on Living and Working Conditions should take it upon itself to exchange good practice and , in that way , involve both the labour market partners and the Member States in a positive process .
On the issue , mentioned by Mr Andersson , of the host country requiring there to be a representative and on the issue of documentation at the workplace , I too think it important that we maintain the right balance , and I really do basically think that this balance is what the Commission has found .
That is the background to our amendments to the report .
The representative need not necessarily be physically present in the host country .
That is something on which we agree , and I should like to see it made clear .
Regarding the reference to the Laval or Waxholm case , I think we must await the final decision before using the matter as guidance as to the state of the law .
That concludes my observations .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the present debate is also a warning : if this communication is yet another attempt to smuggle the deleted Articles 24 and 25 of the original Services Directive through the back door , then this House will unambiguously reject it .
The Posting of Workers Directive is there to protect workers , and this protective function must remain sacrosanct .
In the Posting of Workers Directive the local principle prevails , which means , amongst other things , that all measures by Member States that serve to protect posted workers and protect their interests are legitimate and desirable .
The Directive is a law for a free internal market for services .
But this freedom cannot come at any cost .
It is not the go-ahead for social dumping .
I am tired of having to make armchair decisions about the theoretical possibility of providing evidence of fair pay in the worker 's country of origin within two or four weeks .
The situation on big and small building sites all over Europe tells a different tale .
The lack of possibilities for checking payslips on site gives additional opportunity to criminal machinations .
Surely that is not something you want to take the responsibility for ?
Go and see the building sites for yourselves before proceeding any further .
See how workers are deprived of fair wages , and how social dumping distorts fair competition on those sites .
Equal pay for equal work in the same place must be the overriding principle .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Madam President , first of all we need to remember that the Posting of Workers Directive is about workers ' rights , and it just lays down minimum standards in terms of pay rates , holidays , working hours and so on .
Without the Directive , workers are open to all sorts of abuses through post-box companies and bogus self-employment , a fact which some employers have not been slow to exploit .
However , it seems to me that , in its emphasis , the Commission gives primacy to removing obstacles to the provision of services and the orderly functioning of the internal market .
I believe the resolution associated with this oral question represents a step back from existing Parliament positions , most recently expressed in the Schroedter report .
The fact is that the Commission has not enforced the Directive , and many Member States ignore its provisions .
These failures should not be sidestepped in arguments about proportionality or protectionism .
When Parliament adopted the Services Directive , those of us who were concerned about its impact on workers ' rights were assured that the proper enforcement of the Posting of Workers Directive would deal with our concerns .
That has not happened , and the Commission has failed to enforce this Directive properly .
This leaves many workers exposed , without the minimum standards necessary to avoid exploitation and abuse .
( DE ) Madam President , On 13 June the DG Employment notified the Commission that some Member States are not implementing the Posting of Workers Directive conscientiously , Germany included .
My country is accused of exercising excessively stringent controls , and thereby driving workers from other Member States away .
How provocative can you get ?
I expected a different position from a Commissioner whose fairness I otherwise greatly value .
Although cooperation between sending countries and recipient countries is important , it cannot replace effective controls .
Our common aim must be to secure worker protection , to prevent social dumping and to uncover and punish illegal working .
But this can only be done if we have valid documents , which should be in the language of the host country .
The following should be ready for presentation : work contracts , pay calculations , timesheets .
The General Prosecutor at the European Court of Justice supports this view , because inspectors will obviously have considerable problems with documents that have not been drawn up in the language of the respective country .
Secondly , in order to allow notices to be properly sent , the recipient must prove an address in Germany , and not just a mail-drop abroad that has been specially chosen for anonymity and everyone is obliged to appoint as an official representative anyone they consider appropriate .
The place of work could also be an address .
This I consider to be a fair solution .
Threatening infringement proceedings are an insult .
In Europe , Commissioner , things must be fair , not least as regards controls .
Mr Špidla , I ask you , please keep the sense of scale and balance we are used to seeing from you .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am one of those who thinks that posting of workers is an opportunity for the European Union and its citizens .
An opportunity both in economic terms and in terms of contributing to strengthening the European idea .
Workers who are posted on European territory are first of all Europeans and they must be treated as such , which , to my mind , means that for the same job in the same territory , no inequality should be allowed .
One of the problems raised today by the Directive 96 / 71 / EC is that , on account of the lack of harmonisation of national systems in relation to labour law and the disparities existing between new and old Member States in this field , a fear arises that this directive will allow arbitration between Member States and be linked with ' social dumping ' .
I repeat once more : it is from the top that social Europe must be built , and not by smashing to bits its social acquis , as some here would like .
I cite as evidence certain amendments tabled on this report in relation to modernising labour law .
In this field , I advise them not to play at alchemy , at the risk of finding themselves confronted with uncontrollable social conflicts .
To my mind , in order to avoid these pitfalls , Member States must be able to continue to retain some restrictions but also , when they receive workers on secondment , they must be able to impose certain conditions .
I think in particular that workers on secondment must have authorised representatives who must be independent .
They must be able to supply relevant information regarding working hours and health and safety in relation to this work , so that they can be guaranteed protection .
Employees on secondment must make a prior declaration , so that the social partners in the host countries , where wages are fixed by collective bargaining , can come into play to negotiate directly with the home company of the seconded workers .
We must , however , go further still in this field by giving further thought , for example , to establishing a minimum European wage .
We must have a political commitment to convergence towards a floor of social rights common to all the European Union .
It is with such practices that we put ourselves on the road towards a social Europe , a united Europe , a Europe of workers that we all wish for .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , when we were discussing the services directive , we stated quite clearly and definitely that it should in no way affect social rights in Member States .
That is why we removed the infamous Articles 24 and 25 from the directive , because it should not be possible to override these rights by exploiting loopholes .
We also agreed that , to clear up any ambiguities , the Posting of Workers Directive should be amended if any problems arise .
I would like to remind you of this compromise , which the European Commission also agreed to , and would like to demand this agreement again .
Commissioner , I share your view that lack of , or poor , cooperation among the authorities is one of the main reasons why we are having such problems with the Posting of Workers Directive , but do you really believe that by removing opportunities for control , documentation and everything else that is needed for control , will improve poor collaboration ?
On the contrary , lack of documentation and poor cooperation among authorities equals social dumping pure and simple .
I cannot believe that that is what you really want .
So let us work together towards improving administrative cooperation , and to open the market for services and the markets for workers at the highest level of social protection .
Then we will be doing something positive for Europe , and , instead of a destructive approach to the Member States , strive positively for solutions that really will help things to progress .
That is the direction we should take .
Otherwise we will end up not achieving what we set out to do .
Madam President , I am disappointed that Commissioner Špidla has told us today that he does not propose a new communication on this issue .
If European workers are to move from Member State to Member State without triggering a race to the bottom , we must ensure that the law is clear , that there are standards applied commonly across the European Union and that they are fully implemented .
The Posting of Workers Directive , as it stands , does not meet those criteria , nor do the guidelines which the Commission published only a year ago .
Right now , we need the Commission to insist on the retention of documents in the Member States where a worker is posted and we need to insist on an identifiable employer who carries legal responsibility for compliance .
Even that will not be enough unless all Member States put in place compliance mechanisms and severe penalties for breaches of the law .
There is no possibility of progress on issues like flexicurity and reform of labour law unless we deal with issues such as workers ' security in this area .
Workers in Europe will not stand for a diminution of their rights or a race to the bottom .
We will not get any legislation through this House which weakens their rights in any way unless they can see that there are advantages for them in preventing a race to the bottom .
I believe the short-sightedness of the Council and the Commission in this area is unbelievable , and it is simply inexplicable if they are serious about creating a European social union .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Honourable Members I should like to make it clear that the correct implementation of the posted workers directive is not , under any circumstances , a back door through which we are seeking to weaken and compromise the protection of workers in the European labour market .
Quite the opposite , correct implementation of the directive will lead to the effective protection of workers , and this is of vital importance .
It is not true at all that the Commission is placing restrictions on monitoring powers : let me state categorically that any measures that a Member State deems necessary , and which are proportionate to the objective , will of course be correct and applicable .
I must also point out that the decision on this directive , did not take place in some ivory tower any more than the decision on the communication did - it has been discussed on countless occasions on the ground with the social partners .
I feel that when it comes to implementing laws , we all know where to draw the line between instances when the law becomes a matter of mere bureaucracy , and fails to achieve its objectives , and on the other hand instances when it achieves different and incorrect objectives .
Checks must therefore be thorough and effective , but within the framework of an applied method , as the directive and the law in general do not allow everything .
In other words , not everything will be acceptable - only that which falls within the framework of the law , and which is effective and is proportionate .
As regards amending the directive , which has been suggested , I should like to say that Parliament has itself addressed this issue at least twice or three times before , as have the social partners , and no overriding position was formulated whereby the directive could be recast in a substantive way .
On the contrary , the positions formulated were always in favour of improving cooperation and implementation .
I should also like to point out that the implementation is a matter for the Member States , and the Commission is responsible for ensuring that implementation is carried out within the framework of European law .
It also has an obligation to use the legal resources at its disposal .
In this regard , the Commission of course checks what the situation is in labour markets in the individual Member States and proceeds in a considered way , as is laid down in the law .
It is of course extremely important to improve administrative cooperation .
It is also important to improve cooperation between individual monitoring bodies in the Member States , and the Commission will proceed and channel its efforts in this direction .
If it is shown in subsequent debates that there are grounds for extending the law , this point will certainly be opened up , and fervently debated .
At the moment , neither the preliminary political debate in Parliament nor the debate with the social partners suggests that it would be right to take any new legislative action in this field .
Honourable Members , I must stress once again that the objective of this directive is the effective protection of workers , and any monitoring measures that contribute to effective protection will be appropriate .
Member States that do not carry out effective monitoring are in breach of the directive .
It is clear that monitoring in any area must be pursued in a manner which is proportionate , in the legal sense of the term , and we are often in dispute over what is proportionate .
The Court of Justice in Luxembourg has the authority to settle such disputes between European institutions .
To wind up the debate , a motion for resolution has been tabled under Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 11 July 2007 .
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
First railway package ( debate )
The next item is the report by Michael Cramer , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the implementation of the first railway package
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by expressing my deep gratitude to the shadow rapporteurs for their cooperation on the first railway package .
Generally speaking , the first railway package can be described as a complete success .
The opening of the networks in Europe to rail freight traffic has proved its worth .
The countries who have done particularly well are those who prepared themselves for this early on rather than waiting until the networks were opened .
For example , Germany has been able to increase rail freight traffic by 25 % and the Netherlands by 42.5 % since the opening of the networks , and the United Kingdom and Poland have managed to increase the proportion of freight transported by rail by 60 % - albeit at a low level in the case of the United Kingdom .
This benefits the environment , and it benefits transport in Europe .
The countries who did not prepare for this , and waited until the last moment , are not doing so well .
For example , France , which did not open up its freight networks until the beginning of this year , saw a 28 % decrease in rail freight traffic for the same period .
Its volume of road freight traffic has increased - which hardly fits in with prevailing climate policy .
In my report , I also discuss the fact that the overall modal split has not changed - the reason for which being , of course , the absence of fair framework conditions between the different modes of transport .
Our framework conditions are spectacularly unfair !
Transport in Europe could also be described as too cheap , with only rail transport - which is environmentally friendly - being too expensive .

We also have unfair subsidy practice : approximately 95 % of total EU cofinancing for transport is spent on road transport - not on rail transport , as is always called for and claimed in soapbox speeches .
For this reason , I am delighted that the committee was able to agree that , in future , 40 % of spending on transport should be channelled to the railways .
It is unacceptable that our efforts should be counteracted by poor financing practice .
The unfair framework conditions also take the form of , inter alia , the imposition by the EU of mandatory rail tolls applying to all trains on all routes and having no upper limit , whilst road tolls do have an upper limit , are voluntary - the Member States can decide whether to levy them or not - and apply only on motorways and only to lorries above 12 tonnes .
This is unfair competition , and must change if the railways are to have a chance .
For example , some of the new Member States are levying very high tolls on rail freight services .
The eight highest track charges are levied in the new Member States .
At the same time , these high tolls are used to subsidise passenger transport , which receives hardly any State subsidies or none at all , whilst road freight transport escapes with no charges .
This is a model of how to move transport from the railways to the roads - exactly the opposite of what the competent Commissioner and the EU always claim to be aiming for .
We want fair competition ; but this fair competition is not yet complete , as particularly those railway undertakings that do not have a long State tradition are frustrated time and again in Europe .
They have complained , for example , that access to the network or to a favourable route cannot be granted because this route has already been allocated to the rail undertaking belonging to the dominant group , that their wishes cannot be met since points have previously been extended or passing loops dismantled by the State undertaking , that low-speed stretches of route ( speed limits ) have been ordered - for no good reason - in order to frustrate the wishes of the new rail freight operators , that route prices have been drastically increased when State railway undertakings have been sold to another undertaking , that cross-subsidisation is not being prevented , and that non-State undertakings often pay higher energy prices than group subsidiaries .
This shows that much remains to be done in spite of our success .
After all , the overall modal split between road and rail in Europe has not improved , but actually worsened .
One thing that can be said , however , is that the first railway package has halted the decline .
If we are to improve the situation , we now need fair framework conditions for rail transport in Europe .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that the European Parliament has taken up the report by the Commission on the implementation of the first railway package of 3 May 2006 , and I should like especially to thank Mr Cramer , the author of the report , for his very serious and solid work .
The challenge of European railway policy is to put in place a regulatory framework that encourages new investments and the provision of competitive transport services in a common railway area .
The creation of this common railway area demands the full and correct transposition of Community provisions .
In its report in 2006 , the Commission identified the conditions to be met to take up the challenge : I will mention the most important of them .
Firstly , restructuring of the historic enterprises must be completed .
It must be done while respecting conditions of separate accounting and of neutrality of the essential functions such as allocation of capacities and levying of charges .
Secondly , the principles underlying the levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure must be established taking into account the levying of charges for other modes of transport .
That must be part of an overall strategy encouraging fair competition between modes and therefore sustainable development .
Thirdly , the good functioning of the supervisory and safety bodies demands that these same bodies should be granted the necessary financial and human resources . These bodies must enjoy genuine independence .
The European Parliament largely takes up the priorities for action that have been identified by the Commission .
These priorities put forward the conditions of intermodal and intramodal competition , as well as rules governing the separation between infrastructure and operation .
With regard to the conditions for intermodal competition , the Commission wishes to create a fair and balanced competitive framework .
In your report , Mr Cramer , you mention fairer competition between modes of transport , particularly through internalisation of the external costs of road transport .
At the time of the adoption of the Eurovignette directive , I made the commitment to submit , in June 2008 , a methodology for the internalisation of external costs . Well , this commitment will be kept !
As for the conditions for intramodal competition , I support your position in favour of rapid deployment of the European signalling system European Rail Traffic Management System / European Train Control System ( ERTMS / ETCS ) and the reduction in the noise level of wagons .
On this last point , that is , noise nuisance , I shall present a Commission communication on the measures to be taken .
We are in agreement also concerning infrastructures .
This needs to be a priority in order to promote good performance of rail freight transport .
In October , I shall propose to the Commission a communication on a rail network focussed on freight in Europe .
This document will present a plan of action which will cover the main suggestions in your resolution .
Finally , I quite agree on the need for strict neutrality of the essential functions to realise the policy of market opening and the strengthening of competition .
Your report describes the positive effects of opening up on the performance of rail freight in the Member States that have been the first to open the markets .
Finally , I should like to remind you that the Commission intends to do everything in its power so that Member States effectively implement the provisions of the railway packages .
If necessary also , we shall start infringement proceedings .
A European market can only develop if the regulatory framework is consistent over all European territory .
Non-discriminatory access to services linked with rail transport , for example in the marshalling yards , is vital for the good functioning of the rail market .
My services are also assessing options with a view to recasting the legislation of the first railway package on this point , which will lead us to a recasting of the European railway code next year .
That is what I wanted to say in reply to Mr Cramer , whom I thank once again .
I wish , of course , to confirm to him that the intention of the Commission and of myself as the Commissioner is certainly to do everything so that the modal shift in favour of the railways is as substantial as possible in the years to come .
I shall now listen , Mr President , to the Members of Parliament with close attention , so that I can answer them at the end of the debate .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
Mr Cramer , you already know that I have not always been enthused by your report in all respects - we do not need to discuss this fact today .
The report lacks balance and practical relevance .
For example , it contains many provisions unrelated to the implementation of the first railway package in terms of content .
Therefore , we - our coordinator Mr Jarzembowski and I - have tabled 20 amendments , only 11 of which involve the deletion of whole paragraphs .
I was pleased with the outcome of the vote in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
The important points are , firstly , the call for the Commission to take action , without delay , against Member States who have not implemented the first and second railway packages by the specified date .
Secondly , we consider it important , with regard to the financing of the further development of the European transport routes , that support be given in particular to the 30 priority trans-European network projects .
Unfortunately , the complete deletion of the paragraph headed ' Regulation of the separation between network and operation ' could not be pushed through .
I reject out of hand a limitation of the choice between the various organisational models .
We need solid evidence .
We need to know the advantages and disadvantages of such a separation .
We still need flexibility for railway undertakings .
That is why we have requested a split vote .
I should also like to say a few brief words about the problem of ' gigaliners ' : that is , ultra-long lorries of 60 tonnes and upwards .
We cannot support Mr Cramer 's amendment concerning these in tomorrow 's vote on this report - which , after all , concerns the railway package .
I do fully agree that goods belong on the railways , and thus my position may appear contradictory , but an amendment on gigaliners has no place in this report .
We shall discuss this within the framework of the Ayala Sender report - when we shall also have time for the debate .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , at a time when we are drawing up the statement for the first railway package , we have to recognise that we are still far short of the target .
In spite of the progress achieved and particularly the fact of having stemmed a decline which seemed unavoidable , rail 's modal share remains still too weak .
It is all the more unfortunate because in these times of climate change the choice of rail sees its relevance confirmed every day by what is happening .
We know what the reasons are for this mixed statement : we have staked too much on opening up , the contributions of which cannot be denied , without worrying enough about the technical barriers , in particular the lack of interoperability , knowing that this ought to have accompanied the opening up gradually , instead of lagging further and further behind .
This situation is probably due to the fact that in general liberalising does not cost the Member States very much , while harmonisation is a different matter .
Today at the very moment when we are at last beginning again to tackle the problems of interoperability , it therefore seems to me worrying that , under cover of co-modality , the objectives of modal shift towards rail , in particular , move into the background .
Instead of revising the objectives downwards , we ought to have revised the intellectual as well as the financial means upwards .
I hope that this report will contribute therefore to reminding us of the way we have still to go in order to give back to rail the place it deserves .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as you stressed before me , the object of the first package was to lay the foundations of an integrated European railway area and , by modernising the network , speed up the modal shift of freight traffic from road to rail , so as to reduce CO2 emissions and also , obviously , all the road congestion from which Europe is suffering .
I wish to thank my colleague Mr Cramer for his own-initiative report which sets out a full assessment of the implementation of the first package , without omitting to underline nonetheless all the factors which affect the performance of rail and those which hold up the achievement of the objectives that we have set ourselves .
In the first place we should emphasise that the opening of the rail network , while maintaining a very high level of safety , has allowed a very significant increase in freight traffic at least throughout the European Union , and small rail undertakings have also been able to take an interest in niches considered unprofitable by the historic operators .
I am pleased that the report also places the emphasis on the current system of levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure , which does not allow the setting up of fair competition between the different modes of freight transport .
I think that it is essential today to achieve as rapidly as possible a harmonisation of user fees capped by sector which can better take into account the internalisation of external costs and which limits the exponential increase that we are witnessing currently .
I think also that it will be necessary to have more discussion about the Eurovignette directive , as this represented an advance that we must continue , and I am pleased that you have confirmed this evening , Commissioner , that discussions about this are planned from June 2008 .
I would like , moreover , Commissioner , the Commission to commit itself rapidly , with you , to a process of modernisation and development of intermodal infrastructures , mainly on the international corridors of Road Transport Telematics ( RTT ) , through a European Rail Traffic Management System ( ERTMS ) equipment system and allowing a genuine junction with the port infrastructures on the one hand and river infrastructures on the other .
Finally , I would like the Commission to present recommendations with a view to financial stabilisation of the railways which , in my view , will have to take into account the reduction in debt from which some historic operators have benefited , in order to put all the rail transport actors on an equal footing .


on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Mr President , Mr Barrot , first of all I would like to thank Mr Cramer for his report , even though it has , certainly , been assessed in highly contradictory ways .
In my own brief comments I would like to touch on just one aspect - I was pleased to see that the report stressed that , despite the liberalisation of the rail freight transport market , the European Union 's border states , such as the Baltic States , in reality depend on freight customers , and in our case this usually means Russia .
If Russia , however , chooses to work with a rail monopoly company , then it is relatively difficult for us to discern a real impact arising from the introduction of this first package of rail legislation .
I think , therefore , that this issue needs to be discussed further with Russia , with other potential aspects in mind also , and this is particularly true in view of the announcement by Mr Ivanov , Russia 's vice-premier , concerning moving the flow of container freight to Russian ports alone .
Thank you .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , for many years , everyone has been saying that , in relation to the transport of goods in all European countries , rail is losing the battle .
The same applies even to cross-border , long-distance transport .
The railway system is suitable for mass transport and , in some cases , special goods lines have been built for this purpose , mainly in and around industrial areas in Germany .
Similarly , the recently opened Betuwe line in the Netherlands , which forms part of freight corridor No 1 from Rotterdam to Genoa via Germany and Switzerland , is a special line of this kind which is totally unsuited for the transport of passengers .
Despite this favourable starting position for rail , the proportion of goods transported by rail has decreased and , in some cases , even the volume is declining .
Much of this transport has been taken over by the lorry , and the huge increase in the volume of goods is largely being handled by motorway , as a result of which these are increasingly becoming congested .
This shift is , to a considerable extent , related to infrastructure .
Before , rail boasted a very intricate network , opening up both villages in the countryside and ports and factories in the cities .
Apart from goods lines , there were also container stations where goods carriages came together and were redistributed across different trains .
As many companies had their own connections to the railway network , goods carriages were able to shuttle directly between a harbour quay and a remote company without any interim transhipment of goods .
Everything people want to achieve these days using multi-modal systems was already in place then .
Unfortunately , the governments have decided to shrink the railway network , because it is deemed loss-making .
Many small railway lines have been discontinued and many connections to companies have disappeared .
Billions have been invested , on the other hand , in extending the space-guzzling motorway network .
In many cases , door-to-door goods transport is only possible by lorry these days .
It is indispensable for pick-up and delivery , and it seems the easiest option then to use the motorways for the much longer , in-between section as well .
If the company connections and container stations were restored , this could make a considerable contribution to reinstating goods transport by rail .
The first railway package is partly based on the assumption that rail transport should adopt the working methods of transport by road and air .
In this case , it is international companies that arrange cross-border transport from beginning to end , and this is the most attractive option for those people with a transport requirement .
My group has always pointed out that this is not the only possible solution .
There is an alternative , namely better cooperation between national railway companies .
They should not see each other as competitors , but as partners in a comprehensive European railway network .
It is precisely by encouraging them to enter into competition with each other that cooperation runs less smoothly .
To date , we have not yet seen any positive results in respect of the course taken .
The free market is often not a solution to a problem , but its very cause .
The rapporteur is right in always arguing in favour of the new standard safety system , European Rail Traffic Management System ( ERTMS ) .
We see eye to eye with him on this .
We also notice that the launch of this system is far less swift than had been expected and that , alongside the new system , a second old system should remain in place .
Thanks to the average low speed in freight transport , ERTMS makes for fewer problems compared to the high-speed lines for passenger transport .
Finally , we share Mr Cramer 's view that transport by air and road are kept artificially cheap and that transport by rail is kept artificially dear .
If we do not change this in any way , the least environmentally friendly mode of transport will continue to prevail .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , that was interesting : Mr Meijer virtually recreating ancient railway history before our eyes .
He , too , should have perceived the very idea of laying railway tracks from one village to another for freight transport as being as slow as it is unrealistic .
Mr Cramer , nor can I share your simplistic demonising of the lorry .
After all , lorry operators pay corporation tax , vehicle tax , petroleum tax and tolls - and so the assertion that lorries drive for free and competition is distorted is simply unrealistic .
I fully share your view that it is not right for Poland 's Ministry of Finance to charge excessively high route prices - but that is an issue for the Polish Government , not European legislation , to deal with .
We should perhaps remind the Polish Government that route prices are intended to promote rail transport rather than to reform the Polish budget situation - but this has absolutely nothing to do with the lorry .
Mr President , I should like to ask you to ensure speedy implementation of the second railway package , too , by all Member States .
After all , we pushed through the requirement that networks must have been opened up to the national and cross-border movement of goods by 1 January of this year , and I see this as a great opportunity to help European markets operate across borders .
I should like to discuss one of the points the Commissioner raised , and I would ask him to elaborate on this .
He said that the Commission is willing to help reduce the noise caused by rail trucks , and announced a communication on this .
What I should like to know is when he plans to present this communication .
Does he believe that this will put greater focus on European aspects , or will it open up possibilities for the granting of aid at national level ?
Noise pollution - for example , from trains passing through residential areas at night - is unacceptable in cities , in particular .
If the Commissioner is prepared to provide help with this , we would be very grateful .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Cramer 's report on the implementation of the first railway package shows the difficulties and problems it faces .
If railway transport develops and runs properly , it can result in more people and goods being carried , thereby taking the burden off road transportation and cutting CO2 emissions .
Rapid passenger transport can also compete with local airlines and coach services .
Interlinking rail , road and water transport can reduce its costs and increase the efficiency of the economy .
In implementing this package , we should pay particular attention to supporting railway projects , particularly in countries that lack the funding to expand and upgrade their railway network and infrastructure , supporting all activities relating to the exchange of good practice , including for establishing flexible and competitive modes of operation for railway companies , monitoring and removing organisational , administrative and financial barriers to the development of transport , and support for the railways taking over a portion of international road haulage operations .
I would like to thank Mr Cramer for his necessary and insightful report .
( PT ) The report being debated today contains aspects that reflect the demands of the large private interests that lie behind the liberalisation and privatisation of public rail transport services promoted by the European Union , which we reject .
Our view is that the report should , instead , denounce the dismemberment in EU countries of public services and public companies , the closure of branch lines and stations , service reductions and cuts in the number of trains , the brutal reduction in the number of rail workers , and the increase in precarious work in this sector .
We also believe that the report should , in other respects , fight for the promotion of public rail services through the existence of strong public companies with all their merits , with effective management to ensure high-quality services and high safety standards ; for a guaranteed , high-quality , high-capacity , comfortable public rail service with affordable fares , fully meeting the needs of passenger mobility and goods transport ; and for job security for the workers in the sector , promoting their inclusion in the companies ' senior management teams , enhancing careers and wages and ensuring continued training .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , I thank each of the speakers for the wise observations they have shared with me .
Nonetheless , I shall say a few words on a point which , to my surprise , has not really received the attention of the European Parliament .
It is about the separation between the management of the rail infrastructure and the provision of transport services .
It is , in fact , this separation which makes it possible to give to competition its full scope .
We have to ensure non-discriminatory access to facilitate the entry into the market of new entrants .
That is a very important point .
I should like to answer some questions .
In talking about co-modality , our goal was simply to explain that rail transport , which is indisputably the best solution over long distances , must be able to be completed by local transport which , in certain cases , can only be provided , as Mr Jarzembowski has said , by road .
Therefore , the idea is not to take something away from rail but on the contrary to allow it to have its rightful place .
Oh yes , it is very clear !
I am speaking in particular to Mr Navarro : one must make no mistake about the intention .
The intention is really to make a success of this modal shift , which is very important to me , as it is to you .
I must say also that what we are doing , be it about financing infrastructures across trans-European networks or interoperability , which the European Rail Traffic Management System and European Train Control System is going to make possible for us , or the cross-acceptance of rolling stock or the promotion of freight traffic on European corridors , all these achievements seek to obtain the most substantial modal shift possible .
I think that , on this point , our approach presents no ambiguity .
Mrs Griesbeck , I would like to confirm the Commission 's intention to present guidelines on state aid in the rail sector before the end of the year .
I should also like to confirm to Mr Jarzembowski that the communication on the noise of carriages is planned for the autumn of this year .
I cannot say any more about it for the time being ; we are in the process of working on it .
There are certainly other questions which deserve an answer . I would like you to know , in any case , that I really have listened with close attention to all that has been said by each of you .
I consider for my part that the work carried out by Mr Cramer and his committee is enlightening for the Commission .
I should like to repeat again that what we want are fair intermodal and intramodal conditions of competition which make it possible effectively to develop this modal shift to which , I repeat again once more , we are very committed , particularly for reasons of environment and relief of congestion on our road network .
For all the reasons that you can imagine , we have more need than ever of the railway .
I must say that , each day , I work towards this with much determination .
I have moreover realised that , with the opening of Betuwe in the Netherlands , a willingness is really establishing itself in Europe with a view to giving rail its rightful place ; and indeed , if in certain cases , problems of charging arise , it is incumbent upon the Member States to accept their responsibilities .
This modal shift is a real priority cause in Europe .
It is necessary also that governments accept making it their priority .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 11 July 2007 .
Common rules for air transport services ( debate )
The next item is the report by Arūnas Degutis , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules for the operation of air transport services in the Community ( recast ) C6-0248 / 2006 .
rapporteur . - ( LT ) This future regulation should replace three regulations currently in force , which make up the third set of guidelines for the domestic air transport market .
The aforesaid regulations set out the procedures for issue and cancellation of air transport firm licences and the principles for free use of Community air routes by Community air transport companies , and liberalising prices of airfares .
Once the third set of guidelines began to be applied , an unprecedented expansion of the European air travel sector took place : the old monopolies disappeared , a system of local air transport was instituted , and consumer-friendly competition increased in all markets , especially in the area of pricing .
What had been a regulated European aviation market based on bilateral agreements became a particularly competitive market .
It is natural that after a few years of applying the third set of guidelines , some guidelines became obsolete , others were applied poorly , and now they need revision , reconsideration or straight-out abolition .
The proposal under consideration urges correction of the three sets of guidelines that have been mentioned to make them easier to apply , to simplify the legal grounds , to remove the obsolete parts and to set new , firmer requirements .
In my opinion the Commission 's proposal is logical , and I agree that it would not only be meaningful but also purposeful and essential to review the regulations now in force .
In any case , in the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which I of course support , some important parts of the regulations need to be made more precise .
I would like to mention a few of these parts :
Rentals .
There is variation among the Member States in regard to rental agreement practices .
This can distort the market and cause social and aviation safety problems .
Therefore , without a doubt , new general requirements need to be set .
The rules proposed in Article 13 are too strict and do not take into consideration certain characteristics of the air transport industry , especially its seasonality .
Therefore , it would be good to find a logical compromise between social concerns and safety , and simultaneously improve the performance of airlines .
In my opinion the compromise reached by the Transport Committee may help to resolve this problem .
Transparency of prices .
We support the Commission 's aim of banning advertising of and publicity about airfares which do not include any costs , surcharges , payments and levies .
I believe that the airlines ' commitment to publish only final prices has to be clearly formulated .
Here too we have found a compromise which also reflects consumer needs .
Particular social considerations .
Suggestions concerning particular social considerations put forward by colleagues from other groups are , in my opinion , premature unless the possible consequences are analysed assuming adoption at this time .
Therefore , we request that the Commission prepare a study , on the basis of which it would be possible to regulate these matters without creating obstacles for the improvement of aviation industry competitiveness .
Passenger safety .
In the Commission 's proposal there is no provision for any clear mechanism , which would ensure that passengers would not suffer from the effects of bankruptcy of airlines ; for example , not getting compensation for cancelled flights or being abandoned to their fate at overseas destinations .
Therefore , we believe that guidelines for passenger safety should be included in the regulations ( Amendments 15-16 ) .
Commitment to provide public services and regional airports .
I believe that any formulation of the term ' regional airport ' , which obliges to provide services to the public , will inevitably include airports in economically more affluent regions , whereas airports in regions that need economic or social support may not be included in the definition .
Since the commitment to provide public services on this principle is applicable only to airports serving regions having economic and social problems , I would suggest that the difficult-to-define concept of regional airport be dropped from this document .
As well as the points mentioned earlier , one should explain several definitions and conditions in order to avoid misunderstandings and erroneous application of the regulations .
Community 's domestic air services .
While we suggested some amendments for the subjects mentioned earlier , we support the proposed extension of the Commission 's powers in relation to deciding on questions concerning the provision of domestic Community air services .
Since the Commission can more effectively negotiate concerning certain rights than can individual Member States , it should have the opportunity to do so .
This has been demonstrated by the agreement with Russia on transit flights over Siberia .
Therefore , it is recommended that the Commission 's proposed wording for Article 15 be accepted .
That is a brief characterisation of service provision .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal we are debating today represents a great success for the European Community .
It seeks , in fact , to modernise and complete the 1992 regulation that set up the single aviation market in Europe .
The creation of this single aviation market has allowed air transport in Europe to enjoy unprecedented expansion .
The number of airlines has increased and there has been a general increase in traffic and competition .
Since full liberalisation in 1997 , the number of routes has increased by more than 60 % ; more cities are served , notably in the isolated regions .
The appearance of new competitors has brought a significant reduction in fares on numerous routes .
More and more Europeans can travel by plane .
This development contributes to economic growth , as well as to the creation of direct and indirect employment .
Taking this success into account , the Commission intends to maintain the fundamental principles of this liberalised market .
The proposal seeks simply to simplify the consolidation of current legislation .
It proposes also some adjustments to improve the effectiveness of its application .
Firstly , the revision makes it possible to clean up the text to remove the obsolete parts linked to the transition phase towards the liberalised market .
The text has been clarified , ambiguities have been removed and three regulations have been consolidated into a single text .
Secondly , the proposal seeks to achieve effective and uniform application of Community rules .
At present there are divergences between Member States in the application of the third package .
Thanks to this revision , we shall have a more uniform application especially in relation to the granting and overseeing of operating licences .
The proposal strengthens , moreover , the monitoring of the financial viability of companies , in particular of the new entrants .
Thirdly , the proposal strengthens coordination of Member States on intra-Community services and transit overflight by companies from third countries .
It is important to encourage a coordinated Community approach to ensure the integrity of the European market and to facilitate the work of the negotiators with the third countries .
Finally , fourth point , the proposal advocates new rights for passengers .
The right for passengers to have complete information on the real price of a ticket with taxes , charges and costs included . The right not to be discriminated against according to nationality or place of residence at the time of purchasing a ticket .
Consequently , this updated version should further strengthen the appeal of the single European market in many third countries .
These principles apply not only to Switzerland and to countries in the European Economic Area but also to Morocco and to the countries in South East Europe and they serve as a benchmark at international level .
That is why I thank , Mr President , the European Parliament for the speed with which it has taken up this dossier .
I would like to commend the work carried out by your rapporteur Mr Degutis , and to thank the chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Mr Paolo Costa , as well as all the members of that committee because , I must say , Parliament has certainly improved on our text .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by extending the warmest of thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Degutis , and all the Members involved , for their cooperation .
I firmly believe that , since the vote in committee , we have a balanced , practical report on the operation of air transport services .
The original Commission proposal was well thought-out and goal oriented in this case , so I am much obliged to the Commission , too .
Since I am basically satisfied with the outcome of the vote in committee , I should like to discuss only the transparency requirements with regard to the listing of air fares .
From the outset , I have stood up for the creation of transparency without additional bureaucracy , and for the equal , fair involvement of everyone concerned .
The air fare advertised should show clearly what charges , duties and taxes this includes and what they are used for .
Air-ticket prices should be easy for consumers to understand and transparent .
This is particularly applicable to the advertising of air fares on websites .
Nevertheless , there is still disagreement over the means , and the precise extent of this .
Amendment 48 lays down that duties and charges must be listed and summarised in four categories : firstly , taxes and other State charges and duties ; secondly , air traffic control charges ; thirdly , charges , duties , fees and other costs for the benefit of the airlines ; and , fourthly , fees , levies , charges and other costs for the benefit of the airport operators .
The problem is that air traffic control charges cannot be clearly stated in advance .
Tomorrow , then , on behalf of my group , I shall be requesting the deletion of this second category , air traffic control charges , by means of split voting .
Despite this amendment , the compromise reached fully meets the transparency requirement , whilst taking into account the interests of passengers and also airlines , and so I and my group cannot support the rapporteur 's new amendments , Amendments 54 and 55 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome the Commission proposal and also , of course , the rapporteur 's report , as both make a contribution to the completion of the European internal market for air transport and to increasing safety levels .
I should like to mention and highlight four points .
Firstly , the provision on price transparency that has been adopted is a clear victory for consumers .
It will no longer be possible in future to lure citizens with false bait advertising .
Irrespective of the sales channel , all air fares are to be set out comprehensively and in detail .
Naturally , air traffic control prices are estimated on a flat-rate basis - although , at the end of the day , prices must be comprehensible .
We do not need to argue about this , however .
On the whole , we are creating clarity for passengers and strengthening competition .
Secondly , with regard to wet-leasing contracts , this is a balanced Regulation that , on the one hand , takes account of airlines ' needs in the event that seasonal pricing movements occur or an exceptional need arises and they have to rely on such a model ; and , on the other , makes clear that the circumvention of European safety and social standards is unacceptable .
Thirdly , like many reports on aviation legislation , our report contains numerous amendments on social legislation for employees .
The Commission is urgently required to make a proposal on this at long last , to close the loophole that the Services Directive has left and the present Regulation cannot close .
Fourthly , the new one-step procedure for traffic distribution is simpler and quicker than all previous procedures .
This is a good decision , including in terms of the future , that enables a more flexible response to capacity bottlenecks in infrastructure .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , my thanks to Mr Degutis for his report .
We must agree with Commissioner Barrot 's words that the third package in the internal air market , which is now fifteen years old , has significantly contributed to the development of European civil aviation .
Now change is needed , in particular as regards leasing , licensing air transport services , social matters , protecting passengers against carrier bankruptcy and so forth .
Other important factors are proper observance of the eight Freedoms of the Air .
The question that raises the greatest emotion is the transparency of air ticket prices .
Passengers expect to know how much they will actually pay for tickets , not publicity stunts in disguise .
I support the view that the regulation and the directive we have adopted preventing unfair competition , which will come into effect in five months , will lead to an increase in passenger rights .
A passenger must be the subject both of the activities of the carrier and of the airport .
Unfortunately , it is too often the case that passengers are simply treated as cargo .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I associate the common rules for the operation of air transport services in the Community with the third aviation package or with problems relating to its practical implementation .
Perhaps the biggest problem here is transport safety , which involves securing the social conditions of employees , including cases where aircraft are hired out together with crews , as well as the safety of passengers , who are traditionally the priority .
Alongside this is the issue of the financial health of airlines and the stricter requirements for the terms and conditions that apply to aircraft leasing , including proposed time limits .
I feel that it would also be desirable for consumers to know what exactly they have bought for their money .
You too would surely feel suspicious about airline advertisements promising fares of EUR 1 .
Another issue is that of how detailed the price breakdown should be , and what exactly it should contain .
In this regard , it is very important to clarify the distribution of cost items for processing passengers and aircraft , including the endless discussions on the concept of reasonable profit .
I am definitely opposed to the idea that has emerged during the debate that this is about technical standards and that social issues do not come into play .
I should like to thank the rapporteur Mr Degutis , who has also referred to social issues in his speech .
His work was outstanding and his report deserves our support .
As regards the proposed amendments , we agree with all of them apart from Nos. 16 , 29 , 37 , 40 , 42 , 49 and 50 .
In most cases , this is not a matter of substantive disagreement : our objections mainly involve instances where the same thing has been proposed in two places or where better options are available .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to refer to three more aspects .
In the consolidation of the third aviation package , it is crucial in terms of the transparency of air fares that there be no false bait advertising , and it is also relevant in this regard whether the flat-rate security charges levied on passengers actually match the costs of the security measures .
I have the feeling that airports are using some of these security charges to obtain further remuneration for themselves .
It is very important in the interests of the transparency of costs that security charges do indeed correspond to the costs incurred by security measures .
Secondly , I should like to discuss competition between airports , and to do so from two angles .
I should like to ask the Commissioner to give one or two examples without delay to show the extent to which the Commission 's guidelines for permissible ( or impermissible ) aid for regional airports in the Community are actually being applied .
As I see it , there are a great many regional airports that are only being kept afloat by subsidies and will never be able to support themselves economically .
In these cases , the Commission guidelines should actually be putting an end to the subsidies .
Thirdly , this consolidation of the third aviation package changes the definition of an ' airport system ' slightly .
I would ask that the Commissioner elaborate on this , too , at some stage .
It is unacceptable that , by law , an airport system can only exist if it serves the same conurbation , and that airports such as Frankfurt and Frankfurt Hahn can claim that , despite being 120 km apart , they serve the same conurbation and must therefore be recognised as an airport system .
The Commissioner should on no account permit such mushrooming of what is recognised as an airport system .

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Degutis , on the wonderful flexibility he has shown in accepting some of the proposals of the various Members .
I would also like to congratulate the Commissioner on his magnificent presentation , because it has demonstrated that this text represents a definitive improvement of the legislation , since it updates , simplifies and consolidates the best aspects of rules that had become obsolete and which needed rapid updating , given the sector 's development .
In reality , all of this benefits all of the actors in the sector , particularly passengers , in a sector such as aviation that has suffered so much .
Furthermore , inconsistency amongst these kind of regulations does not just usually distort the operation of the internal market , but we believe that it also leads to risks in terms of the quality of service , safety and working conditions .
Of the improvements and achievements that Parliament has introduced - most of which have been mentioned by other Members already - I would like to stress the demand for greater transparency and control of the financial situation of companies and operators in the sector .
In view of the exponential growth of this sector and the appearance of tempting pockets of potential customers - such as immigrants , who have increasing purchasing power thanks to work regularisation , in my country for example - it has become much more urgent to apply rules and conditions rigorously in order to prevent the fraud and abuse that usually arise in the sale of tickets and also the deceitful offers from companies that appear all over the place .
We also believe the provisions to prevent and alleviate the social consequences of such fraud and of possible bankruptcies to be very reasonable .
Furthermore , transparency of prices and non-discrimination in acquisition , through whichever channel the passenger acquires the tickets , also seem to us to be fundamental improvements to this text .
Other aspects that I believe have emerged and have also improved are those relating to the social conditions for workers in the sector .
Preventing social dumping , which disrupts the economic and social situation , and preventing games from being played with displaced workers employed by transnational companies operating from different bases , has been a positive achievement and an improvement .
Better still is the fact that the debate that has opened up during the process of drawing up this report has led to the request , in Amendment 61 , for a legislative proposal on social and working conditions , which I believe the Commission must present urgently .
Mr President , the opening-up of air travel to millions of citizens has been brought about by the low-fares airlines .
I agree with the Commissioner that the single aviation market has been a singular success .
Airlines such as Ireland 's Ryanair have revolutionised the aviation sector and have put pressure on the older , more established and more expensive airlines to follow suit .
Such competition is good for the consumer and the traveller .
However , I want to focus on what has already been mentioned by four people tonight , and that is that there is a problem .
In such a competitive market , airlines have indulged - and still continue to indulge - in extremely attractive but grossly misleading price advertising .
A travel fare advertised at five cents looks very attractive indeed , but when the consumer goes to book , either online or otherwise , the five-cent ticket can be several hundred euro when taxes and other charges are factored in .
I raised this issue by way of a parliamentary question here last January , and the Commission replied , ' the Commission , while maintaining the general rule of price freedom , proposes that " air carriers operating within the Community [ ... ] provide the general public with comprehensive information on their air fares and rates and the conditions attached ” .
Consumers will thus be informed of the actual price ( price of ticket plus the various charges and taxes ) . '
The Degutis report , which we are debating here tonight , will give practical effect to this , and that is extremely welcome .
The obligation on airlines to introduce full transparency is extremely welcome and very important , because the consumer will now see from the very outset exactly what he or she will have to pay .
That alone will not reduce the numbers of people travelling - as a lot of people think it might - but in my opinion it will further enhance competition and benefit the travelling public .
Finally , could the Commissioner tell us when exactly we can expect this to come into effect ?
The sooner the better , in my view .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank all the speakers and I am pleased about most of the amendments proposed .
These amendments usefully clarify several points , especially concerning the economic and financial monitoring of companies or again the issues about leasing of aircraft .
I fully support the proposed improvements concerning the principal place of business in order to ensure effective monitoring of companies for which a national authority has responsibility .
The Commission also agrees with your proposals in relation to the conditions for granting or revoking licences , even if we cannot accept that this action could be taken on the basis of suspicion alone .
The simplifications regarding public service obligations and coordination of airports will allow a more flexible and effective implementation of these measures .
Moreover , although the Commission can support the major part of the amendments without any problem , I am going nonetheless to tell you about some reservations .
I can understand and support the need to find solutions for passengers who are stranded when an airline goes bankrupt .
Mrs Ayala referred to that .
It is , indeed , such situations that have led to this updating of the regulation , which seeks to strengthen the conditions for granting licences and the economic and financial monitoring of companies .
I cannot , however , at this stage , accept a new obligation whose feasibility and scope in economic and financial terms we have not yet analysed .
That is why , in my opinion , we should make reference to the need to make provision for conditions for reimbursement and repatriation , without , for all that , deciding on a solution the real impact of which we do not really know yet .
My second reservation concerns the social dimension .
It is of the utmost importance that national authorities correctly apply the appropriate national and European legislation .
It is a good thing to remind Member States of these obligations , which are laid down by the Treaty and by national legislation , but this sectoral regulation does not seem the most appropriate to deal with this matter .
We must look more closely at this subject in order to grasp all the implications and to define the real needs that call for a response at Community level .
Also , the proposal made by your rapporteur seems to me right , that is , to make reference to the obligations of Member States in a recital .
Furthermore , I wish to answer , of course , those who asked me about the proposal .
Yes , the Commission is carrying out a study on the effects of the internal aviation market on employment and working conditions .
This study , which will be finished at the end of 2007 , will give us food for thought and enable us to decide what practical measures to take .
As Mr Jarzembowski has mentioned , the Commission is hesitating in relation to the obligations that are too specific for the distribution of traffic between airports .
It is legitimate to require reasonable and effective connection times with city centres . Is it not , however , going too far if we insist on a fixed time , as well as an obligation for there to be links between airports ?
I come to the problem of prices .
The provisions on transparency of prices and full information for passengers are necessary , but they must be feasible and intelligible .
Your rapporteur is right to wish to cover all flights leaving from an airport in the European Community .
However , the extension of this obligation to only the Community companies in third countries gives rise to serious legal and commercial difficulties .
I should like to respond to the question of costs linked with security .
It is true that the Commission is in favour of the cost of security and the portion of the price resulting from it being known .
Moreover , it also wants the various costs , charges , taxes and surcharges to be clearly shown .
However , if it is true that this regulation seeks to ensure information for passengers , we cannot use it to lay down the use and characteristics of each charge or tax ; provisions of this kind will have their place in the directive on airport charges under discussion in our institutions .
Mrs Jeggle , with regard to advertising on the Internet , I agree with you , but Amendment 48 seems to us very complicated .
It really needs to be clear and practical .
I want also to respond to Mr Stockmann and Mr Kohliček concerning the issue of wet leasing .
It is necessary to allow relative flexibility to meet exceptional needs while laying down strict conditions for safety and frequency .
I am in favour of a system that makes it possible to reconcile safety requirements with the need for recourse to wet leasing in exceptional circumstances and for a limited period .
Finally , for reasons of fair competition with third countries , I consider it is justified to compensate for the removal of Article 23 on price leadership by the possibility of imposing restrictions , when a third country with which an agreement has been signed does not recognise the same duties .
It is a principle of good sense which should help us in the negotiations with third countries .
I thank Parliament also for having supported the Commission 's approach concerning relations with third countries , which must be conducted in a coordinated fashion .
There too , I shall still need the support of Parliament , Mr President , for the next stages .
I do not pretend to have answered all the questions .
I say again , quite simply , that Parliament 's work has improved our text .
Therefore , Mr Degutis , Mr Costa , it is really with much satisfaction that I thank Parliament for its work ; the questions that you have raised are also very sound .
I observed that , for some of them , it was not necessarily in this text that an answer needed to be provided .
On the social level , I pointed out that we are in the process of working , and that by the end of the year , I would have a better idea for a possible proposal .
Mr President , I felt it was necessary to provide rather detailed answers in order to close a debate of high quality .
( FR ) Commission position on Parliament 's amendments :
Degutis report
The Commission can accept the following amendments : 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 13 , 14 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 22 , 24 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 34 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 43 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 and 56 .
The Commission can accept in principle the following amendments : 1 , 8 , 10 , 12 , 20 , 23 , 31 , 32 , 36 , 44 and 49 .
The Commission can accept in part the following amendments : 33 , 45 and 47 .
The Commission cannot accept the following amendments : 2 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 25 , 35 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 46 , 48 , 50 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 and 61 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 11 July 2007 .
Sustainable mobility ( debate )
The next item is the report by Etelka Barsi-Pataky , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on Keep Europe moving - Sustainable mobility for our continent
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Parliament welcomes the mid-term review of the fundamental document of Europe 's transport policy , the White Paper .
We are pleased that the Commission has prepared its report on the subject after broad coordination , and that it has done a thorough job .
We also welcome the fact that it has made suggestions in several areas with regard to modifying the existing transport policy .
Parliament recognises the achievements of the past five years , while at the same time we are critical on several matters .
Parliament requests the Council and the Commission to consider our recommendations as the cornerstone of European transport policy .
Now , what do these consist of ?
First of all , the experience of past years shows that the use of regulation is the weak point of transport policy .
As for implementation , it has been the case more than once that this came only after considerable delay , while sometimes it has been done incompletely or not at all .
The Commission 's report does not face up with sufficient thoroughness or honesty to this problem , and therefore it does not suggest appropriate solutions .
Parliament emphasises the importance of cooperation among the European , national and regional levels , of strengthening this cooperation and of working together .
Second , the majority in Parliament is of the opinion that we need to shape our transport policy more realistically than was done in the past .
The review quite rightly observes that transport , as a service , plays a key role in the economy and in society , and that it is inseparable from the latter ; our recommendation is therefore that we integrate it fully into the Lisbon Strategy .
For the most part , we agree that existing capacities must be utilised more efficiently on their own or in integration , and that each and every mode of transport must be sustainable on its own ; this applies particularly to logistics .
In addition to co-modality in certain areas , the modal shift , in our view , plays an important role especially with regard to long-distance transport .
Third , as far as the growth of the European economy is concerned , the inadequate financing of infrastructures poses a risk .
Neither the Commission 's report , nor the Council 's position faces up adequately to this problem .
European transport requires more Community financing , more financing by Member States , more courageous financial solutions and , above all , political support , in order to implement its key projects .
We ask , and we expect , that the tasks of reviewing the seven-year budget for this area begin immediately .
Fourth , we should talk about the changed circumstances and new challenges since 2001 .
Among these I would highlight first of all those tasks , which follow from the reunification of Europe in 2004 and 2007 , which considerably increased the differences within Europe , as well as its diversity , which needs to be analysed much more thoroughly in European legislation .
We have a common interest , moreover , in the interconnected , interoperable trans-European network .
Thus it must be the joint responsibility of every level and every institution to make full use of those sources that ensure cohesion .
Fifth , we need to face the fact that the impact of transport on climate change has increased and continues to increase .
Although the spring session of the Council formulated worthy general objectives , their practical transposition is the task of the legislation that is before us , and that will be carried out in the coming period .
Among these , for instance , is the Commission proposal , due in 2008 , on the internalisation of external costs .
Sixth , we must consider here and take account of the fact that traditional arrangements are gradually reaching the limits of their effectiveness , and therefore we must take advantage of the potential of intelligent transport systems .
We need to create a legal , economic and technological environment that is suitable for the industry .
We have launched some large , comprehensive Community projects , European projects that are promising .
But the Union does not have any experience in these innovations , so we need to blaze a trail in this area .
However , European responses to climate change are worthless if we cannot implement these on a global scale .
Commissioner , it is our opinion that after this mid-term review , there needs to be a progressive renewal of Europe 's transport policy in this direction and an adjustment to the new challenges , otherwise overcrowding , the pressures on the environment , and the problems of social sustainability will present serious obstacles to the growth of Europe 's economy and well-being .
I thank all those fellow Members who have lent their constructive support to the preparation of this report .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very happy to be here to take part in this debate on European transport policy .
I wish to commend the quality of Mrs Barsi-Pataky 's work which , by the conciseness of its messages , has given a strong political signal .
You said just now , Mrs Barsi-Pataky , that any transport policy must be able to be constantly updated , for the very reason that it has to adapt , and you have underlined the importance of making this growth in transport sustainable .
I am pleased by the soundness of your report and its relevance to the mid-term review of the White Paper .
You received favourably the realistic approach of the Commission 's communication ; it is an approach that needs to be brought up to date , in compliance with the Lisbon objectives , and made part of the framework of the European strategy for sustainable development .
These objectives relate to the four pillars of our approach : sustainable mobility , safe mobility , innovative mobility and the international dimension .
You also supported the concept of co-modality and we must indeed , in order to make a success of the modal shift , reduce the negative impacts of all modes of transport precisely so as to ensure the environmental efficiency and performance of each mode of transport .
The promotion of intelligent systems of transport and logistics , urban mobility policies , the development of intelligent charging systems are all ways of contributing to it without jeopardising the mobility necessary for growth .
I shall mention now the items under this heading that are due shortly .
The Green Paper on urban transport , the importance of which you have emphasised .
The action plan on logistics that I intend to submit to you soon and which will include actions intended to remove administrative , operational and functional obstacles : to encourage training and exchange of best practice , to promote standardisation across the different modes .
A communication on port policy is planned for the autumn , in which there will be , among other things , assessments of aspects of integration of port infrastructures in the logistics chain .
The forthcoming appointment of a European coordinator for motorways of the sea and of another European coordinator for waterways , and we are going to consolidate the institutional framework of inland navigation with harmonisation of pilots ' certificates and the setting up of a fund for innovation in this sector .
Next , the communication on a rail network focussed on freight in Europe .
Next , the levying of charges on infrastructures .
As you wanted at the time of adopting the new Eurovignette directive , the Commission will present in 2008 a methodology for the internalisation of external costs .
There , now , is a good agenda which corresponds , Mrs Barsi-Pataky , very much with your recommendations .
I should like to add a few comments about certain passages in your report beginning with a reminder that the Commission carries out a rigorous policy of initiating proceedings for infringements , which is beginning to bear fruit .
In another vein , I understand that the international negotiations are a sensitive subject for Parliament .
Having said that , it is up to the Commission to negotiate international agreements , but it will keep the European Parliament regularly informed about the progress of the negotiations .
I also take note of your request for a report concerning the directive on the interoperability of electronic road pricing systems and we shall present , as set out in the directive , a report for 2009 .
The Commission is in the process of assessing the impact of the European modular system .
Despite the advantages and increased efficiency in some instances , this option remains controversial .
Finally , the Commission fully supports the development of biofuels with the establishment of European standards for this type of fuel .
It is a matter of making it easier to achieve the European Union 's minimum target : 10 % of biofuels out of the total fuel consumption by 2020 .
I am going now to listen with attention to your comments and once again I thank Parliament and the Commission for giving informed opinions on this mid-term review of the White Paper .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks go to the rapporteur , Mrs Barsi-Pataky , for the work she has done .
On behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , I nevertheless have to say that I am sorry that the Committee on Transport and Tourism took only very little account of our committee 's proposals .
The traditional way of thinking is that the more transport there is the better it is for the economy and industry .
The Committee on Industry , however , took the view that transport caused others to incur much more in costs which are not at present internalised in the price of transport .
Transport is the sector where carbon dioxide emissions are growing the fastest .
For example , emissions from road traffic have increased by more than 25 % since 1990 ; the figure is more than 50 % in the case of air traffic .
This renders meaningless the reductions in emissions which have been achieved in industry and energy production .
It is therefore time we started applying ' the polluter pays ' principle in transport too , and internalised the costs of environmental damage in the prices of different transport modes .
Fair competition between the different transport modes also makes this necessary .
The Committee on Transport regrettably wanted to water down this principle so that the environmental charges on transport would be spent in the transport sector .
Transport , however , also needs to take the issue of carbon dioxide emissions seriously .
We have to set clear targets to reduce not just emissions from vehicles but all forms of transport .
Part of this will entail less traffic generally , especially car and air traffic .
Half of the car journeys taken every day in the European Union are less than five kilometres long .
They are mainly in the cities .
If just a third of these short car journeys were stopped and people walked , cycled or took buses instead , carbon dioxide emissions thorughout Europe would go down by several per cent .
For example , emissions in Germany would fall by 4 % .
Moreover , air pollution would be reduced precisely where people mostly tend to live .
According to the World Health Organisation , every year over 300 000 Europeans die before their time from air pollution , the main cause of which in cities is car traffic .
Business would also benefit as a result of less illness caused by pollutants .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Barsi-Pataky on this report and by thanking her for her hard work and willingness to compromise .
She has managed , in a very short , but accurate and perceptive report , to give an overview of the key priorities for Europe 's future transport policy .
Experts - especially those who can read between the lines - will appreciate that .
However , our citizens will lament the lack of detailed , tangible examples and practical proposals .
The mid-term review on the European Commission 's 2001 Transport White Paper shows that we have a lot of catching up to do .
This is not only true for the security aspects , but also for other areas such as sustainability , investment ( particularly in TENs ) and logistics .
Mrs Barsi-Pataky has indicated the right approach through her support for an intermodal transport network in which each carrier will develop their strengths so as to create goods transport services that are in the public interest .
I was struck by the absence of any call for an appropriate Community framework for intermodal tourism , in other words for structuring the movements of European citizens .
We also need intermodal approaches in public and private long-distance passenger transport in order to satisfy the constantly growing desire for mobility .
I very much welcome the decision to link existing transport problems to the development of intelligent transport systems and innovative technical solutions .
Policies should be bold enough to give priority to security-related legislation in the transport sector .
This should include strict rules for HGVs up to 44 tonnes and transport infrastructure safety management .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Barsi-Pataky most warmly on her ability to synthesise such a heated process and procedure as the revision of this Green Paper , despite all of the , shall we say , good intentions .
It was only to be expected , however , that all of the Members would want to add some of the huge number of ideas inspired by the Commission 's proposal .
I would also like to congratulate her on her ability to reach valid compromises , which are going to attract broad support from the whole of Parliament .
She has achieved a good balance between the unquestionable objectives , such as the modal shift in favour of modes that are still under-developed and which offer great environmental advantages , such as railways and inland waterways , while at the same time being able to interweave it with a new notion of co-modality that gave it a touch of realism that was more acceptable to all of the actors in the sector and which reduced many of the pressures that were preventing us from moving forward in a more reasonable manner .
I would point out that one of the great problems with Community legislation - though not just Community legislation - is its deficient application .
It is therefore crucial that we call for innovative instruments for that application .
We also agree with her criticism of the insufficient funding of the trans-European networks and of the other transport measures at European level and we believe that it opens up future perspectives which may be very useful to us in the 2008 debate , in order finally to achieve funding that is a match for our ambitions for European transport .
We are also grateful for your understanding in relation to integrating transport into the heart of the Lisbon Strategy .
We believe that that will finally make the Member States act responsibly in both fields : that of legislative application and that of sufficient funding .
The proposals in favour of logistics also seem to us to be hopeful signs , and we will try to follow them in the report that we are currently drawing up , as well as the innovative solutions and your total and ongoing support for intelligent transport systems .
We also support your call for diversity and what that has meant since enlargement , which you understand better than anybody .
We agree with your approach with regard to the global approach and relations with third countries , which we believe to be crucial to the future of the whole issue of European transport .
We also welcome your support for the Green Paper on urban transport and , finally , we are grateful for your understanding over the need to update your report in relation to climate change , taking up the Council 's latest proposal on reducing CO2 emissions .
The only thing I must say , finally , is that we will not be able to join you in supporting the modular aspect that appears in paragraph 11 of your report , but I believe that , by means of the proposal with which Mr Grosch will perhaps provide us , we will be able to find a solution to that little problem between the two groups .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Mr Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , what we are examining is an excellent report , which enables Parliament to understand , support and align itself with the work that the Commission must carry out in this last brief period of its activities .
The Barsi-Pataky report covers all the problems with which we have dealt in recent years and thus can make a strategic contribution to our policy .
I had the misfortune , if I may put it that way , to arrive just a moment before that clear change in priorities that has occurred over the last few weeks , with the possible inclusion within the Union 's activities of the fight against climate change and direct responsibility for the issue of energy costs .
I believe that this makes it necessary for us to review the whole text in the light of the new priorities , justifying or clarifying all the policies that we must implement to ensure that transport , too , makes its contribution to the attainment of these two objectives .
This means working to use alternative fuels or the same fuels with more efficient engines , trying to organise more efficient journeys with the aid of logistics but also , and above all , adding principles and logic to our need to insist on the better use of more energy-efficient and climate-friendly transport , as well as organising our lives in such as way as to reduce unnecessary mobility demands .
This merely underlines once again the historic strategies , which all in all are a credit to the European transport policy .
Interoperability , access to the markets and the integration of networks are making a dominant reappearance on the stage , albeit with two qualifications : time and money .
Time is becoming more urgent : everything needs to be accelerated and pushed to achieve swifter results if we wish to maintain the objectives of reducing CO2 and energy costs , as anticipated in the new objectives that the Union has set itself .
The other problem is funding .
The way in which the Union acts as intermediary regarding the Member States ' investments needs to be reconsidered in the medium term : I am referring not only to the funding of infrastructure , which is certainly the largest amount , but also to interoperability and to other measures that are designed to facilitate market access .
This funding not only needs to be obtained at European level , but also requires the Commission to have the possibility of coordinating the policies and funding of all the States , so as to ensure that the results we require are rapidly achieved .
on behalf of Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the report has a promising title : ' Keep Europe moving - sustainable mobility for our continent ' .
The clearest statement in Mrs Barsi-Pataky 's report is in paragraph 14 : ' the mid-term review of the Transport White Paper 2001 has not laid down long-term objectives nor given answers ' .
The EU 's transport policy is riddled with inconsistencies .
Many good principles are correctly identified , but often are not put into practice .
The report makes it clear that the negative effects of climate change have increased , not least as a result of a bad transport policy .
Many people still believe that growth is a constant : ever faster , ever higher , ever further .
Growth may be sustainable , but is not a good thing .
Incessant growth will not achieve the Kyoto targets , and the aim of halving CO2 emissions by 2050 will remain a pipe dream .
Often we only treat the symptoms , not the cause of the evil .
Satu Hassu from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy has already cited various examples .
We have been afraid to tell the whole truth about the costs .
We want to build new , ridiculously expensive high-speed train tracks while the existing tracks , in Italy for example , are rusting away .
Air traffic emissions are not included in the CO2 calculations , and transport is being promoted all over Europe .
Let us look at a very real , topical event : today in Vienna , the transport ministers from Italy , Austria and Germany have again happily declared their commitment to the Brenner Base Tunnel .
The economic viability of the Brenner Base Tunnel is very dubious in the light of our experience with the Channel Tunnel .
The finance comes from Member States who are already contravening the Maastricht criteria , which puts it on a very shaky footing .
Some of the approach sections have not even been planned .
It really is a massive white elephant .
There is talk of transferring goods traffic to rail , yet the plans are for a high-speed passenger line.p
The objectives of a socially acceptable and environmentally-friendly transport policy need to be : reducing unnecessary traffic flows , moving to more environmentally-friendly transport methods , being honest about the cost - which means transport prices must include all the costs of construction , maintenance , addressing environmental and health problems , and the cost of accidents - and sustainable taxation of transport based on CO2 emissions , including , most importantly , for air traffic .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , practice has proved to be more inflexible than theory .
Halfway through the planning horizon of the White Paper on transport , it transpires that the objectives are not yet within reach .
The Commission 's decision to fine-tune the objectives is both courageous and sensible . I take my hat off to you .
The change of course does , however , mean that we need to have different irons in the fire .
It is no longer only the intention to shift cargo , but to improve every modality .
This requires copious amounts of international decisiveness and tenacity in a number of cases .
There is also plenty to do in Europe , including the introduction of adequate infrastructure , the use of new technology , specific action programmes for market sectors and the further introduction of the polluter , that is , the user pays principle .
These elements have been included in the Barsi-Pataky report with very good reason .
As such , I can identify with most of the content of her report .
I have tabled amendments in respect of two points .
This House lays down transport legislation , whereupon it is often up to the Member States to transpose this legislation .
It has transpired that one and the same piece of legislation is interpreted and enforced in different ways in different Member States .
This means , for example , that lorries driving across various Member States comply with this selfsame piece of legislation in one country and not in the next , with all the consequences that this entails .
I regard this as unacceptable .
This is why , in my Amendment 4 , attention is drawn to this , and Member States and the Commission are urged , where necessary , to agree on a common interpretation of legal documents .
This amendment does not provide for common penalties applicable to infringements .
The second point concerns urban transport .
Although I am well disposed towards it , I take the view that this should fall within the Member States ' remit , and should remain so .
The role of the European Union can therefore be nothing more than facilitating .
By way of conclusion , I should like to thank Mrs Barsi-Pataky for her efforts and congratulate her on this result .
( DE ) Mr President , the Commission 's mid-term review rightly highlights a number of common transport policy successes , notably the constant improvements in incorporating transport policy priorities in other policy areas : the internal market for one , and environmental policy for another .
I would like to thank Vice-President Barrot for specifically referring to the study on internalising external costs .
We are eagerly awaiting the findings and recommendations for further action .
The mid-term review must also recognise that many actions that were identified as necessary have either failed or are threatened with failure because of the lack of funding and unwillingness to provide funding on the part of the Union - or more specifically , the Member States .
This indicates that new impetus is called for at half-time .
We need more money .
We need better systems .
We need more , better and new technologies , and above all , we need better logistics .
There are also new issues to address .
It is vital that we involve the new Member States and the candidate counties in the older existing system of trans-European networks so that we can all grow together .
With all the different facets of security considerations , there is still a lot of work to be done .
On the subject of urban transport policy , boldness and sensitivity must be our watchwords .
A methodical approach is needed : it is not necessary to enshrine every feasible and conceivable idea in European law straight away .
It may be better to opt for less binding legislation , and more stimulus in the form of best practice and respect for subsidiarity .
Transport as a whole is set to keep increasing , not decrease .
Some have a vision of the future in which transport growth and economic growth will be completely separate .
We do not want to fall flat on our faces , though : growth is not appropriate for all areas .
Amendment 6 from our Scandinavian fellow MEPs should not be seen or used as a back door for the so-called EuroCombi HGVs .
What may be good practice in Scandinavia is not suitable in the rest of Europe .
My thanks to the Commission . I would also like to thank the rapporteur for this excellent report .

( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to begin by thanking Mrs Barsi-Pataky , who has produced a skilfully worded report with some very clear messages .
I also wish to thank the Commission and Commissioner Barrot for their evaluation of the White Paper , involving a lot of constructive new thinking about the EU 's transport policy .
The White Paper will be the framework for sound and wide-ranging transport decisions over the next few years .
The evaluation may help bring about better decisions .
The EU 's Heads of State or Government have , of course , decided that efficient transport should be a part of the Lisbon Process , designed to make the EU into the most competitive knowledge-based economy before the year 2010 , and that of course sounds all well and good .
It shows that there is increasing understanding for the fact that efficient transport is crucial to economic development .
At the same time , the Commission 's commitment to co-modality and its focus on the interplay of different forms of transport testify to a more realistic understanding of what drives demand for transport , which is to say that people want the safest , most efficient , comfortable and inexpensive means of getting from A to B. We must develop each individual mode of transport in ways that are environmentally sound and we must do more to coordinate the different forms of transport so that proper consideration is given both to efficiency and to the environment .
Such a policy requires investment , and one might well doubt somewhat whether the EU Heads of State or Government will honour their fine words about enhanced transport .
We shall get some perspective on the matter shortly when we hear what the Trans-European Networks are to get .
I am afraid that not enough money has been set aside for the Trans-European Networks for 2007 to 2013 , and we must demand that the agenda for the mid-term review of the 2009 budgetary framework includes more money for transport investment .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Europe is stuck in traffic jams , and the situation is getting worse .
Change is needed .
Yet transport plays a vital role in our economy .
If our transport policy is poor , the economy will suffer because it is dependent on the transport sector .
So it is important that we create links between transport policy and other policies .
We can and must make progress on a lot of important regulation , such as harmonisation , starting at European level , but we must remember that political measures can only be taken at Community level if they offer a clear added value .
This means constantly evaluating the need for all EU transport policy regulations .
Existing measures have to be reviewed regularly , so as to be able to nip any undesirable trends in the bud .
Overregulation is detrimental to the transport market .
In order to make real improvements to mobility and environmental protection , we need to establish substantial incentives for the relatively environmentally-friendly , but hitherto neglected rail and inland waterway sectors .
We need to get the Member States on board in this area .
There is still a wealth of unexploited potential , and that is a challenge for Europe .
At the same time , there is no satisfactory answer to the question of whether the European Commission should intervene in urban transport .
Are we responsible for this sector ?
Does that not go against the principle of subsidiarity ?
Can Europe dictate how our towns and cities manage their internal affairs ?
The European Commission cannot be allowed to use the current hysterical climate change debate to extend its powers .
If we want to make sustainable improvements to the transport situation and thereby to environmental quality in our cities , we need to get Europe 's citizens behind us .
Only through changes in the behaviour of our citizens as transport users will we achieve substantial and genuinely effective results .
This will require targeted information campaigns , however , which would need to be initiated and supported at European level .
To close , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Barsi-Pataky , for her excellent and thorough report on the subject and for always being open to discussion .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work .
European transport faces major challenges : a uniform market and good connections and cross-border permeability , services in large cities , safety and quality of services and working conditions for transport workers .
This involves above all good and systematic regulation of European and national legislation . It also involves proper organisation and logistics , a lot of investment in infrastructure , but above all it involves energy consumption .
There is no such thing as transport without energy supplies .
Using energy in transport creates harmful emissions .
We must limit these emissions on environmental grounds using the requisite technology .
The cost of fuel is high , and we must reduce fuel consumption by incorporating new technology into engines .
But new pollution-cutting and fuel-saving technologies cost money , and we have to develop them further to bring down their price , as cheaper technology in transport is cheap transport , and cheap transport means a competitive economy .
So here again , the main problem is new technologies .
I would like to ask this House , during the mid-term budget review , to greatly increase expenditure on transport research and technology .
We need to be innovative in transport technology , otherwise we will lose the race for competitive transport , a competitive economy and the Lisbon strategy .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all , quite simply but frankly , to say to Mrs Satu Hassi that I am surprised by her comments as we are totally committed to sustainable mobility .
I am surprised , Mrs Hassi , that you should think that we are forgetting the ' polluter pays ' principle .
I think I made , with Mr Dimas , a brave commitment about sharing with aviation the allowances for greenhouse gas emissions .
We observe a political line and I am very surprised by your comments which , if I may say , seem to me a little excessive .

I am also going to take the opportunity of saying to Mr Kusstatscher that I find it difficult to understand him : it is quite clear that at a time when we are building infrastructures for high speed trains , we are freeing up conventional lines for freight .
It is not just by chance that I stated just now that there would be a communication on railway lines dedicated to freight .
Mrs Sommer , may I say to you also that I am not looking for competences .
On the other hand , I take into account , on the one hand , the expectations of citizens and , on the other hand , the fact that , if you want rail to have its rightful place in Europe , it is necessary to ensure interoperability .
If you want a sustainable development policy , there comes a moment when you can do it only by coordination and harmonisation on a European scale .
I say this to you straight out , because you will understand that as a Commissioner , committed as I am , I am happy to accept a certain number of justified criticisms , but I feel obliged to answer back directly when the criticism becomes excessive .
I come now to some comments that I wanted to make .
The Commission has already begun removing obstacles to the running of trains : simplifying the certification of railway vehicles , railway interoperability and safety , the third rail package .
I thank your Committee on Transport and Tourism for their work in this field towards reaching an agreement .
In the aviation sector , we have two regulations concerning the interoperability of European traffic management systems .
We adopted , in 2007 , an ' airports ' package that is focussed on the role of airports in the competitiveness of the internal aviation market and , as for infrastructures , we have a new trans-European network ( TEN ) .
Mr Costa is right , however , when he says that we shall have to really redouble our efforts to coordinate financing because , as Mrs Ayala and others have emphasised , we find ourselves faced with a budget which is too limited to be able really to undertake the major works on infrastructure that will enable sustainable mobility .
You are absolutely right and I thank Parliament for forcefully pointing it out .
Mr Koch spoke about co-modality in tourism and he is right .
Co-modality must also work in favour of passengers .
As far as infrastructures are concerned , as I have just said , we are going to try to mobilise all possible resources and to develop public private partnerships with the involvement of the European Investment Bank .
I shall say a brief word on the social aspects of transport .
From April new social rules in relation to professional road transport came into force and we presented three proposals for regulations with a view to modernising admission to the occupation of road transport operator and access to the road transport market .
With regard to passengers ' rights , we have , thanks to Parliament , begun to introduce rights for passengers with reduced mobility in all modes of transport , particularly by coach and by sea .
I will admit to you , knowing Parliament 's sensitivity on this subject , that we must now actually put these rights into practice .
As far as safety is concerned , I should like to emphasise again the priority of road safety in our action , as the first European Road Safety Day attests .
We have also simplified the rules in relation to transport of dangerous goods and we have three air , sea and rail safety agencies , which are not idle .
Safety will keep us busy in the autumn in the context of conciliation on common rules in the aviation sector .
With regard to innovation , on which Mrs Barsi-Pataky was right to insist , it is really a major problem .
Transport has to benefit from new technology .
That will be the case with the Single European Sky ATM Research ( SESAR ) for air traffic . It is the case with the European Rail Traffic Management System ( ERTMS ) to equip new railway lines and then , of course , it will be the case with energy saving and green propulsion to ensure the sustainability of road mobility .
All that will be the subject of an action plan for energy efficiency and will be part of the European strategy for energy defined by the European Council .
I shall not elaborate on the international dimension .
It is obviously necessary to pursue this policy that has enabled us to sign an open sky agreement with the United States and with other countries .
Henceforth , we are going to pursue all these efforts .
Mr President , I shall leave it at that , because , of course , all of that deserves much more explanation .
I thank Parliament and particularly Mrs Barsi-Pataky , because I think we are engaged in a transport policy that really takes into account future requirements , which looks not to the past but very much to the future , with this double objective : to enable mobility such as the Lisbon objectives require and , at the same time , to ensure that this mobility remains compatible with the demands of environmental protection and the fight against global warming .
It is a very difficult battle .
I thank Parliament very much for its support and , personally , I feel very committed to these efforts towards sustainable mobility .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 11 July 2007 .
Recent developments in bilateral trade relations with China ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on bilateral trade relations between the EU and China by Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade - B6-0129 / 2007 ) .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to be able to introduce this subject on behalf of the Committee on International Trade .
I would like to begin by thanking Commissioner Mandelson and his services , who have dramatically improved the flow of information sent to our committee regarding the various bilateral and interregional trade negotiations .
The committee hopes that this style of cooperation will continue for international negotiations on partnership and cooperation agreements in which , as in the case of China , trade is a significant factor .
Our trade relations with the People 's Republic of China are of great importance for both sides .
Last year , China took over from the USA as the largest exporter to the European Union .
At the same time , the European Union 's trade deficit with China rose to EUR 128 billion .
The Committee on International Trade has been monitoring China 's growing importance in international trade for some time now .
As early as 2005 , our committee chose to produce an own-initiative report on the subject : the first report ever produced on an individual trading partner .
A second report looked at the consequences of the expiry of the quota system for the Chinese textiles and clothing industry .
We should congratulate the rapporteurs - Caroline Lucas and Tokia Saïfi - for their foresight two years ago .
In the European Union and developing countries , concerns about the textiles and clothing industry and the impact of opening the market to China have still not been allayed .
This uncertainty has been increasing as the 2005 Memorandum of Understanding is now due to expire .
We need a clear statement about China 's market economy status in order to investigate allegations of dumping in this area .
The Lucas report looked at the issue of Europe 's strategy in terms of optimising the value creation chain and increasing production of high-tech goods .
The belief that the European Union can continue to offer cannier solutions in the long term and set the pace for scientific and technical progress has to be called into question in view of the incredibly high numbers of well-qualified Chinese school leavers .
We do , of course , recognise and welcome the reduction in poverty that China 's meteoric rise has brought about in the past 20 years .
At the same time , it is reasonable to expect China to comply with the WTO rules that it accepted when it became a member .
This includes provisions on intellectual property and the principle of non-discrimination for imported goods .
Nor can we afford to ignore the ecological and social consequences of China 's growth .
We should be prepared to support those who are addressing the problems on the ground .
Commissioner Mandelson , I believe I read that last month at a trade union conference in the United Kingdom you said that in international and bilateral trade talks , we seek to set fair environmental and social standards .
I only hope that this applies to our major trading partners , not just the small ones .
So we expect the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement that you are currently negotiating with China to incorporate all these elements , and that the interests of all affected parties will be considered , instead of focussing solely on market access .
Commissioner , perhaps you could tell us to what extent this message is being conveyed through the EU 's stance in the negotiations on the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with China , and also how China has responded to our position .
Another , more general , question is that of the relationship between international and bilateral negotiations .
The European Union 's trade strategy sees national bilateral and interregional trade relations as complementing the multilateral efforts made within the WTO .
The WTO negotiations seem to have stalled .
Could you , Commissioner , explain what is the basis for conducting bilateral discussions , given that it is currently unclear what shape the global framework for future negotiations will take , and therefore what the agreements will need to look like .
Lastly , I would like to ask you whether it is really necessary , before we reach an agreement in a multilateral framework , to negotiate individual WTO-plus agreements containing provisions that we know many developing countries are not happy with .
Would this type of conduct not make concluding a multilateral agreement - which is the solution that our committee favours - even more complicated than it is at present ?
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , let me say straight away in response to Mr Markov that I am grateful to him for acknowledging the increased flow of information that comes from the Commission to his committee and the stronger cooperation that he has seen .
As far as China is concerned , the EU side has as its objective in the prospective Partnership and Cooperation Agreement to lay the foundation for enhanced cooperation , including enforcement and , where possible , the upgrading of environmental - including climate change mitigation - social , labour and safety standards , so we are on the same wavelength on that .
I welcome this opportunity to give this House some feedback on recent developments in bilateral trade relations with China .
China has been a top priority since I took office .
We have a lot to gain , but also some things to lose , depending on how we conduct this important relationship .
I chose the European Parliament last October to present , together with Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , the Commission 's China strategy paper - ' Closer Partners , Growing Responsibilities ' - and , more specifically on trade and investment , the policy paper entitled ' Competition and Partnership ' .
I argued in that policy paper that Europe benefits from an open and balanced economic relationship with China based on fair reciprocity .
That fundamental argument still holds good today .
Our economies are complementary : China has strong competitive advantages in many areas ; we have an enduring competitive advantage in high value-added services and goods , especially ones that require strong intellectual property right ( IPR ) protection .
However , we have not yet achieved the balance in our relationship that will guarantee that it can be sustained to our mutual benefit .
Europe 's trade deficit with China is indeed growing .
I accept that part of this deficit may be the natural result of market forces , but we also know that our export potential is being hampered by barriers in the Chinese market and that an important part of the current trade balance is consequently artificial .
It is a product of politics , not economics ; it can be addressed by politics .
A recent study has even put a number on the cost of China 's barriers to our trade at about EUR 20 billion annually in lost exports , that is 30 % of our exports to China .
China must take practical steps to address the problem .
So what is the EU looking for ?
Well , we want improved access to China 's goods and services markets and , for EU investors , a sea change in protection of intellectual property rights and copyrights , especially by cleaning up the huge street markets that sell counterfeit products and by ensuring Chinese companies pay royalties due to EU companies when using their technology .
We want an ambitious approach to negotiations to update the 1985 Trade and Economic Cooperation Agreement between the EU and China .
This has to be a genuinely high-standard agreement that addresses long-term concerns , and we want assurances that the drive for growth and the lack of domestic market signals in China will not lead to over-production and dumping , especially in key products like steel .
The fundamental case for a positive trade relationship with China remains correct , but we are at something of a crossroads in our trade relations with China .
A policy of dialogue to address the problems we have is credible only if it delivers more than the alternative means of trying to force change .
The policy of dialogue and engagement can be challenged .
It will be challenged if things do not improve between us and if people cannot see tangible , deliverable , practical improvements and benefits as a result of that policy of dialogue and engagement .
So let me repeat : openness to China is in Europe 's interests , but it is sustainable only if we can show that EU products and services are just as welcome in China as Chinese goods are in Europe .
That is why China needs to reciprocate by strengthening its commitment to economic openness and market reform behind its own borders .
I have made this case openly and frankly to the Chinese authorities , most recently with Commerce Minister Bo Xilai in our recent EU-China Joint Committee meeting in Brussels on 12 June .
At that meeting , the Chinese leadership recognised for the first time that the current trend of the trade imbalance between China and the EU is simply not sustainable .
I was able to agree with Bo Xilai to set up a high-level group that will explore ways to address this issue .
I am looking forward to the initial report of this group at the next EU-China summit in November , and I expect it to identify some first tangible and practical steps to address this shared challenge , notably in ensuring higher Chinese imports from the EU .
I agreed with Minister Bo Xilai on 12 specific points that address EU companies ' concerns regarding their access to the Chinese market .
One of these was the agreement on terms of reference for the upgrading of our 1985 trade pact .
This was an important step forward , as I had withheld our commitment until I felt the terms of reference were right from our point of view .
It is important to stress that the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement of which our trade discussions are forming part will encompass the full scope of the EU-China bilateral relationship , including enhanced cooperation in political matters .
The PCA will contain a standard clause on human rights .
The clause will cover all issues related to democratic principles and fundamental human rights .
As I have already said , one of our objectives in the PCA is to lay the foundation for enhanced cooperation on matters to do with environment , social , labour and safety standards .
On the trade side , the agreement will cover important issues for both sides such as IPR , investment , non-tariff trade barriers , capital movements , sustainable trade , and natural resources and competition .
These negotiations are an important tool to try to rebalance our trade relations and create opportunities for EU business operators .
However , this is not a preferential agreement , and tariffs will , therefore , not be discussed .
In parallel , the European Commission will continue to monitor closely China 's implementation of its WTO accession obligations .
This will remain a central priority for the Commission in the years to come .
China 's non-accession to the WTO Government Procurement Agreement leaves important Chinese markets closed , and China needs to honour its commitment to open negotiations on accession to this agreement in 2008 .
The Commission will also launch a comprehensive review of market openness in China and China 's implementation of its WTO commitments later this year .
IPR was another focus of my talks last month with Minister Bo Xilai .
Cooperation and dialogue on IPR issues are not an end in themselves .
They have to produce real change .
Talk is not enough .
That is why the Commission has made it clear to China that the cooperative approach we are presently favouring must produce tangible results .
The next meeting of the EU-China IP working group should be held in the coming month .
If significant progress is not made in the short-term on key issues for the EU , such as fake markets and payment of royalties , we will have to reconsider our approach with China in the IPR area .
The Commission does not exclude using the dispute settlement mechanism of the WTO .
In addition , the Commission is working actively to stop Chinese exports of fakes from entering the Community , most notably through strengthened customs actions at EU borders .
I believe this must become a higher priority for the EU as a whole .
Europe can cope with tough competition , but it needs to be fair competition .
This means that we have to ensure that we are acting on a level playing field , rejecting anti-competitive trading practices and standing ready to apply our trade defence instruments against dumping and illegal subsidies , as well as stepping up the fight against counterfeiting .
I should also like to share with you key elements of our updated assessment of China 's request for market economy status .
This issue is important in the context of the EU 's application of its trade defence instruments when faced with allegations of unfair dumping in Europe by Chinese exports .
The updated assessment reflects the significant and welcome steps of China towards becoming a market economy .
Progress was recorded across the board and brought China closer to fulfilling the four outstanding market economy status ( MES ) criteria .
In particular , we think that the adoption of a number of important laws deserves recognition - the bankruptcy law , the new property rights law and the new accounting standards .
However , the updated assessment also makes clear that still further progress is needed .
None of the four outstanding criteria has been fully met .
In particular , proper implementation of the new pieces of legislation will be crucial .
It is not enough to pass new laws .
They , as I believe China 's state authorities understand , must also be used and respected .
We will review the situation again in 12 months and continue technical talks in the meanwhile .
I value the views of this House very highly and I am committed to providing early and clear information to you .
Where possible and appropriate , this has been done in writing , for instance the MES assessment has been transmitted to the Committee on International Trade .
On other occasions , it may be more appropriate to provide information orally because of its sensitivity .
This is fully in line with Article 19 of the Framework Agreement .
What matters is that I will continue to keep Parliament fully informed .
To summarise my approach , I believe in a balanced partnership between the European Union and China based on fair reciprocity , a partnership whose core task is to open markets to fair trade for the benefit of Europe , China and the wider world .
I believe the EU has been playing its part in delivering that partnership .
It is right that we insist that China should play its full part as well .
Mr President , Commissioner Mandelson is not only an inspired orator , he is also a tireless negotiator .
Six years after the accession of China to the WTO , we are still waiting for a balance in bilateral trade between the European Union and China .
China enjoys fully the benefits of the open markets , without itself complying fully with its obligations under multilateral rules and disciplines .
The Chinese markets are still to a large extent closed and non-transparent .
There are high import barriers , which result - according to estimates - in lost profits of EUR 20 billion a year to European businesses .
Protection of intellectual property is inadequate .
I need only mention that , in 2006 , 80 % of imitation goods seized on the borders of Europe were of Chinese origin .
The Commission preferred to continue bilateral dialogue with China on intellectual property issues rather than coordinated action between the ΕU and the USA , which activated the WTO dispute settlement mechanism against China .
Dialogue would appear to be the way forward .
However , we are awaiting concrete results from this specific dialogue .
In any event , dialogue does not preclude the use of other legal means .
In the textile and clothing sector , all means should be used to safeguard the smooth development of European flows when the Shanghai Agreement expires in 2008 .
As far as footwear of Chinese origin is concerned , the Commission is called on to monitor imports closely , in order to prevent the risk of China 's circumventing the already inadequate trade defence measures adopted by the Union .
China , as a trading policy power constitutes both a threat and an opportunity .
What we need to fight against are China 's competitive advantages that derive from prohibitive import barriers , from unfair competition and from economic , ecological and social dumping practices .
The liberalisation of trade , which we enthusiastically support , should be based on reciprocity and accompanied by equivalent institutional counterbalances .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , based on the fundamental premise that relations between the European Union and China are of vital strategic importance in political terms , we have to ensure that our trade relations are governed by two principles , which have been very well expressed by the Commissioner : on the one hand we must invest in cooperation and , on the other , we must always keep up a very demanding attitude in our relations with China .
Our trade relations with China are extremely asymmetrical .
It is not just our more direct interests that are at stake , but also our essential values in terms of environmental protection , respect for employment rights and guaranteed protection for certain fundamental social issues .
In that context , we must establish a permanent debate on our cooperation efforts with this emerging great power , which is absolutely essential for keeping the international system in balance . That is why we cannot close ourselves off from China .
Indeed , we cannot close ourselves off from a growing market that is opening up new opportunities for us , which , of course , we have to seize .
Here , too , we have to be demanding about the opening-up of those markets and about respect for intellectual property rights , for example . At the same time , the European Union must adopt this highly demanding attitude in relation to fundamental issues concerning certain core principles of our model of economic , social and political organisation .
That , in fact , forces us to adopt the balanced position that I have mentioned ( and I believe that the European Commission has been making efforts to do so by adopting the trade protection instruments that are available to us whenever we find that there is a real danger of Chinese exports threatening certain European industries , particularly footwear , clothing and textiles ) and to be extremely demanding in the relations that we have to maintain with China in this area .
That , I believe , is the path we need to take , which must be based precisely on the fundamental idea that we cannot forgo having ever closer relations with China . At the same time , we have to try to promote some of our values .
To conclude , I feel that we Europeans are in a very special position in the international context , in that our interests are to a great extent identified with our values .
Protecting our interests depends on promoting many of our values and , if we do manage to promote them , we shall certainly be defending our interests .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I feel it is appropriate to begin by expressing Europe 's support for the flood victims in China .
Our fellow Member , Mr Markov , has raised an extremely important question , for which I would like to thank him on behalf of the Committee on International Trade .
The EU and China are two of the oldest cultures in the world .
On the one hand we have the largest trading bloc and on the other the fastest growing economy in humanity 's history .
So this is definitely an issue that needs to be addressed outside the WTO : an issue that requires a bilateral approach and a bilateral agreement .
Both sides have a great deal at stake .
We should not allow ourselves to be pressurised by the USA .
So I would like to thank Commissioner Mandelson for refusing to adopt a common WTO strategy for dealing with China on the subject of pirate goods .
Both sides - China and the EU - have both interests and instruments to protect against and to allow abuses of intellectual property rights : anti-dumping and anti-subsidy measures .
What matters is how we deal with one another - how we use those instruments .
The Commissioner has said that reciprocity is vital , and I would agree .
We Europeans benefit from the fact that China has adopted our continent-wide European patent laws wholesale .
That is a good thing .
But having the laws is not enough : the rights must be enforceable and they have to be enforced .
It is also in China 's own interest to do so , though - you know that the Chinese company Heier will soon have an interest in protecting its own patents .
Which proves that China does need this strategy .
What should we do in the meantime , though ?
We are threatened with a very hostile scenario , whereby the Chinese apply for patents that are similar to ours , then close their market .
They have already proved that it can be done .
Thanks to the former President of the European Patent Office , Mr Pompidou , in around four years ' time , China will actually have overtaken us in terms of the number of patents .
I think we should link the patent issue to the EU 's climate protection targets .
That is right , with our climate protection targets !
Let me explain why : China is a win-win culture , a culture that strives to achieve harmony .
So I think that if we have something to offer , we may succeed .
China is currently experiencing massive environmental problems .
Social stability is threatened ; the government is under great pressure because of huge environmental problems .
At both the IPPC Conference and the G8 summit , China indicated that it wants to work towards the climate protection targets .
Yet in many areas China lacks the technology .
So our offer could be that we will support a CO2-free coal-fired power plant with our technologies , as a gesture , but in return we can demand that our patent rights be respected .
Commissioner , you are on the right track .
Thank you very much for the information that you have provided today .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when the European Commission has begun talks with China with a view to a new partnership and cooperation agreement , Parliament 's Committee on International Trade feels a duty to draw the attention of the Community executive to some well-known issues , which characterise relations with the Asian giant .
China has a right to economic growth and development , which equates to well-being for its citizens , which also constitutes an opportunity for the world economy .
This should not take place , however , at the expense of compliance with the rules of international trade , of what has been agreed within legitimate forums and of what China accepted when it entered the WTO , otherwise the consequences for its economic partners , starting with Europe , could be disastrous , as they could for Chinese citizens themselves .
The talks with China are the most appropriate opportunity for tackling these issues bilaterally .
We need to find a way to tackle the issue of insufficient protection of human rights and inadequate environmental , social and safety standards .
Nobody is expecting China to achieve our levels , but to gradually achieve more acceptable standards .
We need to act as ' exporting fathers ' to improve access to the European Union market by means of the gradual removal of non-tariff barriers and , more generally , of administrative obstacles of various kinds that very often discourage businesses , especially small ones , from investing in China , and we need to take a firmer position on combating counterfeiting .
The Chinese Government must do its part and show political will and take effective action to combat a phenomenon that concerns a large number of businesses , and especially consumers , worldwide .
Above all , food-related counterfeiting , which has recently been an increasing problem , deserves the greatest attention because it affects the health of ignorant and defenceless citizens who trust in the appearance of labels .
This battle against counterfeiting and forgery must involve both the European authorities and the Chinese Government .
On these three aspects we expect the Commission , in the course of the talks that Parliament will follow with the utmost attention , to adopt a firm approach that will lead to clear and unequivocal results for our entrepreneurs , our consumers and also for Chinese citizens , because by ' well-being ' we mean not only European well-being but also the well-being of Chinese citizens .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Commissioner , the status of market economy is not yet within China 's reach .
There are still too many irregularities in the bilateral trade relations for this .
The frequent violations of intellectual property , for example , spring to mind .
Commissioner , I have gleaned from your excellent intervention that following your meeting with Chinese Minister Bo Xilai on 12 June , the dialogue on intellectual property rights has been resumed .
This news has brought me great joy .
Moreover , I take the view - unlike my Liberal counterpart - that in matters such as these within a WTO context , the EU would do well to tag along with the United States straight away .
After all , the United States remains our most important strategic ally .
Commissioner , I should actually , above all , like to draw your attention to another important aspect of our trade relations with China , namely the European export of secondary raw materials , such as used paper .
This is a huge issue at the moment .
Last weekend , the Dutch prominent press dedicated a large article to this very subject .
As you know , the new European rules for the export of these raw materials will enter into force in two days ' time .
It is through the Commission 's fault that no agreements have as yet been concluded with important countries such as China and India .
This means that , as from 12 July , used paper and other recyclable materials will become the most dangerous form of waste .
You will appreciate that this has major implications for the export of these products .
I would urge Commissioner Mandelson to promise this House a transitional provision that runs until 1 January 2008 .
During this time , you will be able to conclude agreements with those countries with which there is nothing in place as yet .
With this , you will be able to prevent exports from grinding to a halt and these products from accruing in European ports , such as that of Rotterdam .
I hope , Commissioner , that you will really take action , because this is a matter that comes across to the Dutch public as very negative in terms of Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , we would agree that precisely because of the scale of EU 's trade deficit with China , the European Union needs to be given much better market access opportunities , that the distortions created by Chinese State aids have to be reduced , and the Chinese Government needs to enforce WTO-standard intellectual property rights in the provinces as well .
We also need to work together to convince China that we are not just presenting a list of demands , but rather that it is in China 's interest to allow fair market access .
We have to make China understand that if they want to lick their environment into shape , if they want to create an efficient energy supply - after all , China has plenty of money , there is no problem on that front - then we need to be given access to their public procurement market .
Then we will be able to sell our products in China in a sensible trade in goods , and China will be able to purchase modern coal-fired power stations and sewage plants and suchlike and make use of our technologies .
China does not need handouts , it has plenty of capital : it has the largest foreign currency reserves in the world .
China is currently setting up a fund to invest its money worldwide .
Our message to the Chinese Government should be : invest your money in your own country !
Do something for environmental protection and energy security , improve safety in the coalmines .
If we are successful , we will also be able to improve trade relations in the long term .
Of course , as you indicated , these agreements also contain a human rights clause because we have been discussing human rights with China for years ; we must stand firm on that point .
As a previous speaker said , no one expects China to respect all human rights overnight , but we do need to see significant progress .
The People 's Republic of China signed the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights several years ago , but has not ratified it and does not apply it .
So we need to turn around and say : you chose to sign it , you said you wanted to uphold human rights , now do it !
( ES ) Commissioner , I would like to thank you for the information that you have given us and also for your work in favour of balanced relations that are beneficial to both parties .
I agree that China must not be seen just as a threat to certain sectors , but also as a great opportunity .
We also agree , however , that it must continue to make efforts to apply the agreements , to open up its markets and to create an open climate for investments .
As you have pointed out , European industry is still complaining that there are an excessive number of barriers and obstacles that put it at a competitive disadvantage .
In this regard , we are still talking about tariff barriers and non-tariff barriers , such as piracy , counterfeiting , discrimination between national and imported products and so on .
We therefore believe that opening up negotiations on a new partnership and cooperation agreement with China is a good initiative that must enable the European Union to strengthen its bilateral trade policy on the basis of the principle of reciprocity , which you yourself have mentioned .
We are delighted to agree that the issue of human rights should be one of the issues tackled within the negotiations on the agreement , of course .
Specifically , we must point out that the Chinese Government is making progress in this area and the rights recognised by the International Labour Organisation should also be taken into account , since they are a crucial aspect of human rights .
The agreement must also serve to continue promoting a commitment on the part of the Chinese authorities to effectively - not just theoretically - protect intellectual property rights through the adoption of relevant measures in the administrative , legal and border-control fields .
I would like to refer to the ' memorandum of understanding ' between the European Union and China on trade for the textile and clothing sector , which expires this year .
There is concern in the textile industry about its expiry and about the fact that the conditions of the agreement between the United States and China are being extended until the end of 2008 .
In view of this disparity , therefore , I would also like to ask you what measures can be taken to prevent situations of tension such as those which took place in 2005 .
( PL ) - Mr President , once again this forum is discussing trade relations with China , which has over the past decade emerged as a world economic and political power .
In October last year , the European Commission approved a programme for EU-China relations , which entailed an increase in mutual undertakings .
In this situation , it would be sensible to support changes for greater openness and pluralism in China , as well as cooperation on energy and climate change because we know that China is one of the world 's major producers of greenhouse gases .
On the other hand , we must not forget about the alarm that was caused when thousands of tubes of counterfeit toothpaste , some of them manufactured in China , were discovered in Spain , and containing doses of toxic diethylene glycol far in excess of European standards .
China means cheaper goods in European shops and greater competition , but is it always healthy ?
I am in favour of making the best of the opportunities offered by the dynamic development of relations with China , especially following my visit there , when I was able to see first hand this fast-developing world power .
The Commission says that a strong Chinese economy is in the economic interests of Europe , and rightly so .
However , we should not forget to look after the interests of the members of the Community above all , and to assess the opportunities but also the threats that cooperation with this Asian tiger poses through the prism of these interests .
( SV ) I am convinced that fear of China 's economic growth really is exaggerated .
I believe that those who have a sufficiently long historical perspective on trade policy recognise a good deal of the disquiet and a good many of the arguments from the debate about the incorporation into the world economy of Japan and of other Asiatic tigers ( such as Korea and Taiwan ) .
Certainly , it is easy to allow oneself to be frightened by the relative size of the countries concerned .
As the Commissioner pointed out , however , their economies supplement Europe 's economy , and their size is , rather , a great opportunity for Europe .
I am convinced that the strong and sustained growth and the boom being experienced in the world right now is due in large part to the fact that China , India and other large countries in the world are in the process of being incorporated into the world economy .
That does not , however , mean that there are no problems in trade relations .
I believe that we have many important problems to get to grips with , for example infringements of copyright and issues concerning intellectual property rights , as well as Chinese markets closed to everything from financial services to car parts .
I am almost more concerned , however , about the protectionist tendencies to which China 's growth is giving rise in Europe .
Not that I believe the Commissioner to be in favour of such tendencies , but there are many voices that are now demanding more trade barriers in order to stop imports from China .
Talk of stopping , for example , Chinese textile exports has been heard in this House in the course of this evening .
I am convinced that the European trade barriers against China cost European consumers and European companies more money than do imports of Chinese goods .
We should , therefore , continue to combat European trade barriers rather than Chinese exports .
The fact is that China 's growing prosperity , together with trade with China , not only give thousands or millions or , indeed , hundreds of millions of Chinese people richer and more dignified lives ; they also make Europe richer .
We must not forget that trade is never a zero sum game .
We are both winners .
( ES ) Mr President , allow me to begin by saying something that is said so often at these night sittings , which is that we are discussing such an important issue amongst such a select band that I have the impression that we do not even have a representative from the Chinese Embassy present at this sitting .
I am entirely confident that the verbatim reports of debates that Parliament 's services produce so efficiently will enable them to read what we are saying .
If I am to follow on from the previous speech , I must draw a conclusion : the globalisation that we are currently seeing would be unimaginable without the explosion of China .
China 's presence on the world market has simply been a decisive and unquestionable reality , but a very recent one let us not forget .
The explosion of China , which has been direct and immense in the case of production , will be even more so in the case of consumption and also in distribution at world level , becoming one of the main determining factors of both elements .
But neither must we forget that the quantity and characteristics of Chinese goods , largely defined by the profile of its workforce , its internal market , limited in income terms but incomparable in absolute quantity terms , and , more recently , its investment capacity , make China a great supply and demand power .
However , as a wonderful article today by our fellow Member Mr Martin points out , China is a key factor in the success or failure of many international negotiations , including that of the recent G4 meeting .
Can our approach to relations with China be simply to say that everything is a free-for-all , that is to say , all doors are open to what we send and what we may receive ?
I believe not .
We must do it in a regulated manner and , furthermore , we must demand clear reciprocity , the removal of barriers to access for European products , adequate protection of intellectual property rights and patents , full respect for the standards required in social terms - which I believe to be crucial - and equal respect for environmental and safety criteria for goods produced in China .
And of course we must not forget human rights .
We are not just talking about values in metaphysical terms .
We are talking about rights applicable to people , to citizens like ourselves .
We are talking about values that are quite simply beyond dispute and which cannot be treated in relative terms .
Just today more people have been executed in China , and that is the most serious violation of human rights imaginable .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for a very clear and convincing message and I see that we share the same concerns .
Ten months ago this Parliament decided that trade relations with China require reciprocal market access , which has to be founded on the WTO rules , fair competition and a reasonable balance of interests .
The ' round ' situation , sadly , does not match those expectations today .
We are worried about the increasing trade deficit with China .
We are worried about the fact that 70 % of all counterfeit products on the European markets originate from China and that EU industries are suffering extensive damage as a result of unfair competition and social dumping .
At the same time , many EU exporters are handicapped when trying to enter Chinese markets .
Therefore , the EU representatives should insist first of all on providing legal security for foreign companies in China .
I agree with the Commissioner that imbalance in the relationship is mainly a product of politics and not economics .
The widespread use of slave labour , including children , is an extremely alarming problem that should be addressed at the highest possible level .
The recent cases exposed are only the tip of an iceberg .
China has now been a member of the WTO for six years but it has not implemented significant WTO commitments , including protection of intellectual property , national treatment and transparency .
I still see leverage to create a fair and reciprocal balance of relations in linking firmly China 's request for market economy status with Peking fully meeting its WTO commitments .
Lastly , China is to be seen as a sobering example , bearing in mind Russia 's impending WTO membership .
As far as we would be hesitant about insisting on reciprocity and meeting commitments , it would be unrealistic to hope that EU support for Russia 's membership will make Mr Putin 's state behave according to the WTO rules .
( HU ) Two weeks ago , 20 Members of the European Parliament went to China , and their trip there confirmed that the picture is much more complex and nuanced than what we have available to us here .
I agree fully with Mr Fjellner that the 21st century could be China 's century , and that for the European Union this represents an enormous challenge and an enormous opportunity .
There is very great asymmetry not only in trade , but also in the fact that the Chinese are much more familiar with the European Union than we in the European Union are with China .
The picture is much more nuanced , be that in terms of human rights or on other questions .
This is an enormous competitive disadvantage for us .
The problem is not only that we do not know the Mandarin Chinese language , but that they know the English and European languages much better - this is an enormous asymmetry .
We need to overcome this , for if we do not make changes to this situation , we will not progress in excellence .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , bearing in mind your probable desire for this House to rise before midnight , I would just like to say that overwhelmingly the contributions to this debate have been very balanced and very realistic .
I think that Mr Calabuig Rull and Mr Carnero González , for example , made appropriate observations in stressing the fact that China is an opportunity for Europe , as well as a threat .
Another appropriate observation was that of Mr Fjellner that we need to take the longer-term political view in our relations with China , but he also referred to the growth of protectionism , of a sort of Chinese nationalism which is becoming more prominent in China 's trade practices .
My view is that China 's nationalism does not sit comfortably with the enormous benefits that it is deriving from the internationalist trading system that is based on reciprocity .
Without reciprocity China will not be able to expect in the future the continued goodwill and balanced approach that it has been receiving from Europe .
The fact is that China is falling below our expectations .
It is not that it is failing to comply with or implement all its WTO obligations and commitments , because in many respects it is .
But in certain other key areas of economic activity in China , in financial and other services , it is failing to implement fully the commitments that it made upon its accession to the WTO .
One or two concerns have been expressed about textiles .
This House will recall that in 2005 I negotiated a voluntary agreement with China that gave European industry an extra period of two-and-a-half years to restructure and to adapt to the new global situation in the textile sector .
It was a once-and-for-all , bilaterally concluded agreement and the Commission therefore has no means simply to seek an extension of the agreed levels that have been operating beyond the beginning of 2008 .
However , I will be putting in place means to monitor and to keep under surveillance any sudden and large-scale changes in imports of Chinese textiles that threaten to disrupt our market in Europe , and I will consider what , if any , action I can take in the light of disturbances to our market .
This is quite distinct from the use of trade defence instruments .
The textiles agreement was based on fair trade .
It was not unfair trade .
It was just a disturbance that we were unable to take on on such a scale at this time .
In other respects , the use of TDI is not against China 's natural competitive advantage but against unfair competition , and we will retain the right and the full use of our trade defence instruments and employ them as and when necessary .
In conclusion , others have referred to the need for China to consciously build up the standards it operates in relation to social , labour and environmental standards .
That will always be a feature of the discussions that I undertake with Chinese officials .
I am personally very committed to growing technology transfer with China on climate change projects .
This is a key way to ensure Chinese interest in tackling climate change .
It is a win-win situation .
The EU can export energy-efficient , clean technology and China can make a contribution to tackling its environmental problems .
This is at the heart of our dialogue with China on climate change and it is something in the trade realm that I intend to build up in the future .
That concludes my remarks in response to this debate , which I greatly welcome .
As I say , it has been very balanced , and I will certainly ensure that I and my services take into account fully the remarks and observations that have been made by Members of this House this evening .
Mr President , I asked the Commissioner a very clear question : at the moment there is unrest in my country , a big news report on a mission of the Commission agreeing to the export of so-called secondary resources such as old paper , recycling material , etc .
What are you going to do , Commissioner ?
I ask you to conclude agreements with countries such as China and India and pause until 1 January 2008 , because otherwise there is a standstill in exports in harbours like Rotterdam .
I asked you what you were going to do .
I did not get an answer .
I hope you forgot it .
Member of the Commission .
I think in the circumstances and in view of the time , it might be better if I gave the Member a written response to his question .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the last serious and very recent case of widely-consumed counterfeited goods - a toothpaste containing antifreeze , sold on the European market and produced in China - brings back into the limelight the problem of combating ' multinational forgery ' .
It is in this large Asian country , where de facto slavery is permitted for workers deprived of any sort of protection , that most of the products of the counterfeiting industry are concentrated - medicines , cosmetics and food products , as well as toys and items of clothing containing carcinogenic chemical substances that are strictly prohibited in the European Union .
Unfortunately , this is a phenomenon that , while until a few years ago was restricted to high-end products ( luxury lotions , perfumes , watches and bags ) , is now expanding to include products within the reach of an ever-growing number of users , leading to a high risk for consumer health .
Today , more than ever , it is necessary for the political and industrial West to adopt a strong position towards powerful , wealthy China .
On the one hand , we need to step up coordination between the Member States in inspections of imported products and , on the other hand , we need to persuade the Chinese Government to apply wide-scale , very strict on-the-ground , checks in order to protect European industry from unfair competition resulting partly from counterfeiting and piracy .
in writing . - ( FR ) China represents a major political and commercial challenge .
It is in fact essential to rethink economic and commercial relations between the EU and China , based on respect for the rules of fair and honest competition as well as on the application of World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rules .
China must commit itself in practice to global responsibility and in favour of the establishment of commercial relationships based on reciprocity .
Our European markets are open to those who open theirs , but they are closed to those who close them .
We must not resign ourselves to unfair competition and monetary , social and ecological dumping practices .
On the question of environmental standards , the EU must , in the framework of the new agreement , denounce the importing of products into the Community market that do not respect the environmental and phytosanitary rules ( which the EU itself imposes on Community producers ) .
China is a major stakeholder and must cooperate on the matter of climate change and energy in order to strengthen international environmental governance .
The achievement of parallel progress on the political and commercial fronts is , one can understand , a more than decisive factor for an EU - China agreement .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 12 midnight )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
PNR Agreement with the United States ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Presentation of the programme of the Portuguese presidency ( debate )
I am delighted to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council , the Portuguese Prime Minister , José Sócrates , to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
As always , it is also a pleasure to have the President of the Commission , José Manuel Durão Barroso , with us .
( Applause )
As you can tell from the names , this is a very special line-up .
Portugal is at the centre of the European Union .
It is a great pleasure to invite the President-in-Office of the European Council , Prime Minister José Sócrates , to take the floor .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Mr President - my dear Mr Poettering , my dear Mr Barroso , honourable Members , at the start of the half-year of the Portuguese Presidency , in the presence of the legitimate representatives of the citizens of Europe , I would like to reaffirm the main guiding principle of this Presidency : the construction of a stronger Europe for a better world .
To this end , we make a clear commitment : we will do everything possible to transcend the period of doubts and uncertainties as to the course the European project should follow .
We should like to ask all Members here , in the seat of European democracy , to support us in that common objective .
It is well known that Portugal was not a founder Member State of the European Communities .
However , when we restored democracy in our country , in 1974 , after 48 years under an authoritarian regime , our principal objective was to join the European Communities , as they were known at the time .
We achieved that objective in 1986 .
On assuming the Presidency of the Council of Ministers of the Union for the third time , I would like to reassure you of the Portuguese Government 's determination and its commitment towards promoting and strengthening the values of peace , freedom , solidarity and prosperity that inspired the founder Members in 1957 ; those values which we , now 27 Member States and almost 500 million citizens , reaffirmed last March in Berlin .
I am confident , honourable Members , that this half-year will see us emerge from the deadlocks and obstructions that have been holding up the European project for too long .
The example of the European project is motivating many peoples and countries in various parts of the world , who are the first to ask the European Union to play a more active role in world affairs , and they have difficulty in understanding our hesitations .
I have always considered , and continue to consider , the European project as one of the noblest and most vital political projects of our times .
The construction of Europe is important for the European economy , for the promotion of European values and for European citizens .
Yet the construction of Europe is an equally important factor in meeting global challenges , taking advantage of the opportunities of these times of change and building a fairer , more stable and more developed world .
It is not only the people of Europe who need a strong Europe ; the world also needs a Europe with a proactive voice .
Mr President , honourable Members , I think you will agree with me that the success of a Presidency always depends on the clarity of its programme .
Our priorities for the next six months are clearly defined : the reform of the Treaties , an agenda for modernising Europe 's economies and societies and the strengthening of the role of Europe in the world .
The biggest challenge , of course , lies in pursuing the process of reforming the Treaties , on the basis of the mandate adopted at the last European Council .
I have pleasure in commending to you the merits of the strategy and negotiations conducted by the German Chancellor , Angela Merkel , whom we have consistently supported throughout the last six months .
I would also like to acknowledge with gratitude the clear positions adopted by Parliament in the Resolution it adopted on the basis of the Barón Crespo-Brok report , which led to an agreement which was reached between the Member States that preserved the core objectives of the Constitutional Treaty and which incorporated the signals given by the French and Dutch referendums .
The progress that was made at the last Europe Council was only possible as a result of the impetus it was given by the European Parliament , which has always maintained a strong , consistent and constructive position in that respect , and never resigned itself to the deadlock at the time .
The agreement reached at the 21 and 22 June European Council took the form of a clear and precise mandate , as Portugal has always considered necessary . We are now in a position to move forward .
I would like to make it clear to Parliament that there is one point on which I have no doubts . The decisive moment was in October 2006 when the Heads of State or Government of the three countries that made up the trio of Presidencies - Germany , Portugal and Slovenia - agreed to prioritise the resolution of the institutional impasse in their programme .
At that time , in October 2006 , there were few who believed that such an objective was possible . The fact is that that objective is now within our reach .
We therefore approach that task with confidence and should now complete it by transforming the mandate into a new Treaty .
I know we are facing a difficult and demanding process of negotiation and reaching agreement .
I am naturally prepared for the problems that always arise , especially in the final stages of negotiating processes . I know , however , that we can do it .
One thing is clear to me : our mandate is not to change the mandate . Our mandate is to transform that mandate into a Treaty .
The mandate , furthermore , is clear .
It is clear as to which parts of the previous Constitutional Treaty must be abandoned , as to what should be retained in the Reforming Treaty and as to what innovative new aspects should be added to the Treaty of Nice .
The best thing we can do , honourable Members , is to take advantage of the political momentum . We have to move quickly .
This is why I decided to open the Intergovernmental Conference on 23 July , separately from the General Affairs and External Relations Council .
On the same day , we will be distributing a draft Treaty drawn up on the basis of the detailed instructions in the mandate .
In the course of the same week we shall be holding meetings with legal experts to examine the text and identify any potential difficulties .
The informal meeting of Foreign Ministers on 7 and 8 September will be used to take stock of how this is progressing .
We intend to play an active role in ensuring that agreement on the Treaty can be reached during the informal European Council in Lisbon on 18 and 19 October .
That is our objective and I think you will agree with me that this timetable is closest to the spirit and desire of all the European institutions and also the one that will best serve the interests of the Union .
I am relying on the European Parliament to achieve that objective .
That , furthermore , is why I have argued that Parliament should have three representatives at the Intergovernmental Conference , and not two as on previous occasions , thus ensuring greater representation for this House .
For the same reason , moreover , I am also going to propose that , whenever the Intergovernmental Conference is attended by Heads of State or Government , Parliament be represented by its President .
I know I can rely on all the institutions to contribute .
I am grateful to the European Commission and the Central European Bank for issuing their opinions promptly .
I am grateful to Parliament for its efforts in ensuring that its opinion could also be adopted today , thus fulfilling the necessary conditions to enable the Intergovernmental Conference to begin this month as well .
I know I can rely on the willingness and commitment of all the Member States .
This is a moment of convergence when all the institutions come together so that a prompt decision on the Treaty can provide a clear sign of Europe 's confidence and determination to make progress in its project .
Madam President , honourable Members , the reform of the Treaties is still only one of the tasks facing the Union in the next six months and I should like , if I may , to take a few minutes to talk to you about some other extremely important issues within the Union .
Apart from institutional matters , the citizens of Europe are demanding answers to questions that directly relate to their everyday lives , in which they recognise that Europe must produce practical results that make a difference and help improve their living conditions .
I believe no one is in any doubt that Europe must invest further in modernisation .
Just over seven years ago , António Guterres , then Prime Minister of Portugal , came to this House to present the Lisbon Strategy . Up to now , that Strategy has been the road map for the modernisation of the European economy and society .
I therefore have particular pleasure in telling you that the ' Lisbon Strategy ' will once again be at the heart of our plans .
The strategy defined in 2000 with a view to strengthening competitiveness and social cohesion , by investing in knowledge and innovation , is still the right way forward and still has the support of the main European political forces .
What we shall be doing is actively to contribute to a new round of the Lisbon agenda , which will be adopted in the spring of 2008 during the Slovenian Presidency .
We shall prepare for that new round by maintaining the balance between the three components of that agenda , namely the economic , social and environmental components .
The review of the internal market will enable us to place the accent on the business competitiveness , on opening up the markets , on eliminating context costs , and on the role the cultural industries can pay in terms of job creation , economic growth and innovation .
The next half-year will also be particularly relevant as regards political , energy and environmental options , and , on those matters , Europe can have only one objective : to continue to take the lead in environmental issues and , in particular , in the fight against climate change .
We shall therefore meet the objectives of promoting the debate on a technological plan of action for energy and the environment , and will emphasise the role of biofuels , particularly in the context of the report that emerged from the first summit meeting between the European Union and Brazil .
We wish to give the social dimension of the ' Lisbon Strategy ' the visibility and relevance it deserves .
Ten years after the launch of the ' European Employment Strategy ' , it seems essential to us to encourage a debate on the best ways of coordinating employment policies , with a view to boosting the creation of sustainable jobs in a context of global competition .
This line of action pursued by the Portuguese Presidency will be closely linked with the training of human resources , the reconciliation of work and family life and the fight against poverty and exclusion .
The European social model , with its well-known diversity , requires us to reflect together on the sustainability of pension and retirement systems , and also to identify the reforms that are necessary in the labour markets and systems of protection against social risks .
In that context , the aim of our debate on so-called ' flexicurity ' should be to find integrated and balanced solutions , which should be reflected in general shared principles at European level that take account of the diverse social conditions in the various Member States .
Honourable Members , for the Portuguese Presidency , one of the basic core values of the European project lies in the interface between freedom and security . In that context , one of the Presidency 's priorities will be to strengthen police and judicial cooperation in the fight against terrorism and crime .
Terrorism remains one of the greatest threats to international peace and security . Democracies are not afraid of terrorism and know how to stand firm in the face of that threat .
If there is a good example of that firmness it was provided last week by the British Government , to which I should like to pass on a message of solidarity from all the countries in the Union .
The fight against terrorism must therefore remain a common objective for all the Member States , because only European cooperation will make it possible to prevent , protect ourselves against and combat terrorism .
The Portuguese Presidency will work to implement ongoing initiatives under the EU strategy against terrorism , the action plan to combat terrorism and the continued implementation of the strategy to prevent the radicalisation and recruitment of terrorists , which will be reviewed during the next six months .
We therefore consider it urgent to find a replacement for Mr De Vries and define the resources and the mandate that will enable his replacement to perform his or her duties effectively .
Honourable Members , history has taught us that there is no freedom without security .
This is why the Union 's security policy is also essential in order to preserve the open and tolerant nature of European societies .
It is therefore a source of pride for me to say that it was Portugal that suggested , and it was also a Portuguese company that designed SIS-ONE4ALL , the technological solution whereby the new Member States could become full members of the Schengen area and whereby borders with those countries are to disappear at the end of the Portuguese Presidency .
We shall thus fulfil one of the greatest wishes of those citizens : freedom of movement of persons in Union territory .
Honourable Members , I should also like to say a few words about immigration policy . We shall give special attention to this issue during our Presidency .
Europe today is an area that welcomes millions of immigrants who live , work and bring up their children here , and whose contribution is essential to European economic growth .
We must therefore draw up a European immigration policy based on prevention of illegal immigration , but also one of including and integrating legal immigrants and of effective cooperation with their countries of origin , one that can regulate migratory flows to our mutual benefit .
Only a policy effective in both the country of origin and the country of destination , one that addresses both the causes and the effects , will be capable of dealing with the scale of the phenomenon in a manner compatible with our values and responsibilities .
Mr President , honourable Members , the current international situation is creating special responsibilities for the European Union and I should now like to speak to you about the European Union foreign policy agenda under the Portuguese Presidency .
The citizens of Europe are unequivocal in their demand for us to take an active role on the international stage , based on the values of international law , mutual respect , dialogue and cooperation .
Similarly the international community expects the Union to play a committed and consistent role in major international affairs .
In the second half of 2007 , there are decisions on delicate world issues that cannot be put off - the future of Kosovo , the nuclear dossier on Iran , the humanitarian crisis in Darfur . There is to be a series of especially important bilateral summits , with India , China , Russia and Ukraine .
Relations with the United States , in the context defined by the Washington Summit , which took place under the German Presidency , will be monitored as closely as one would expect of such strategically important relations .
In all cases , we will be equal to our responsibilities as holders of the Presidency , and will work closely with Javier Solana , High Representative for External Policy , and the European Commission .
I should like to draw your attention to three initiatives with which we are closely linked and which deserve special emphasis : the EU-Brazil Summit , which has already taken place , the EU-Africa Summit and Euro-Med meetings .
In this first week of the Presidency , we have already held the Summit with Brazil with the aim of moving relations to a higher level of mutual understanding and close cooperation , at all levels .
This initiative is particularly dear to the Portuguese , as we share our language and much of our culture and history with Brazil .
We are seeking to create the political conditions whereby , as is happening with other emerging economic powers , a formal relationship of mutual benefit to Europe and Brazil may be created , which will in turn help us achieve the kind of relations we should like to enjoy with Latin America as a whole .
Closer ties with Brazil will also bring practical results in terms of our response to global challenges .
Last week 's summit with President Lula has also made it possible to keep open a window of opportunity , which we must now make the most of in the Doha Round negotiations , and we shall do everything possible to support the European Commission in that context .
I am among those who take the view that the Doha Round negotiations represent an important factor in regulating globalisation and that the conclusion of the negotiations will be highly positive . This should continue to be a priority for the European institutions .
The EUROMED ministerial meetings form part of a series of negotiations , including what are known as the Barcelona Process and the New Neighbourhood Policy . These meetings serve to highlight the importance we attach to reviving the crucial political debate with our partners to the south of the Mediterranean .
We share common concerns and are facing challenges relating to development and social cohesion that emphasise the growing interdependence of the two sides of the Mediterranean , and we are convinced that we can help overcome certain obstacles in essential areas such as the management of migratory flows and the potential contribution of diasporas to their countries of origin , with the support and commitment of the European countries and the relevant international institutions .
Finally , we propose to hold a second EU-Africa Summit , having been behind the previous Summit in Cairo in 2000 , which , as you will recall , took place under a Portuguese Presidency .
Without overlooking certain difficulties that will have to be overcome , we are convinced that there is no justification for the fact that no meeting of this kind has been held at the highest level for more than seven years , when it comes to two continents with such close historical ties and that are so interdependent in today 's world .
Portugal is in a particularly good position to take on this responsibility and is very much counting on the African Union and all European and African countries to ensure that this Summit offers a chance to revive dialogue and cooperation on matters of the greatest common interest .
We shall therefore take on the task of defining a new strategic partnership between the European Union and Africa aimed at sustainable development , ensuring peace , fighting endemic diseases and maintaining a balanced partnership in the management of migratory flows , to our mutual benefit .
Mr President , honourable Members , this is our agenda , which I have briefly described to you .
I am aware that we are holding the Presidency at a time when the international situation is extremely delicate and that we have been ambitious in the definition of our own objectives .
We know that Presidencies on their own do not resolve all the problems that arise , but we also know that we can make a difference if we adopt clear objectives , if we are humble in the way we pursue them and if we demonstrate the will to reach the necessary consensus .
Many European philosophers define today 's world with the prefix ' post ' - post-democratic , post-modern or post-industrial - it is for them a ' post ' world .
All that this concept really means is that we are living in a world of change , accelerated change , and we do not yet fully understand what we see happening .
Amidst all these uncertainties and unknown factors , however , we believe one thing is certain : in a changing world the worst mistake is to stand still .
That is a mistake that Europe must not make .
Honourable Members , our firm proposal is to ensure that Europe does not stand still and to advance the European project in the cause of creating a better world .
( Applause )
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for the presentation of your programme .
The applause shows how well it has been received here in the European Parliament .
Above all , we would like to thank you for making it clear that the European Parliament will be represented at all levels of the Intergovernmental Conference .
You personally have always supported that approach , which guarantees that the European Parliament will be able to give its approval to convening an Intergovernmental Conference .
We in the European Parliament also have great expectations for our work with the Council General Secretariat .
I would now like to invite the President of the Commission , José Manuel Durão Barroso , to address the House .
President of the Commission .
( PT ) Mr President , Prime Minister , honourable Members , I should like first of all to extend a very special greeting to the Prime Minister of Portugal at the start of the Portuguese Presidency .
The programme outlined for the Portuguese Presidency is ambitious and demanding , and the Intergovernmental Conference will naturally occupy a prominent place , particularly until the European Council meeting in October , but the Portuguese Presidency involves more than the very important issue of the Treaty .
Other tough assignments include foreign relations , with important summit meetings being held with many of our partners , the relaunched Lisbon Agenda for Growth and Employment , and innovation .
Yesterday the Commission adopted its opinion for the Intergovernmental Conference ( IGC ) .
As I have already stated in this House , the IGC about to begin will be of a very different kind from its predecessors .
Thanks to the work that has already been done , to the efforts , in particular of the German Presidency , which I would also like to commend , and to the fact that we have been able to make such clear progress , we can say that the degree of detail in this mandate is unprecedented .
Never has an IGC begun with such a precise mandate .
In certain areas , in fact , that mandate adopts the wording of the 2004 IGC , while in others it uses highly-developed legal and technical language .
As a result of that degree of precision , we can now say that the central question is no longer about its political substance , since that was essentially resolved when we met in the European Council , but rather about keeping faithfully to the content of the mandate .
We therefore need to be clear on this .
I want to make the position of the Commission clear : we fully support the mandate and consider that the issue does not need to be discussed again .
The crux of the matter , as Mr Sócrates has told us , is to transform the mandate into a Treaty .
It is not to create a new mandate .
That would be very much a backward step , and in my view , it would be inconceivable for us to go back on what has unanimously been agreed .
It would be a sign of a serious lack of confidence if we were now to try to renegotiate a mandate to which everyone has agreed .
It is impossible to build a strong Europe without confidence in the value of the commitments we have made .
It is also true that , from the Commission 's point of view , the mandate is neither ideal nor perfect . On many points we would have been more ambitious .
Nobody finds the mandate absolutely ideal , and that is how the European project works and has always worked .
Since 1957 , our integration project has always moved forward by means of political compromise and not with ideal solutions . That is once again how it will be .
Nor should we forget that the agreement we reached at the European Council was hard won , based as it was on a delicate political compromise .
Our responsibility is to maintain that compromise at the IGC , all the way to final ratification .
The Commission fully supports the Portuguese Presidency 's intention to hold a short , condensed IGC .
It will begin on 23 July and , if all goes well , and we shall do everything in our power to ensure that it does , it may be concluded at the informal European Council in October .
The Commission does , however , reserve the right to express its opinion on positions and proposals of governments of Member States during the IGC and , in particular , we shall be vigilant to ensure that the mandate is duly fulfilled .
We think it is our duty to do so .
Mr President , Prime Minister , honourable Members , as we have already mentioned , the Portuguese Presidency goes beyond this vital matter of the Treaty and I am pleased to note that the Prime Minister and President of the Council intends to give particular attention to the Lisbon Strategy .
The Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Employment , which we collectively relaunched in 2005 , is now producing some quite encouraging results .
Unemployment in the European Union has fallen from 10 % in the mid-nineties to 7 % last June .
Our analyses prove that structural unemployment is also falling , which is fairly encouraging for Europe in the medium and long term . Our data also show that there has been a 50 % increase in women 's employment .
These figures are most welcome in a Europe we want to make more competitive , fairer and more inclusive .
Economic growth has also reached its highest levels since 2000 , in a context of the higher potential and growth of the European economy , which leads us to believe that the recent growth is structural and not merely cyclical .
It is fair to say that this progress is largely due to the reforms inspired by the relaunched Lisbon Agenda for Growth and Employment .
The fact is that , by giving the various governments of the Member States a common reform framework , Europe is facilitating , supporting and strengthening precisely that movement to reform which , admittedly at varying speeds and with different scopes , all European governments have been implementing in one way or another .
It is therefore appropriate to emphasise here that the much-maligned Lisbon Strategy is a crucial factor in the economic and social modernisation of Europe .
The fact is , however , that there is no room for complacency . There is still a lot to do to make the European economy more competitive and European society fairer .
In particular , we must increase the contribution of innovation to economic growth .
I know this is one of the priorities of the Portuguese Presidency and this is something I applaud .
Innovation is the driving force behind the triumvirate of the Energy Technology Plan , the European Technology Institute and the first Innovation and Technology Community , which we intend to see specifically targeted at energy issues and the fight against climate change , and which we hope will be launched during the Portuguese Presidency .
This is the clearest example that the relaunched Lisbon Strategy is seeking to connect the different aspects , such as this key central aspect of the fight against climate change and energy security .
To achieve success in that area , we must do more in the field of innovation and that is why I am pleased to note that the Portuguese Presidency intends to include innovation as an essential topic at the December European Council .
Education , scientific research and innovation are essential elements of the European society we want to build in response to the most pressing concerns and challenges posed by this new century .
To achieve the objectives we have set in the context of European energy and climate policy , we have prepared an ambitious and consistent strategy to ensure sustainability , security of supply and European competitiveness .
It should be emphasised , however , that for the success of that strategy we must warmly applaud the conclusions of the March European Council , which mark a turning point in the history of energy and the fight against climate change .
In order to achieve results now we must step up our efforts in the areas of scientific research , technological development and innovation .
The technological plan in the area of clean energy technologies is a cornerstone of that strategy .
The creation of the European Institute of Technology , which is now so well received in the European Parliament , also constitutes an essential means of increasing European competitiveness by mobilising efforts on a European scale and better liaison between knowledge and innovation .
Mr President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , as the Commission states in the opinion we adopted yesterday , the reforming Treaty will reinforce the capacity for action of the Union in external relations , which is highly symbolic : two of the central pillars of the Portuguese Presidency are institutional reform and the Union 's external relations .
The active cooperation between the Presidency and the Commission in this latter field is obvious .
Last week , Mr Sócrates and I myself went to the final session of the African Union Summit in Accra , and on the following day we attended the first EU-Brazil Summit .
With Brazil , our latest strategic partner , we share an ambitious agenda that includes energy , mainly biofuels , which we want to be sustainable , the fight against climate change , and trade relations .
In the case of international trade , we have made a very strong appeal to President Lula to reach an agreement at the Doha negotiations . The Commission emphasises the commercial importance of Doha because trade drives economic growth and development .
Trade has lifted millions out of poverty in Asia and it can go on doing so , not only in the Asian countries , but also in South America and Africa .
International trade must , however , be based on multilateral rules and institutions and the European Union has a vital role to play in the consolidation of international rules and governance . Doha is therefore an essential issue .
It has to do not only with trade , although trade is important in itself ; it has to do with our multilateral vision .
We cannot actively support multilateralism and then defend unilateralism when it comes to trade .
We also need to make progress on this matter because it is not only an agenda for trade , it is an agenda for social development , an agenda that can strengthen our links with developing countries .
In the case of Africa , the strategic partnership between Europe and Africa is also essential for international stability .
The EU is the main source of financial , economic and technical aid for Africa .
Europe is the major trading partner of the African continent , importing more than all the other G8 countries .
From the beginning of its mandate , the Commission I have the honour of chairing has made relations with Africa one of its most urgent priorities .
For example , the Commission has opened its first EU history college outside Europe in Addis Ababa , where we held a working meeting with the Commission of the African Union .
Yet there is still much to be done in relations between Europeans and Africans .
The imminent EU-Africa Summit , to be held under the Portuguese Presidency , is a unique opportunity to set an ambitious agenda , including practical issues such as energy , migration , the fight against climate change and , obviously , democracy and human rights .
We have a duty to talk with our African partners about issues of democracy , human rights and governance .
We have talked with the rest of the world , it would be incomprehensible for us not to talk with Africa .
There are , admittedly , certain political and diplomatic problems to be resolved , but those problems , the relevance of which we have to acknowledge , cannot and must not become obstacles to an essential strategic partnership for the future of globalisation .
Africa and Europe must work together .
I have said more than once that the EU has a mission for the 21st century , namely the promotion of justice , freedom and solidarity throughout the world .
The EU cannot and must not be a group of countries dedicated to looking inwards .
It can and must be a force for reform and stability in the world , and for the defence of European interests and the promotion of European values .
We are a community of values , particularly the values of freedom and solidarity .
The African continent is undoubtedly a region that needs our support and commitment .
The European Union cannot close its eyes to the drama that is being acted out so close to it .
Before I finish , I should like to wish the Portuguese Government every success and reaffirm the Commission 's absolute willingness to work with the Presidency .
I may say that I have total confidence in the ability of Portugal - a country that has proved its commitment to Europe - of the Portuguese Government and authorities , and of all the country 's political forces to work for Europe .
We share with the Portuguese Presidency the excellent slogan it has chosen for this period : a stronger Europe for a better world .
Together we shall succeed in working to this end .
( Applause )


Mr President , Mr Sócrates , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , my group welcomes the Portuguese Presidency 's ambitious motto : ' A stronger Union for a better world ' .
By making its will to build central to its mandate , the Portuguese Presidency is following the German Presidency 's lead .
And by capitalising on the dynamism of Mrs Merkel 's achievements , you will show , Mr Sócrates , that a Presidency 's success depends on its having a strong political will and a strategy of convergence on ambitious , but realistic , priorities .
Your success will also depend on your cooperating with this Parliament . Involve us very closely in your work and your decision-making .
As far as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is concerned , institutional reform , the security of our fellow citizens , the pursuit of the internal market and the consolidation of growth are the crucial aspects of your Presidency .
The agreement reached on 21 and 22 June takes up the bulk of the advances contained in the previous text .
If the Member States ratify it by spring 2009 , Europe will finally be able to make effective , transparent and democratic decisions in areas such as security , growth , energy , climate change and demographics .
Going back on the commitments made would be to regard the European Union as a house of cards : one card fewer and the whole house collapses .
As far as our group - and in particular Mr Brok who will represent it - are concerned , the Intergovernmental Conference must be devoted to the legal finalisation of the revised treaties and should be concluded , as you wish , Mr Sócrates , in time for the European Council in the autumn .
Mr Sócrates , while a stronger Union for a better world motivates your work , you cannot overlook the security of our fellow citizens , and you have spoken of this matter at length this morning .
The terrorist acts in the United Kingdom and elsewhere in Europe and the breaking of the ceasefire by ETA worry us and call for Europe-wide anti-terrorist coordination .
Mr Sócrates , I am aware of the Member States ' reluctance to cooperate in this area .
The ' every man for himself ' principle must be eradicated ; it is the security of the people of Europe that must prevail .
Faced with international crime , terrorist cells , the complexity of the networks and the sophistication of the methods used , not least regarding migration , we are in danger of being caught up and we have a duty to act immediately .
The vacancy of the post of EU anti-terrorist coordinator is unacceptable . Thank you for your commitment .
Mr Sócrates , let us show the same determination on the subject of our security as we do on climate change and energy .
The victims of the terrorist attacks require us to stand united .
Under your leadership , we expect more cohesion and the Member States to be more involved in an effective anti-terror coordination model .
With regard to the other priorities such as the pursuit of the internal market and the consolidation of growth , our fellow citizens will only adhere to the European ideal if they can see that our social model , the free movement not only of persons , goods and capital , but also of services , and the promotion of education , training and innovation , are reflected in so many tangible improvements in their everyday lives .
Becoming the world 's most advanced economic area means having political will and courage .
Portugal dared to have the Lisbon Strategy .
The opportunity has been given to it to provide the best ' after-sales ' service .
We value both the social and the economic dimension of European integration .
Mr Sócrates , we hope , like you do , that progress will be made with Africa on migration issues and that our links with Brazil and the emerging countries will be strengthened .
Like you , too , we regard transatlantic relations as one of our priorities .
Over the last few months our partnership has taken a big step forward in quality terms ; it must now make progress .
Firm positions in terms of respect for our values and ongoing dialogue must govern our neighbourhood relations with the Balkans , Ukraine , Belarus and , of course , Russia .
Mr Sócrates , the PPE-DE Group wishes you every success with this stronger Union for a better world that you so earnestly desire .
We will support you when it comes to defending the values of peace and solidarity , courage and responsibility .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , almost exactly one year ago , on 1 July last year , there was an excellent football match that Portugal won in a penalty shootout after extra time .
It was a remarkable game .
The Portuguese kept their nerve and every penalty went in .
The ball is now in position for our penalty shot .
You have said everything there is to say about the Intergovernmental Conference .
Now you need to get the ball in the net .
From this morning 's speech , I suspect that your nerves are as steely as those of the Portuguese football team .
If you score this time , in October you will win the trophy .
( Applause )

We are realists , Prime Minister Sócrates : there is not as much in the mandate as we might have hoped , but we accept that no more could have been achieved in the negotiations .
However , there is a good deal in the mandate .
You need to make it clear to all participants in the Intergovernmental Conference that there can be no going back on what has been agreed .
I have a comment to make to my fellow Member , Joseph Daul , at this point .
I have certainly noted that this is the position of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and I hope that all sections of the PPE-DE Group , right through to the committee chairmen in your group , will take the same view .
( Applause )
The higher the committee , the less I am certain .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what would happen if we went backwards ?
We would find ourselves in another crisis situation like the one we have just resolved .
And if we are in a crisis , President-in-Office , then the laudable objectives you have just described would again be out of our reach .
How can we really implement a cohesive Lisbon Strategy with a two-speed Europe ?
The two are mutually exclusive .
You are quite right : we need to breathe new life into the Lisbon Strategy .
Three years ago , a decision was taken to revitalise the Lisbon Strategy .
Three years down the line , we have not made much progress .
It is good that you are saying as President-in-Office of the Council we are going to get our heads down and get things moving , speed things up .
There are two main reasons for speeding things up , though : you are quite right to say that we want to focus on qualifications .
If we want to become the most competitive knowledge-based continent , we need to focus on qualifications .
What we want from the Lisbon Strategy , above all , is social stability .

If we have greater economic growth - which we do , there are more jobs , and the reforms are taking effect , in fact thanks to Gerhard Schröder 's Government , they are already having an impact in my country - if we have more jobs , then there is one thing we need above all : for that growth to be sustainable and to bring sustainable social stability .
Otherwise the Lisbon Strategy is worthless .
If , as you quite rightly said , President-in-Office , we are looking for a subject that forces us to act as a Community , and a Community of 27 , and where there is massive popular support , then climate protection is it .
The Live Earth concert last weekend clearly showed us how enthusiastically young people will champion a cause .
So let us harness that enthusiasm .
These young people go to the concert , and when it is over , they ask : and what now ?
Bono and Herbert Grönemeyer do not have the solution .
They can champion a solution , but it is up to us to provide it through practical actions .
If we offer that solution , though , if we actually implement the ambitious targets , then I am certain that the people of Europe will be behind us , and that is exactly what the European project needs .
When I talk about climate protection , Prime Minister , I am very grateful for your strategy on Africa and Latin America , because climate protection will only be feasible if we involve Africa and Latin America .
In the case of Africa we need to recognise the bitter truth that the continent is most affected by global warning , despite making the least contribution to that global warming .
This is a significant factor in the Africans ' plight .
I am very grateful for your position on Latin America too : the European Union 's transatlantic relations go far beyond our relationship with the United States of America .
Above all , it is incumbent upon us to support Latin America in finding multilateral solutions to international conflicts , in United Nations reform , and in combating financial crises triggered by the financial markets .
Which countries were most affected ?
Argentina , and also Brazil .
It is vital that we in Europe work with the Latin Americans .
My group will be running with and supporting this initiative in the autumn , and we are very grateful to you for organising the summit .
There are some people in this House who immediately get twitchy if there are two speakers in a row from the same country .
Mr President , today we have seen a Portuguese President-in-Office of the Council from the left and a former President-in-Office from the right working together for Europe .
I think that is worthy of note .
Overcoming issues that divide us at home in order to work together for a Europe for everyone else , this sense of common ground , of setting aside our differences , is what defines the notion of Europe .
That is exactly what we need to build a stronger Europe , because as you quite rightly said , not only Europe itself , but the whole world , needs a strong and united Europe .
That can only be achieved by resolving our differences , and concentrating on what unites us .
So I wish you all the best for your Presidency .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , President-in-Office , the programme that you have presented combines clear goals with ample ambition .
Success is not immanent , but Liberals and Democrats have high hopes of a European Union double act under the two Josés .
Indeed , you appear to compete for the laurels of economic liberalism .
As Britain 's newspaper the Daily Mirror might say , ' It 's the only way , José ! '
Who , if not you two , could convince Europe 's governments of the beauty of Lisbon and the importance of its agenda ?
Put the ' is on ' back into ' Lisbon ' - the need to consolidate public finances , the commitment to financial discipline and debt management , the drive to complete and strengthen the single market .
Yes , even in the face of populist opposition in your own parties .
It is not just in Asia that the free market has lifted millions out of poverty - it has done the same for 50 million people in the EU in the last 10 years alone .
Most importantly , there is a need for sustainable economic recovery in Europe to be built on job creation rather than on rigging the rate of exchange to ratchet up export-driven growth .
Therefore , my group particularly welcomes your initiative to open the discussion on flexicurity .
We have to modernise social protection and benefit systems to face the challenges of a global market .
Let us protect workers , not uncompetitive jobs .
Our social safety net should protect not failing businesses but rather those in them , helping them to find new employment opportunities .
The only European social model that matters to me is the one that preserves our prosperity by preparing our people for the future .
And , yes , if we talk about the future , let us not forget the fight against climate change .
Let us look at how we can merge the Gothenburg and Lisbon Agendas and use innovation in green technologies to help us be more innovative , create more jobs and lead the world in setting the climate change agenda .
President-in-Office , you are right to place an emphasis on Africa - discovered , exploited and then abandoned by Europeans .
The fact that you have called the first EU-Africa summit in seven years says it all .
It has been the forgotten continent for far too long .
Africa needs Europe , and Europe needs Africa if we are to deal successfully with migration , disease and climate change .
China offers money for natural resources and weapons for money .
That is the road of 21st century economic colonialism and it is the wrong way forward for Africa .
But Europe must avoid talk of the dimensions of empire .
Let us learn from the past and forge a new and generous partnership .
In justice and home affairs , we appreciate the fact that your Presidency will focus on a series of measures strengthening the area of justice in the European Union .
After the revealing comments by Germany 's Interior Minister , Mr Schäuble , my group will be on the guard against the erosion of civil liberties that underpin our society .
( Applause )
We want to see the framework decision on procedural safeguards agreed in the Council as a necessary accompanying measure to the European arrest warrant .
And we caution against a response to terrorism which changes the nature of our society by fettering the freedoms for which you fought in the Carnation Revolution .
Two weeks ago , this House applauded the Council for agreement on a mandate for the IGC , but last week we learned from some of your colleagues in the Council that they were hollow words .
Well , that was rather an ephemeral victory .
I believe I speak not only for my group but for many colleagues in this House when I urge that the package agreed at the June Summit should not be unravelled .
From a school on the Sagres peninsula , your country gained world repute as a nation of navigators .
As President-in-Office , you will need those skills to navigate through the treacherous waters of Council negotiations .
We wish you good luck and fair winds .
Boa sorte !
( Applause )
thar ceann an Ghrúpa UEN . - A Uachtaráin , is í an aidhm is mó a bheidh ag an Uachtaránacht seo a chinntiú go síneoidh ceannairí an Aontais Eorpaigh Conradh nua an Aontais Eorpaigh níos déanaí sa bhliain .
Tháinig na ceannairí ar shocrú ginearálta polaitíochta ag an gcruinniú mullaigh deireanach ach tá obair mhór fós le déanamh sula mbeidh an conradh cinntithe go hiomlán .
Beidh an Phortaingéil i mbun cruinnithe mullaigh go hidirnáisiúnta leis an mBrasaíl , le ceannairí na hAfraice agus le rialtais Mheiriceá , na Síne agus na hIndia .
And in particular when we speak about Africa we have all seen the difficulties and the concerns that have been raised by many colleagues with regard to the attendance of certain people at that conference .
Perhaps this could be an opportunity for us , instead of shouting ' no ' from the sidelines , to encourage other African countries to cooperate with each other , to use the open method of coordination of what should be proper democratic controls and proper procedures for the rights of individuals and freedoms for individuals when we meet at this African summit .
Darfur is mentioned often but rarely given any real meat , and the African summit provides us with another opportunity to try to bring together the disparate parts and elements in the conflict to ensure we can find a clear way forward .
Concerning the reform treaty - as you rightly mention the mandate has been set for the IGC in very specific terms - in many ways , despite what other people may think , we should expand or change those terms .
We are best to deal with what we have before us and what has been agreed by the 27 governments .
If I could sum up what the reform treaty should be about in one single phrase , the reform treaty is about giving us the freedom we seek , which is not the freedom to do whatever we wish , but rather , the freedom to achieve all that we desire .
In particular , when we speak about that freedom , we must take into account our climate and in particular climate change .
As I said in Lisbon , I welcome the fact that the Brazil Summit gave us an opportunity to bring forward the whole idea of renewable energies and look at ways of creating new world trade organisation and partnership with the developing world and , most importantly of all , to guarantee that our citizens have the rights and freedom to succeed in Europe .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , a stronger Europe for a better world .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ' a stronger Union for a better world ' : my group and I like your slogan very much , and I believe that there are three things the Presidency should do to ensure that over the next six months we remember this stronger Europe .
With regard to the intergovernmental conference , you should not tolerate at all those who wish to back-pedal the agreements reached , but you should , meanwhile , find areas for possible improvements , such as in the field of climate change , and seek to promote and allow the opening up of the intergovernmental conference to the eyes of the European Parliament and to public debate .
For us , these are the conditions for a successful reform of the Treaties .
This reform will not be the last , because we are committed from now on in this House to reinitiating the battle for the European Constitution .
On the Lisbon Strategy , we believe that no progress will be made unless , over the next six months , you are able , together with the Commission and Parliament , to strengthen the climate change agenda , since this cannot be separated from the Lisbon agenda .
Following the decisions taken during the German Presidency , the time has come to act , rejecting the attempts by many Member States to become swept up in wheeling and dealing , where each party has the aim of reducing its commitments to the minimum .
For this reason we would like to relaunch - and I urge you to take this into consideration - the idea of a Pact on climate change and energy security , based on the goal of restricting temperature increases to 2 ° C above the level of the pre-industrial era and on instruments that include mechanisms for imposing sanctions , exactly as in the Stability Pact .
There must be three lines of action , on which we would like concrete results within six months and on which I would ask you to respond , right now , in this debate : the issue of energy saving ; transport , which unbelievably remained outside the agreements reached in the spring but which is responsible for 30 % of emissions ; and renewable energies , on which unfortunately the Barroso Commission has still done nothing , especially with regard to the heating and cooling Directive .
The issue of renewable energies enables me , Mr President , to bring to your attention the issue of biofuel and relations with Brazil .
We are worried : we do not like the mystical vision and miraculous significance given by President Lula to biofuel , as a new ' green gold ' ; nor do we like at all the fact that the issues of deforestation , illegal importing of timber , food safety and the European contribution to the development of innovative technologies for renewable energies have been excluded from the agenda .
I would briefly like to make a similar observation on the issue of Africa .
The fine words of Presidents Sócrates and Barroso have a specific and worrying implication , which I urge you to consider : the pressure exerted by the European Union on various African countries to make them sign the economic partnership agreement by the end of the year .
The Commission is using money from the Development Fund to convince these countries , in many of which civil society is opposed to the agreement , because the total opening up of their markets would ultimately achieve nothing but a reduction and restriction in their ability to integrate into the international market .
I would have liked to say many other things to you , Mr President , but I am unable to do so .
I hope that I will have other opportunities to do so .
( Applause )

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , what we have just heard from the current President of the Council proves that this is going to be yet another wasted opportunity to put on the agenda some of the serious economic and social problems that need changes in policy and responses on the part of the Community institutions : for example , the unequal distribution of income , increased job insecurity and the poverty in which nearly 80 million people live , including increasing numbers of workers on low pay and fewer rights , old people with negligible pensions , and women and children being denied fundamental human rights .
Instead of attaching priority to changing the objectives and statutes of the Central European Bank so as to demand that it be subject to democratic control , to curb the rise in interest rates and to stop social injustice from getting any worse , he persists in his obsession with the main proposals contained in the neoliberal and militaristic draft Constitutional Treaty and greater concentration of the power of major EU powers .
Instead of fighting for the withdrawal , or at least a radical revision , of the Stability and Growth Pact and the Lisbon Strategy , in order to kick-start investment in the public sector and SMEs , to curb deregulation and the privatisation of fundamental sectors and public services with a view to creating more jobs with rights and reducing poverty and social exclusion , he places the emphasis on the sacred cow of competition to increase the power of the economic and financial groups .
Instead of proposing measures to respect the dignity of working people , and to alleviate the increasingly insecure situation of millions of workers , particularly women and young people - as several thousand people demanded at the demonstration organised by the General Confederation of Portuguese Workers on 5 July in Guimarães - what we are seeing is an emphasis on flexisecurity , which more than anything else means flexi-exploitation of the workers .
That is why we stress the need for a sea change on the part of the EU , and why we say it is time to listen to the people 's demands , to extend democracy and to commit ourselves to a fairer social Europe characterised by progress and a fairer distribution of income ; it is time to uphold the principle of sovereign States with equal rights , to strengthen international cooperation and solidarity , to commit ourselves firmly to peace , whether in the Middle East , Palestine , Iraq , Afghanistan or Africa .
We reaffirm our objection to a so-called reforming draft Treaty , but which , in practice , is nothing more than a reproduction of the Constitutional Treaty by means of a major smokescreen designed to circumvent referendums and to reduce democracy and the opportunity for people and national institutions to make their voices heard , for fear of pluralistic debate and public opinion in our countries .
That is why we want a referendum in every Member State , as public opinion in our States demands .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a Polish newspaper recently published the following story : What was the first European referendum ?
Answer : when God , having created Eve , said to Adam : ' choose your wife ' .
The image is apt .
Today , far away from the Garden of Eden , the Portuguese Presidency has taken over from the German Presidency .
The latter will have been marked by its trickery , with an attempt to impose on the people of France and of the Netherlands a barely disguised and pruned text that they rejected by referendum .
This mini-treaty is nothing but the Constitution in disguise .
Some years ago , Mr Padoa-Schioppa , the father of the euro , wrote a piece in a French journal , the gist of which was that European integration stems more from enlightened despotism than from democracy .
We have a vivid illustration of this today with this gross manipulation .
How can one say that the new text corresponds to the desire expressed by the people of France and of the Netherlands during the referendums if it is not submitted to another such test by referendum ?
If I may , Mr President , I shall express a wish in this House at the dawn of the Portuguese Presidency : if we do not want the people of Europe to turn their backs once and for all on the political class , then the Portuguese Presidency must make a total break with its outdated methods and undertake immediately the one genuine European reform that the people expect : less technocracy , more democracy .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , may I take this opportunity once again to express our gratitude for the magnificent reception that yourself and your government reserved for the chairmen of the parliamentary groups very recently in Lisbon : it testifies to your will to work seriously with this Parliament .
We can only approve a number of your objectives , the ambition of which does not surprise us .
They include that of helping to resolve the problems in Africa , problems that we must indeed admit have only worsened since the countries of Europe left , unlike what some people would have us believe .
They also include an effort aimed at Latin America , and in particular Brazil , which is dear to your heart and which is close to you - all that is justifiable .
As I have already had the opportunity to say to you , I believe that the only way that the European international policy that you hope to develop will have any legitimacy and transparency is if it distinguishes itself from that of the hegemonic superpower that the United States has now become .
I fear , Mr President , that my fellow Member , Mr Watson , and many others like him are confusing two things : on the one hand , the necessary restoration of economic freedoms within a nation or within an area of which the parameters are almost the same in social protection terms and , on the other , a form of unbridled free-marketism that is reflected in downright unfair competition founded on social dumping .
The truth is that , in the beginning , an economy develops only within a protective framework , which is true for the major partners of the world market that , today , are Japan and China .
With regard , lastly , to the Intergovernmental Conference , you are going to have to apply a road map that has been proposed to you and that is a veritable manual with which to deceive the electorate .
We are , in effect , keeping the substance of a constitution that , as has just been said , has been rejected , and changing the vocabulary .
True , we are doing away with the words ' constitution ' , ' foreign affairs minister ' and ' framework law ' , we are not mentioning the Charter in the text and we are merely publishing it in the Official Journal .
However , we are keeping the extension of the Union 's powers , majority voting and a single presidency , which would deprive us of your presence today , if it were in force .
We are keeping everything to which the people did not subscribe and which they would most probably reject if they were properly informed .
Mr President , you are the representative of a nation that is small in size but so very glorious in terms of its immense history .
Such glory was possible only thanks to the constant battle that Portugal has always fought - from its birth and throughout its history - to uphold its independence .
I beg you : do not be a party to the disappearance of this most precious of assets of your nation and of all our nations - our national independence .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Sócrates , we welcome the presentation of the guidelines that Portugal intends to follow over the coming months : naturally , we agree with the priority placed on the Intergovernmental Conference and can only offer our best wishes for you to achieve the aim of fully and faithfully turning the mandate into a new treaty .
As you yourself said , the Presidency will have more commitments than just this one over the coming months .
We welcome the list of priorities that you have set yourselves and understand the reasons why , in relation to some of these priorities - Lisbon , Africa , Brazil - Portugal will be especially committed .
At the same time , we would like to emphasise the fact that , in order to turn your slogan into a reality and demonstrate that a stronger Europe can lead to a better world , we need not just good intentions but facts , which are not chosen by us but derive from the actual priorities of the circumstances in which we find ourselves .
On this point , I would like to draw your attention and that of your Presidency to the most urgent priority , which is set by a region close to us in the Mediterranean - the Middle East - on which Europe can and must do more .
This region has not had much of a presence in the recent past but now that the dangers are becoming more acute and the opportunities greater as a result , Europe must demonstrate that it knows how to be stronger in order to contribute to a better world .
( PT ) Mr President , Prime Minister , you will certainly have noted , as I have , the enormous groundswell of both expectation and sympathy you have aroused on all sides of this House , and there must be some reason for that .
The reason is , of course , the firm and decisive manner in which you have rejected any interference with the decisions taken at the June meeting of the European Council .
Continue along that line and you will certainly have even stronger support after the informal meeting of the September European Council .
You also mentioned the Lisbon Strategy and the need for a new cycle .
We all agree with that .
We must , however , bear in mind that one of the reasons for the breakdown of the first Lisbon Strategy was the cardinal sin of not having given the Commission the responsibility for steering that strategy , a task for which the intergovernmental model has proved inadequate .
In recent years , the President of the Commission - and he deserves great credit for this - has tried to make use of the fine detail to move the strategy forward .
Nonetheless , the Council must accept that the Commission must be even more deeply involved with it in order to achieve the ambitious objectives you referred to , Prime Minister , in your speech .
As far as foreign relations are concerned , it has to be said that you have started off on the right foot .
The Summit with Brazil was an unqualified success , as I can confirm from President Lula 's comments at the Conference of Presidents in Brussels .
I would also like to tell you that neither in Africa nor in Europe should anyone be held to ransom by Robert Mugabe .
Let us say so clearly .
The summit must be for debate and must not concentrate on that sole or principal topic .
There are many other issues to which you have referred , which must be the subject of our discussion and our dialogue and partnership with Africa .
Just one more point , Mr President .
In the case of relations with Russia , you have had the courage to visit President Putin in an atmosphere you knew would be unfavourable to you .
You should now try to persuade your colleagues that Russia needs to be involved in [ addressing ] international problems , for Russia needs to be part of the solution and not part of the problem .
Prime Minister , you have the support of this House , you certainly have the support of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for the ambitious programme you have presented .
I am on your side , and wish you every success .
( PT ) Mr President , listening to the President of the Council and the President of the Commission I felt immensely proud to be Portuguese .
This is a moment that will go down in the history of the European institutions .
It is the first time in this Parliament that European dialogue at the highest level has taken place in Portuguese .
In the past , the Portuguese language travelled all round the world . It was , furthermore , the first European language to establish dialogue between East and West .
Today Portuguese is spoken by more than 220 million people spread across the five continents .
As the Portuguese poet António Ferreira once said , ' Let the Portuguese language flourish : may it be spoken , sung and heard , and long may it live ' .
The Portuguese Presidency has just begun and it has already left an indelible mark .
The first EU-Brazil Summit was a success .
It was a matter of urgency to include the B of Brazil in the EU 's strategic partnerships with the BRIC countries ( of Brazil , Russia , India and China ) .
This has now been done . Conditions have now been improved for Europe to give fresh impetus to relations with Mercosur and the Doha negotiations .
The Portuguese Presidency , therefore , has got off to the best possible start .
I would like it to have a similar success with its other priorities , including the adoption of the new Treaty and the second EU-Africa Summit .
Dialogue with Africa is essential in the fight against illegal immigration and climate change .
With regard to the Treaty , the Council 's mandate was , as the Prime Minister has told us , precise and clear : Nothing is open to debate .
The substance has been agreed , all that is needed is the exact wording .
My wish is that there should be no obstacles along the way . We do not want Europe to be paralysed by stumbling over a comma or colliding with a word .
That would send the worst possible signal to the citizens of Europe and the world in general .
We Europeans need a strong , united Europe , capable of responding to the challenges of globalisation .
A stronger Europe and a better world and , as Cardoso Pires might have said : E agora , José ?
( Over to you , José ) . Now it is time to get down to work .
I wish you good luck , because a successful Portuguese Presidency will mean a successful Europe .
( NL ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I should like to congratulate Portugal on its Presidency and thank it for its pledge to work closely together with this House .
You can rest assured , Mr President , that we will take you at your word .
We welcome your intention to organise an EU-Africa Summit and an EU-Brazil Summit .
As far as the EU-Africa Summit is concerned , though , we should not leave people in any doubt as to the fact that EU sanctions during your Presidency cannot simply be academic .
To put it bluntly : at a summit such as this , there is no room for leaders who have reduced their own people to a state of misery and famine and who persist in this .
Whilst a clear-cut position such as this does not make it any easier for you , Mr President , this is the product of a system we introduced ourselves at the time .
I wish you much luck for the Brazil Summit .
Brazil is an important country , and a reinforcement of the ties between the EU and Latin and Central America is a welcome development .
I should also like to ask you a question .
According to a brochure I read about your Presidency , it is the intention to make a contribution to disarmament and non-proliferation .
I would appreciate it if you could expand on this a little .
Finally , I should like to mention an issue that has not been raised before .
It is clear , Mr President , that , in the next six months , you too will need to face up to all the crises that may develop anywhere in the world .
There is one which will undoubtedly be at the top of the agenda and which we will be debating this afternoon , in fact : the crisis in the Middle East and Palestine .
I hope that you too will be able to make a positive contribution in this matter .
- ( PL ) Mr President , the priorities put forward by the President of the Council which started with the Portuguese presidency , are cause for great hope .
It is particularly important to strengthen transatlantic relations , not only in the war on international terrorism , but also in the fields of economic relations and research .
The presidency has also made equally valuable declarations about helping to stabilise the Western Balkans , and about drawing up a strategy , in conjunction with African partners , for the continent 's development .
We would also happily adopt an outline for the EU membership prospects of Ukraine during the European Union - Ukraine summit .
Unfortunately the Portuguese presidency has also inherited the so-called ' new constitutional treaty ' .
Let us hope that this troublesome legacy will not obscure the ambitious aims the presidency has set for itself , which are of real importance for the future of Europe and the world .
Mr President , coming from Scotland , a smaller Atlantic maritime nation , I warmly congratulate our Portuguese colleagues and thank Mr Sócrates for his enthusiasm , his realism and his ambition today .
I only wish my own country , Scotland , could take its natural place as a constructive and enthusiastic partner Member State , but we are on our way , for we do have much in common .
We want to see realism ; we want to see dynamism ; we want to see reform ; we want to see progress ; and , in the reform treaty , you have an opportunity to deliver for all of us .
My party decided , on balance , that we could not recommend the previous draft of the Constitution to our voters , but that is in the past , and we view your efforts with a fair heart and an open and constructive attitude .
We wish you all the best .
The EU is far from perfect but what is right with it is to be saved and is to be promoted .
If you can build on the successes and sweep away what does not work - like this building , perhaps ! - I hope to congratulate you in December also .
( PT ) Prime Minister Sócrates says he has received a clear and precise mandate .
I agree .
He knows that the governments of Spain or Luxembourg Governments will argue that the new Treaty is the same as the previous one and will require parliamentary ratification .
He also knows that the governments of France and the Netherlands will say exactly the opposite ultimately to support the same idea , namely that there will be no referendum for anyone .
I wonder why he says nothing .
Are we to have six months of doublespeak , or will we see the political vision to include the people in the decision ?
I am also puzzled as to why he says nothing about certain other things .
Europe has no policy on Iraq ; does Washington have to decide to call its boys home before we can have such a policy ?
Europe has two policies on the Iranian nuclear programme ; will bombs have to fall in Iran before we see that such an escalation ought to have been prevented ?
Europe has an irresponsible policy in Palestine and Lebanon ; in the one case , it has always supported its President without recognising governments , and in the other it supports the government and opposes the President .
Does it all have to go wrong before we see that our role ought to be to encourage internal agreement ?
Last summer there was an unscheduled war .
A year later , it is looming again .
Mr Sócrates , we shall only prevent it if we want to do so .
Mr Sócrates , you are part of this great deception : the attempt to hoodwink the British , the French and the Dutch into accepting a treaty without a referendum .
The other day you said that this treaty was less federalist .
I ask you : less federalist than what ?
You really could not make some of this stuff up .
Fortunately , there are some voices in the EU who are honest and say that we have the substance of the Constitution and all we have done is to change the terminology .
Others say that we have 90 % , or 99 % , of what was there in the first place .
Whether we are playing the game that you are playing or whether we are being honest , we all know the truth , which is that if the British had a referendum on this , 70 % or perhaps more would say ' no ' .
I wonder whether it would not be better for everybody if the British just were not part of this European Union .
Why do we not just get a quickie divorce ?
We can do it very quickly ; let us keep the lawyers out ; let us have a free trade agreement ; let us have a Swiss-style relationship .
I think everybody would be a lot happier , most certainly we would be .
While we are at it , I simply cannot bear listening to you and Mr Barroso blathering on about Africa and what we have to do to help people there .
A very good start would be for you to stop Mr Mugabe attending the summit in December : that would send a good message .

However , I will give you a real challenge , a positive thing that you could do .
Yesterday Mr Barroso talked about the EU being an empire and , when it comes to Africa , my goodness me it is !
I urge you to stop the fisheries deals with West Africa .
Stop your own fleet .
Stop the Spanish fleet plundering western African resources , killing African fishermen .
If you do that in your six-month Presidency then you will have done something positive for Africa .
Please act !
( SK ) Despite the fact that the Portuguese presidency is facing many challenges , the most serious one being the staging of an intergovernmental conference to negotiate the draft Constitutional Treaty , I am pleased to see that the Portuguese Presidency will also be dealing with other issues .
The main issue here concerns the strategies in sectors that are within the purview of national states , for example the health sector .
This week , namely on 12 and 13 July , the minister of health will be holding a Round Table devoted to healthcare strategies in Europe , and I have the honour to be taking part in these round table discussions .
The meeting will be addressing issues such as discrepancies between the healthcare systems of Member States , legislation in the area of healthcare services , the problem of the rising incidence of cancer in the European Union and the mobility of patients and health professionals .
I appreciate the fact that the talks will also include the participation of representatives from Slovenia , which announced some time ago that the fight against cancer would be one of the major priorities of its presidency .
Prime Minister , I would like to wish you every success .
Mr President , President-in-Office , President of the Commission , this Presidency is embarked upon at an important time for the European Union .
I am delighted that my country and your country share the same patron saint , St George , who was well known for fighting dragons and dealing with difficult problems .
I hope that this will be the case with this Presidency also .
I am delighted that you are giving such emphasis to the issues of Africa .
The plight of the continent and the fight against global poverty are matters which the British Conservative Party feels very strongly about .
However , I must also press you , I think , to ensure that the EU-Africa summit later this year takes place without the presence of Robert Mugabe .
I and my colleagues , including Geoffrey Van Orden , have been underlining this matter for some time because I think it would be intolerable for our Union to welcome such a tyrant to Europe at a time when the suffering of his people is clear and should be uppermost in our minds .
As to the draft mandate for the IGC , it may be very precise but it is not necessarily right .
We believe very strongly that , whatever form this constitution is shown to be in , there ought to be a referendum , certainly in the United Kingdom .
And indeed we believe that the promise made by our outgoing - now former - Prime Minister , Mr Blair , to give the British people a referendum on this issue should be followed and taken on board by his successor , Gordon Brown .
We have other serious concerns .
There are serious concerns about our continuing commitment to free competition , about the legal position of the so-called British opt-out of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and about the collapse of the third pillar , but I look forward to a positive debate during the IGC on these matters .
Finally , I want to refer to the resolution on the IGC today , which calls for the issue of Parliament 's two seats to be included in the mandate .
I believe this is the perfect opportunity to demonstrate that Europe is listening to the people .
The continuing vast expense of shuffling between Brussels and Strasbourg undermines the standing of our Parliament and the matter must be resolved soon .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I support the programme of the Portuguese Presidency because , Mr President , if there is one thing worse than standing still , it is to go backwards .
( ES ) We are currently undergoing a process of political realism .
We are not entirely pleased with the mandate , but we feel that it shows political realism .
We in the European Parliament , and many citizens - the majority of them - wanted the Constitutional Treaty , but we accepted the idea of seeking a solution through a mandate that is very clear , but I do not believe there has ever been a mandate with so many footnotes .
We must not forget that .
We are all aware of the skill that legal experts have when it comes to resolving problems .
Certain issues are striking . For example , we are meeting here under the European flag .
What are we going to do , Mr President .
Are we going to take the flag down or is this meeting going to be considered illegal ?
This is an important point and there is something rather humiliating about it .
There is another significant problem , and that is how we are going to explain this to the citizens .
We are going to have Treaties 1 500 pages long , like telephone directories .
In other words , we must find a way to explain the things we are doing and in doing so we must defend the progress , the legal personality , the extension of qualified majority voting and codecision , the advances in foreign policy ...
We must explain all of this , but it is not going to be at all easy and - since the devil is in the detail - we must study the way the mandate is drawn up very carefully .
I believe that the European Parliament and the national Parliaments and civil society are going to be watching closely .
Having said that , Mr President , I want to see a Lisbon Treaty emerge from the Portuguese Presidency .
I want it to be a Treaty of reform and not of counter-reform .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I have carefully listened to your speech today and carefully read the speech you made at the Assembly of the Republic in Lisbon .
I see that you have set out a wide-ranging programme for the Portuguese presidency and I wish you every success .
I would , however , like to give my personal interpretation of your programme , and ask three fundamental questions .
The first and most obvious one is the new constitutional treaty .
The German presidency made some progress and managed to put together a difficult compromise .
Each Member State may now feel that it has lost something in the negotiating process - that is the nature of compromise .
But Europe has gained the chance to strengthen its unity .
The mandate , which was unanimously approved , must be implemented , and no country , including my own , should be allowed to back away from its undertakings .
The Portuguese presidency now has the difficult task of creating the consensus required to get the treaty approved .
I would also appeal , as Barón Crespo has done , to try and put it in a form that would make it as clear as possible to the ordinary European citizen .
The second point is establishing a policy of European solidarity , such as the common European energy policy , which will prove that Europe has profoundly and irreversibly united since the historic year of 1989 .
Another example of solidarity policy is the historic idea of free movement of people within the European Union , meaning the full opening of the Schengen area to new Member States .
Only a Europe without internal borders can be a truly united community .
And the third task is fulfilling Europe 's undertakings towards the rest of the world .
Portugal has pointed out the significance of Brazil , which has traditional ties with Europe as well as a vast development potential .
However , the presidency 's programme has also ensured renewed dialogue with Africa .
This is an extremely important task , arising as it does from Europe 's historical responsibility towards the continent with its unexploited natural resources , but which is currently racked by poverty , disease and ethnic violence .
These are the challenges of our times , which can and must galvanise the process of European integration .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Portuguese Presidency does well to devote itself to the dialogue with Africa , in which what is perhaps needed more is the presence , for instance , of an army of small and medium-sized European businesses , to give birth to and shape a healthy economy in those regions , rather than an invasion of Chinese or multinationals that are not always inspired by humanitarian aims .
It is equally crucial , however , to exclude from that Summit a leader such as Mr Mugabe , whom Europe should condemn not only for his initiatives and anti-humanitarian acts but also for his anti-white and anti-European racism , since racism should be condemned everywhere , not just in some places .
We are worried , though , by the attitude of Mr Manuel Lobo Antunes towards an extremely swift opening up with regard to the Turkey issue : it is not absolutely necessary to step up the pace , for many reasons , the main one being that there is still a risk of admitting to Europe a country in which sharia law is in force .
These are very worrying questions , and include geopolitical issues : for example , Mr President , we do not want Europe to end up bordering Iraq , Iran and other countries of that type .

( CS ) Mr President , the Portuguese presidency wishes to bring the European Treaty to completion and at the same time to address the challenges of global competition .
I must point out that these are entirely incompatible and contradictory processes .
It is clear from the new text that the Treaty seeks to preserve excessively costly and inefficient social systems .
It is also clear from the text that the leaders of the EU Member States believe in a Bolshevist fantasy of stable prices and full employment .
More to the point , the Union has again distanced itself somewhat from its founding principle of free economic competition without barriers , which has simply been expunged from the new Treaty .
Mr President , I must again point out that the rejection of free economic competition as the driving force of the European economy constitutes a serious warning for all democratically aware citizens .
It is only a small step from trampling down freedoms in the area of business to trampling down fundamental human rights and freedoms .
The main thrust of democratic politicians should now be to incorporate free economic competition back into the Treaty with immediate effect .
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , let me make a few comments .
Only a few , because I agree with what both the Commission President and the President-in-Office of the Council have said regarding the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Intergovernmental Conference is tasked with doing as little as possible .
Its role is to keep to the IGC mandate , not to develop new ideas .
I can think of many things that should also be included in a Treaty of this type .
I know that some elements that were in the Constitution are missing , but this is a historical moment in which what has been agreed has to be transformed into a legally-binding document .
For this reason , we feel that we should support the Presidency in their clear commitment to the mandate in order to get the job done as soon as possible .
Whilst I think that symbols and many other elements - particularly transparency - have been lost , since the Convention , which also had input from national parliamentary representatives , we have had more democracy and greater efficiency .
Efficiency has been improved through more majority voting , through the rules on foreign and security policy and a few other areas .
There is still room for improvement , but this is better than the current situation .
Wherever majority voting applies , the European Parliament has the power of codecision .
If this Treaty becomes reality , the European Parliament will have equal powers of codecision in 90-95 % of cases .
Some things have been forgotten : in future , the European Council , on the basis of a qualified majority , will propose a candidate for election as Commission President to the European Parliament in the light of the results of the European election and after consultations with the European Parliament .
This will increase citizens ' rights , because , through the Parliament , citizens will have a direct line to the Commission thereby generating considerable legitimacy .
This marks a significant step forward , and ties in with the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
If we speak out for certain values worldwide , we also have to apply those values ourselves and make them legally binding .
This is why a binding Charter of Fundamental Rights is so vital for citizens ' rights .
The only ones who have been cheated are the British citizens .
( DE ) Mr President , occasionally one hears that this Intergovernmental Conference will just be dealing with the technicalities of the Treaty .
That is not true !
You , President-in-Office , have shown that the political significance of the Intergovernmental Conference is that it will keep to the whole mandate and nothing but the mandate .
The political significance lies in the clear determination to conclude the negotiations in October , and in seeking to convince all 27 Member States that this is the right way forward for Europe at this historic moment .
I have no doubt that you will succeed , given the clarity of your programme and your firm political will .
The chairman of my group has said that you just need to get the ball in the net from the penalty spot .
Martin , let us not forget , this is not a penalty shootout , but a penalty awarded mid-game !
The game will continue .
There is still the whole second half , or the ratification process .
Past experience has shown that a few problems may yet emerge .
So I feel it would be good , President-in-Office , if you were to seek to convince your colleagues in the Council informally of the need for speedy ratification within the next twelve months .
It would be good if the Netherlands and France , who voted ' no ' , could be the first to ratify .
It would also be good , President-in-Office , if you could persuade the new British Prime Minister , Gordon Brown , not to bring up the rear in the ratification process , but rather to lead the way .
That would send a clear message to the whole of Europe .
( MT ) Thank you , Mr President .
Last week I had the opportunity to visit one of the four detention centres in Malta in the company of the Chairman of our group , Mr Daul .
Currently , these detention centres are together providing shelter to more than 1 400 people , all of whom are immigrants who took great risks to cross the Mediterranean .
In fact these people were saved from drowning by our Maltese maritime patrol team .
I talked with one of the immigrants from Nigeria , supposedly a country with abundant natural resources .
With tears in his eyes , this young 17 year-old kept insisting that he wanted to go to Europe .
However , he claimed that even being held in detention was better than having to return to Nigeria .
This illustrates the fact that our policy designed to promote development in the African continent has so far failed .
It is this policy that can , in the long term , lead to a reduction in the influx of immigrants to Europe .
However , this policy must also go hand in hand with other policies that require urgent and immediate attention if we are to step up the fight against illegal immigration , and , in particular , against the network of organised crime that is behind it and that is exploiting the misfortune of these people .
We saw some of the boats used by immigrants to cross the Mediterranean .
They are all the same size , have the same type of engine and are in a shocking and disgraceful state .
They generally accommodate around 30 people , which is enough for these vessels to start taking in amounts of water large enough to sink them at the first sign of wind or sea swell .
It is little wonder that , before departing from Libya , the immigrants are informed that their journey will take them to either Italy or Malta or lead to death by drowning .
Each person pays $ 1 000 for the crossing - a total of $ 30 000 , almost all of which is profit .
Who knows , maybe this money is going towards the financing of terrorism . Thank you .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Sócrates , I welcome the fact that justice and internal affairs constitute one of the priorities of your Presidency .
We do in fact share an overall and common view of immigration .
True , we need to implement a genuine policy of cooperation with the countries of origin , which must be based on respect for fundamental rights , but it is also crucial that we open up legal immigration channels at European level , and we await a constructive debate with the Presidency on the definition of the common rights of non-EU nationals working legally in Europe .
It goes without saying that the statements of good intentions made by the European Councils on the subject of European solidarity in terms of border management and migratory flows must be followed up with concrete measures .
That is why the Council must , as a matter of urgency , look into the necessary revision - and I would emphasise this point - of the Dublin II regulation .
Furthermore , we are relying on the Portuguese Presidency to encourage the Council to reach an agreement on the ' return ' Directive that respects the right of asylum and the principle of non-refoulement .
( Applause )
( PT ) Mr President , the European Presidency that began a few days ago is facing challenges that call for negotiating ability , political will and strategic vision .
Firstly , there is the institutional issue .
Now that the Intergovernmental Conference mandate - a precise one , as requested - has been adopted , we hope it will be possible for the Portuguese Government to negotiate a reform of the Treaties with the scope required to overcome the institutional deadlock .
Among other amendments that stand out , the European Union is no longer rotating presidencies , such as yours , and one Commissioner per Member State .
Once these national elements have been eliminated , in the name of efficiency , the greatest responsibility is to reduce the distance that has been created between citizens and the EU , and the best way of doing that is to build a Europe that produces results when it comes to its citizens ' concerns , such as the economy and employment .
In this regard , we have recently been talking about ' flexicurity ' .
We believe that , without employment , there is no social model to support and that employment is protected by means of nimble , competitive firms that are constantly adjusting to the market .
Making the employment system more flexible is not the only answer , nor is it the only way to achieve the economic sustainability that we advocate .
Europe will be successful if we have the political will to invest in the areas in which it has particular potential and , at the same time , in research , innovation and long-term vision .
One such area is the new European Maritime Strategy to which the European Parliament will make a major contribution in today 's vote .
When it comes to the exploitation of resources , transport , trade , the environment , scientific research , in the section on protection against environmental disasters , and also against illegal practices and crime , what are needed are fresh , global responses .
We expect the Portuguese Presidency to give that strategy a decisive boost at the appropriate moment .
On that subject , I would like to say one final thing .
Concerns such as peace , security , the fight against terrorism , economic development in our neighbouring countries , the prevention of illegal immigration and energy supplies are all issues that will benefit from an approach that creates allies and includes partners in the South .
There is , moreover , an increasing need for a new partnership for the Mediterranean and the Portuguese Presidency is in a good position to promote a revival of that strategic dialogue for the European Union .
Prime Minister , we wish you good luck and the greatest success in the next six months .
We know that if it goes well for you , it will certainly go well for Europe .
Mr President , I wish to begin with an urgent matter .
I have just received the news that in Libya the death penalty has just been confirmed on the Bulgarian nurses .
I should like to make a direct appeal to Mr Sócrates to act on behalf of the European Union to ensure that there is a kind of grace or there is direct contact with Mr Gaddafi that this verdict should not be implemented .
( Applause )
We are very shocked that the courts in Libya have reconfirmed the death penalties for Europeans , who should be freed and allowed to go to their homes in Bulgaria .
Prime Minister , I urge you to do whatever you can to make clear to the Libyan authorities the view of the European Parliament and the European Union in general .
I should like to hear your views on foreign issues : how you see further developments in relations with Russia ; the preparation of a partnership and cooperation agreement ; what steps you will be able to take to ensure that , in this second half of 2007 , we will be able to develop a mandate to restart and start negotiations on the new partnership and cooperation agreement .
It is very important to have these talks with the Russians on more transparent energy relations , on the problems in our shared neighbourhood , but also to be able to restart the human rights dialogue , the democracy debate between Russia and the European Union , but also to be able to further develop our multilateral agenda , whether it concerns Iran , the future of the United Nations system , Kyoto and so on .
Secondly , I should like to hear your comments on how you see the further developments concerning Kosovo , which is also related to our relations with Russia .
We are pleased that there is now a period of three or four months that will allow for further talks , especially with the new government , which we support very much , given the important role of the democratic party in that government .
What can you do to ensure that , in the end , there is a result that is acceptable - maybe not completely acceptable , but more acceptable - to Serbia , and which will have the support of Russia in the Security Council and will also keep the European Union united ?
Mr Ahtisaari 's proposals should be a basis , but we should also have a situation in which there is a UN resolution as a basis for the operation of European Union in the future .
We expect that Kosovo will define its status in the end .
( Applause )
Thank you , Jan Marinus Wiersma .
With your consent , I will comment on the question of nurses later , once the plenary is full and before the vote .
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we have been given our homework , and plan to send the right messages to Africa and Latin America .
The Intergovernmental Conference needs to discuss the technical details and implementing the substance of the Treaty and the decisions made at the summit , not to negotiate a new Treaty .
Today you will have noticed that the problem is not the European Parliament , not the Commission , and not Europe 's citizens .
The only problem you may encounter is the vanity of some Heads of State or Government and Member States in the Council .
So I say to you : make sure that under your Presidency everyone keeps to what has been agreed , that everyone keeps their promises , that they make good on their financial commitments - I am thinking of Frontex - and that they take responsibility for doing at home what they promised at the European level : that they implement real projects and respect the rules , rather than presenting clever interpretations - particularly France .
If you ensure that what has been agreed becomes reality , you will generate new momentum in the European Union and have fewer problems .
- ( PL ) Mr President , each EU presidency brings with it new challenges , new aims , and new opportunities , but also new potential mistakes and setbacks .
I carefully read the interviews the Portuguese premier gave to the press on the European Union 's eastern policy , and what I read worried me deeply .
You said , and I quote , ' ... when negotiating with Russia we should not just emphasise our differences , but also our similarities ... ' .
This is a surprising statement which may be interpreted as heralding a change in tone of the EU 's eastern policy to a very acquiescent , and , I am not afraid to say it , appeasing tone .
The European Union must continue to steer the course of the German presidency , which is one of solidarity and unity .
Only solidarity will allow us to act effectively in our relations with Russia .
Any lack of consistency will only be interpreted as weakness by our eastern partner .
There are many issues that need to be addressed : the unresolved dispute about Polish food exports to Russia , and the need to conduct a policy of energy solidarity to prevent Moscow from putting pressure on individual Member States .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Madam President , honourable Members , I would like to begin by thanking you for all your comments in this debate , and your criticisms of my speech and of the Presidency 's plans .
I would like everyone to know that those comments and criticisms are very helpful to me in the tasks I have to perform as President of the Council .
I think it is also fair to say that , from what I have heard overall , the MEPs ' comments regarding the Union 's tasks for the next six months largely coincide with the programme I have presented to you here .
I am delighted to see that there is broad political consensus on what we have to do in the next six months .
This is extremely important for Europe .
It has not been difficult , furthermore , to identify those priorities , because we are all aware of one very simple fact : what Europe expects - what the European economy , European society and the world expect - is that this time Europe will resolve its institutional crisis once and for all , because for the last two years the idea on which we have been reflecting was one that everyone has seen as an institutional crisis that Europe has been incapable of overcoming .
The clear signal that we must send to the world and to Europeans is that we are going to succeed in overcoming that crisis and breaking that deadlock .
That is why I am pleased to hear in all the Members ' speeches the idea that concluding a Treaty at the earliest opportunity should naturally be our priority .
I do not know whether it will be a penalty , but the fact is that we need to score that goal , and as quickly as possible .
I am also pleased that the Members support the Presidency 's view that , to obtain a Treaty , it is also necessary to take advantage of the current political situation , the current political climate , the current political convergence , so as to transform the mandate into a Treaty as quickly as possible .
I am therefore pleased to see that the timetable I have presented here , the idea that we must move quickly , also corresponds to a political consensus .
There is no reason , furthermore , why we should not do so .
That , as I say , is what the European economy expects , what the other European institutions expect and what the world expects : in other words , that we should move quickly .
The final consensus , the agreement , the mutual commitment we are reaching is such a clear and precise commitment that nobody expects us to get bogged down in interminable discussions , especially given that discussions are conducted behind closed doors .
I am therefore pleased to see that there is general agreement on the idea that priority should be given to converting the mandate into a Treaty .
I have naturally addressed the issue of the mandate and have stated that , if there is one thing the Presidency does not have , it is a mandate to reopen or alter the mandate it has received .
This is of the greatest importance and also seems to me to be the core issue .
No one expects that and I am sure all the Member States in attendance that night and that made a commitment to a firm agreement are fully aware of what that would mean in terms of discrediting the institutions and Europe itself .
I am therefore certain that none of the Member States and no political leader advocate such a possibility , and that you will support me when I say that our whole duty is to keep the mandate as it is and transform that mandate into a Treaty .
I would also like to state the obvious : that this Union depends on everyone , and everyone is necessary .
I am well aware of the task facing the Presidency , which is to make it possible to reach an agreement between the 27 ; not the 26 , the 25 or the 24 , but the 27 .
That , furthermore , is what distinguishes a union from an alliance .
We are not an alliance , we are a Union , and because we are a union we are all indispensable and must all be ' on board ' .
That is why I say that we will do our best to move as quickly as possible to obtain what we all desire , which is that in October , at the first opportunity , not the final opportunity , but the first opportunity , Europe should be capable of giving a clear signal to Europeans and the world that it has overcome its institutional crisis .
I would also like to say a few words on the ratification of the Treaty .
Ratification at national level is a problem for the Member States , it is not a European problem .
At this moment , having heard what I have heard , I would like to point out that nowhere in the world , in liberal democracies , is Parliamentary ratification considered illegitimate or incompatible with the best values of modern democracies .
I believe that the attempt to devalue parliamentary ratification does no credit to representative democracy . I fully understand that there are those who advocate referendums and argue for direct democracy at certain times .
I find that very positive and believe that referendums and more participative democracy make democracy richer .
But never , never , in any circumstances , have I argued that such a more direct and participative democracy can be used against representative democracy .
I consider that a bogus argument and would like to make that clear .
Parliaments are legitimately empowered to approve treaties and to do so on behalf of the people .
That is what the theory of democracy teaches us , and I have lived with those values for so long that I am not willing to relinquish them , particularly at this time .
A second point I would like to speak to you about , honourable Members , is external policy , which is set to be one of our priorities under this Presidency . It will be one of our priorities because it cannot be otherwise .
If we look at EU foreign policy , it is easy to see that there are some gaps in it .
We naturally want to fill those gaps . We have already filled one , namely that of Brazil .
The fact is that the EU has held summits with China , India and Russia but not with Brazil , the other BRIC country .
This has not happened , but ought to happen , because such a summit lends consistency to our policies towards the emerging economic powers and attaches greater importance to relations between Europe and Latin America .
Those strategic relations are also vitally important when dealing with questions of world governance . I feel that Europe is now in a better position to influence global political issues having entered into a strategic partnership with Brazil .
There is one thing of which I have no doubt . European foreign policy has become richer as a result of the agreement reached at the summit with Brazil .
It remains to be seen , but I have high hopes that that summit may have helped create a better climate for dialogue between Europe and Brazil , which will in turn help the Doha Round and the negotiations for an agreement on world trade to continue .
I have high hopes of that and I am among those who believe in the benefits of a successful Doha Round , and an agreement in that framework , for the whole world , for the regulation of globalisation and also for the promotion of greater freedom of trade and more development , particularly in the least developed countries .
A word about Africa as well , and what I want to say is that we need a specific policy on Africa , too .
Europe has to decide whether it wants to move forward or stay as it is , and we have already been in the latter position for seven years .
Something has to be done , and I would like to remind you all that we have already made that choice , at least nine months ago .
The European Council has already decided to hold a Summit , and at the last three meetings it was declared that the summit should be held this year , during the Portuguese Presidency .
The time for thinking about a summit , therefore , is over .
Let us hold the summit .
I should like to say this about the EU-Africa Summit . For a start , I consider that Europe cannot go on paying the price for not having a structured , institutional and strategic dialogue with Africa .
I think that is a mistake that is already costing us dear .
We in Europe are paying the price , but the Africans are also paying the price , and there are people whose lives are the worse because we do not have that dialogue with Africa .
If we in this Chamber think of human rights and hunger , we must also think that a great deal would be contributed by holding a summit with Africa , not only to resolve development problems and to provide a better response to the problems of hunger in Africa , but also to provide a better response to the problems of governance and human rights in African countries .
That is how I see this issue .
Now , the surest way of contributing nothing towards resolving problems is to stay as we are : doing nothing .
I consider that the wrong option .
On the subject of Africa I would also like to tell you , honourable Members , of my sadness on hearing the news about the Bulgarian nurses , as previous speakers have mentioned .
I should also like you to know that we have been monitoring that case for a long time .
As you know , Portugal is one of the countries that has the best relations with the North African countries , including Libya , and we have been keeping a close eye on the matter . We have for a long time been talking to the Libyan authorities about it .
We now have more responsibility during these six months and are well aware of the importance of the case .
We are working on it , and indeed , I did so recently , in conjunction with the President of the Commission , when we were in Accra .
We shall do everything possible to ensure that the case has a happy ending .
There is still leave to appeal the decision .
As I say , we are monitoring the case and hope you all appreciate the diplomatic delicacy of the matter .
Our objective is to see that the case be brought to a satisfactory conclusion .
As you will appreciate , political rhetoric is not always helpful , but you all know how committed we are to securing a satisfactory outcome to the case .
Two more comments . Firstly , with regard to climate change , I should just like to say that I have been Minister for the Environment , I have spent a term of office as Minister for the Environment , and I remember the difficulty we had at the time , in 2000 , talking about climate change .
That difficulty belongs to a different era . The situation is now totally different and I believe we have all realised that the operational synthesis between innovation and energy is climate change .
There is a great desire in various sectors for action to be taken quickly , but I think , as you must all agree , that the decisions we took at the last spring European Council were absolutely essential to give Europe credibility in that field and to put Europe in a political position to lead , to be in the front line , to provide a political response to this global problem .
We are going to monitor this subject very closely . I myself - if I can fit it into my timetable , although I intend to do so - shall be in Bali , representing the EU , to give a speech expressing the Union 's willingness to provide leadership for the post-Kyoto framework and for the world 's response to climate change .
I should like to make it clear , however , that we have an internal agenda to which we must adhere and that agenda includes the Technological Energy Plan , which we shall deal with in conjunction with the Commission , and the creation of the European Institute of Technology , which we firmly support and which will be launching its first Knowledge and Innovation Community ( KIC ) and that first initiative is rightly , and indeed symbolically , targeted at climate change .
Finally , a word on biofuels : there are no magic solutions , but biofuels are the most efficient way at the present time of reducing CO2 in the field of transport .
I have no doubts about this and if there is a way forward , an appropriate solution that contributes towards such reduction , I consider that we have no right to overlook it , if only because it naturally has a less than favourable impact on other areas .
I consider that the balance-sheet on biofuels is highly positive and one that should encourage us to continue with them .
Finally , I turn to immigration . I want to make it clear that the subject of immigration will be one of the most important during our Presidency .
We shall attach great importance to this issue .
Europe needs to set out a clear way of thinking on immigration .
I think the only way we can have an immigration policy commensurate with the problem and also compatible with our values is to define a policy constructed on three pillars .
The first is to prevent illegal immigration , to strengthen border security , and fight this crime against human dignity .
The second is to fight for an inclusive , human policy .
Europe today is a continent that provides shelter for many millions of immigrants , who are also waiting for a definition of immigration .
Thirdly , as a third pillar , we must have a policy that has been agreed with the countries of origin , to make it possible to regulate migratory flows to our mutual benefit .
These are the three pillars that should form European policy , but they should be formulated in documentary form , and therefore , during the next six months , we shall be organising conferences and shall continue to work in conjunction with the Commission and Mr Frattini to make it possible to structure and publicise a consistent and comprehensive European Union immigration policy compatible with the response the problem demands .
Madam President , honourable Members , I should like to thank you once again for all your comments and wish to conclude as follows . We have our plan , we are embarking on these six months with confidence , with the energy and willingness of those political leaders who , throughout their political lives , have always believed in the European project .
I have said several times before that I was born in 1957 , the Year of Europe , and elected to Parliament a year after we came into Europe .
I am a European politician and , therefore , when I come here , I do so with the greatest honour as one who has this opportunity to serve Europe in such a place .
We therefore start out with confidence , the confidence of someone who is thoroughly familiar with the European project .
We have a plan , but a plan is only a plan .
Naturally there will be unforeseen events , situations that were not in the plan , events that will take us by surprise , and it is just as well that politics is like that , because if it were not so it would not be a matter for politicians , inasmuch as politicians are there to deal with unforeseen situations .
The plan guides us in our actions and , if unforeseen and unexpected events occur , we shall be here , armed with what is important for a politician : the set of values , principles and guidelines that have always guided us in the construction of a stronger Europe in the service of a better world .
Thank you , Mr President .
President-in-Office , we have confidence in you .
The European Parliament will be at your side making sure you succeed .
If you succeed , the European Union will succeed .
We wish you all the best for the Presidency .
President of the Commission .
( PT ) Mr President , Prime Minister , honourable Members , I also should first of all like to take this opportunity to express our solidarity with the Bulgarian nurses and their families , and also with the Palestinian doctor , following the disturbing news we have received .
We are extremely disappointed by these decisions , but I would also like to say that I am confident that a solution will be found .
In particular , I would like to assure the Bulgarian nurses and their families that the European Commission , in conjunction with the President of the Council and the Member States , will do everything possible to safeguard their right to life and freedom .
Prime Minister , the debate has clearly demonstrated that Parliament supports the priorities of the Portuguese Presidency of the Council .
As Mr Schulz said , a message of support for the European project has come from the various political and ideological areas .
The European project cannot be seen as merely the property of one political or ideological sector or another .
It should unite political forces that have that common objective of making a stronger Europe , a Europe that responds to the aspirations of its citizens .
That is what we have seen here today .
We very much agree with the your analysis regarding the need to resolve the institutional issue . The fact is that the non-resolution of the institutional issue has cast a shadow of doubt , of scepticism , of negativity and at times even of cynicism , over everything Europe has done .
Europe has not been deadlocked .
In recent years , and the cooperation between the various institutions has been important in this , we have succeeded in dealing with difficult issues , we have approved a budget for the next seven years , we have achieved a hard-won consensus on an issue as divisive as the service directive , at the March European Council , we succeeded in adopting the most ambitious package of measures so far presented concerning the fight against climate change , the relaunched Lisbon Strategy has borne fruit , thanks to a new system of governance .
The fact is that at present Europe is , broadly speaking , enjoying a successful period ; we have economic growth that gives us fresh cause for hope , we are creating more jobs now than our US partners and Eurobarometer results confirm that we have the highest level of confidence in Europe for eight years .
Times are , therefore , better .
The fact is , however , that until the institutional issue is resolved , this doubt is always present and , particularly when we are outside Europe , we are confronted with questions to which we have to attach due prominence .
We are asked how Europeans can want to lead the world in the fight against climate change , how Europeans can ensure energy security , how Europeans can want to transform their economy into one of the fairest , most inclusive and most competitive in the world , when they are incapable of deciding how their own institutions should function and how decisions should be taken .
This , therefore , is a matter of credibility .
That is why it is absolutely essential that we resolve the institutional issue and the Prime Minister , the President-in-office of the Council , will leave here today , with , in my view , the very clear support of both Parliament and certainly the Commission , to find a solution in full compliance with the mandate and if possible a solution as early as the October European Council .
That should be our objective and in that , Prime Minister , you have our total support .
Lastly , I would like to say that we have taken careful note of the priorities established at the December European Council : immigration and matters related to the new Agenda for Security , Justice and Freedom in Europe .
One of the improvements we have made to the Treaty is to increase our capacity to take action on matters of justice , freedom and security .
As previous speakers have mentioned , immigration issues are crucial from a human point of view - they are human dramas that we have to deal with .
As regards the Agenda for Innovation , the Prime Minister has just now taken the opportunity to lend his clear and unequivocal support to the creation of a European Institute of Technology , to the launch of the first Knowledge and Innovation Community , innovation precisely targeted at the issue of climate change , and anything we can do to give fresh impetus to the Agenda for Innovation .
This is one of the issues in which Europe cannot afford to lag behind , or to give ground , not only in relation to our US partners but also in relation to other , emerging powers ; Europe needs to make more determined efforts in this area .
I feel that if we achieve these objectives we shall be entitled to be proud of ourselves .
Finally , with regard to Africa , a problem that has been discussed here , honourable Members , we cannot accept that our relations with a continent like the African continent should be dependent on one dictator or another , whoever it might be .
The fact is that Europe has partnership relations at the highest level with Asia , where there are dictators , and with Latin America , where some countries are also not democracies . What is more , the red carpet is laid out for some of those dictators in certain European capitals .
I therefore cannot understand why we are prevented from having high-level relations with Africa , whilst we keep the door open for those who are sometimes actually hampering Africa 's democratic development , because we are in some way being held hostage by one dictator or another .
We therefore resolutely support this priority of the Portuguese Presidency , and it is certain that the objectives , or one of the objectives , of the summit should be to discuss democracy , freedom , human rights and the need to develop our relations for the benefit of good governance in Africa , and all areas of relations between our respective continents .
If so , I think we can be happy with this Presidency because we are sure that , during these six months , we shall continue to advance towards a stronger Europe for a better world ; a Europe where it is demonstrated in practice that only by working together can we produce results that are really in the interests of European citizens .
( Applause )
The debate on the Portuguese Presidency is closed .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) As well as the reform of the institutions , without which the European Union will not have the role that it should within the world , and the challenge to achieve competitiveness within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy , I hope that the Portuguese Presidency will be able to tackle vigorously that which , as I have already emphasised on various occasions , is the main stalemate that we need to overcome , namely energy independence and the fight against climate change .
Energy will represent at the same time the business and the problem of the future , as we can see also from the alarm over the imminent total consumption of non-renewable energy sources and the Kyoto protocol commitments .
Only with proper independence from external suppliers will we be able to ensure that Europe has a leading role in the world economy in the long term , as well as a stronger position on the geopolitical stage , and is not subject to external threats .
This is an essential condition when it comes to promoting stability , democracy and respect for human rights throughout the world .
Let us therefore try to focus our attention , energies and resources on what we already have , which is nuclear power , and on what we can have , which is renewable energy sources , promoting research , cofinancing by the Member States and the private sector , action on tax , reform of the transport sector , and a call to European experts who have gone abroad through lack of opportunities .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Portuguese Presidency must focus on the priority objective of the signing by the 27 of a new institutional treaty , in October , in Lisbon , all the more so because the mandate entrusted to the Intergovernmental Conference by the last European Council is clear and precise .
The launch of a new round of the Lisbon Strategy for growth and employment is an opportunity to give the social dimension the importance and visibility that it deserves , not least through the improved coordination of employment policies and through the development of ' flexicurity ' , with the aim of reconciling our fellow citizens with Europe and its reformed economic model .
I am sure that the Portuguese Presidency will pay special attention to the EU 's outermost regions - the specific circumstances of which it is well aware - together with Madeira and the Azores , in order to give fresh impetus to the Community measures benefiting them , not least those concerning the neighbourhood policy and the additional costs generated by the outermost regions .
It is imperative that the last Brussels summit has beneficial consequences and bears witness to the fact that Europe 's renewed spirit is stronger than the national self-interests .
I sincerely hope that the Portuguese Presidency succeeds in making the most of the major political boost observed at the end of the German Presidency .
Statement by the President
Today the Libyan Supreme Court confirmed the death sentence passed on the five Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor detained in Libya since February 1999 .
They are accused of deliberately infecting hundreds of Libyan children with HIV .
I am greatly disturbed by this news , which is distressing for everybody , especially , of course , for the nurses and the doctor , and for their relatives and friends .
I met members of their families in April , and I should like to pass on to them our solidarity and support at this difficult time .
I should also like to send them a message of hope .
This is not the end of the procedure .
The matter will now be referred to the Libyan High Judicial Council .
We believe that the Libyan authorities will take the necessary steps to review and quash the death sentence , paving the way for an early resolution to this situation .
Once again , we reiterate our fundamental opposition to the death penalty , which is against human dignity .
We express our solidarity with the victims of the HIV / AIDS infection in Benghazi hospital .
We appeal to the Libyan authorities to show clemency and to release the five Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor .
( Sustained applause )
1 .
Calendar of part-sessions for 2008 ( vote )
2 .
Convening of the Intergovernmental Conference : opinion of the European Parliament ( vote )
- Report : Leinen
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , in this opinion we have given the green light to convene the Intergovernmental Conference .
We had a very tight deadline for producing the report and holding consultations .
There was no alternative , although there has been criticism from some members .
There are two minority opinions appended to the opinion : one from Marco Cappato and the other from Bernard Wojciechowski , but as I said , time was limited .
Exceptional circumstances require an extra degree of flexibility , and I would like to take this opportunity to thank the members of my committee for their willingness to make constructive contributions , for the discussions on the proposal and for giving their approval on Monday evening .
We have respected the rules of procedure and so can vote today .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Mr Leinen for having emphasised the presence of the minority opinions .
Rule 2 of our Rules of Procedure states that we shall not be bound by any instructions and shall not receive a binding mandate .
This applies with regard to issues and , in my view , also to methods .
A system whereby , in connection with a decision that will have consequences for the next few years or decades , we have had one and a half hours in which to table amendments to the original versions , and not even that amount of time in committee , is a sort of binding mandate not to be debated , which Parliament has received on this highly important issue .
This is not just a formality : since this Parliament 's opinion is mandatory , we could have used such an obligation to have a positive influence on decisions during the opening of this intergovernmental conference .
Instead , we ourselves abdicated from doing so , and also abdicated from being a Parliament and exercising the powers available to us .
This is the reason for the minority opinion .
- Before the vote on Amendment 1
( DE ) Mr President , since several Members addressed me before the vote , I would like to use this opportunity to stress once again that the proposal to include the question of representation for the European Parliament in the Intergovernmental Conference mandate was supported by many Members of this House .
So , if this is a signal you want to send , here is an opportunity to do so .
- Before the vote on Amendment 9
Mr President , I would like to propose an oral amendment to this amendment to add the word ' European ' before ' referendum ' , so it would then read ' European referendum ' .
( The oral amendment was not accepted . )
3 .
Mergers and division of public limited companies ( vote )
- Report : Kauppi
4 .
Specific Programme ' Civil justice ' ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
- Report : Segelström
- Before the vote
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission would like to make the following declaration before the vote .
' The Commission hopes that it will be possible today to find an acceptable compromise in all the institutions on account of the importance of adopting a civil justice financial programme as soon as possible .
We are already late .
If an acceptable solution is not found today , it is clear that the civil justice programme will not be adopted in time to be executed in 2007 , with very negative consequences .
Without this financial programme , the Commission will not be able to support associations or other actors from civil society , or the studies and projects that are fundamental to the development of the civil justice policies .
The Commission could support the compromise set out in amendment 2 , which adds a recital to the Council 's common position specifying the right of Parliament to be informed in accordance with Article 7 ( 3 ) of Decision 1999 / 468 / EC and , more particularly , to receive the draft annual programme relating to the civil justice financial programme when it is submitted to the management committee .
Parliament should also receive the results of voting and a summary record of the meeting of the management committee .
The Commission , moreover , confirms its commitment to transmit directly to the chair of the competent parliamentary committee - the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs - the draft annual programme , and to inform Parliament without delay about any modification being made to it .
Finally , the Commission confirms , as firmly stated in the letters addressed by Vice-President Frattini to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , its availability to attend the competent parliamentary committee upon its request , in order to provide its members with all necessary information on the draft annual programme ' .
5 .
Community action in the field of water policy ( vote )
- Report : Lienemann
6 .
End-of life vehicles ( vote )
- Report : Florenz
7 .
Waste electrical and electronic equipment ( vote )
- Report : Florenz
8 .
Hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment ( vote )
- Report : Florenz
9 .
Ecodesign requirements for energy-using products ( vote )
- Report : Ries
10 .
Community postal services ( vote )
- Report : Ferber
- Before the vote on Amendment 64 :
Mr President , I should like you to check that the corresponding part of Amendment 64 is compatible with Amendment 62 , which was adopted .
That is exactly what we are going to do !
11 .
Common rules for air transport services ( vote )
- Report : Degutis
- Following the approval of the Commission 's proposal .
( FR ) Mr President , I should simply like to draw the translation services ' attention to the quality of the French translation .
The French word for supervision is supervision , and not contrôle or surveillance , hedge funds are fonds alternatifs and parliamentary committee is commission parlementaire .
We take good note of those corrections for the sake of the purity of the French language .
12 .
Financial services policy ( 2005-2010 ) - White Paper ( vote )
- Report : van den Burg
- Before the vote on paragraph 26
rapporteur . - On this paragraph , I propose withdrawing the oral amendments but asking the PPE-DE Group if they can agree that both amendment 5 from their side and amendment 17 from the ALDE Group are compatible and that we can vote on both of them .
If that is the case , we will vote in favour of your amendment as well .
If not , we will vote against it and I can then withdraw my amendment 23 .
- Before the vote on paragraph 34
rapporteur . - I should simply like to add ' group ' to paragraph 34 , so that it is the ' European Investment Bank Group ' instead of just the bank .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
13 .
Modernising labour law to meet the challenges of the 21st century ( vote )
- Report : Protasiewicz
- Before the vote on Amendment 11
, rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would just like to explain to my fellow Members that Amendments 11 and 12 are not new texts being added , but existing paragraphs being moved from elsewhere .
As one of the groups has requested a roll call vote , I would like to inform them that voting against it will not change the fact that this text remains in the report , but that it will be in a different , less suitable place .
For this reason I ask you to vote in favour of Amendment 12 .
- Before the vote on paragraph 3
, rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , One further clarification : just because we are now voting separately on paragraphs 3 and 4 , that does not mean the amendments announced by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality will be excluded .
That text will be inserted elsewhere , in the form of Amendments 20 and 21 .
They are therefore not being deleted from the report , but simply changing position .
- Before the vote on paragraph 4
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although I have heard the explanation given by the rapporteur , I would like to say that if we adopt paragraph 4 , on which we are about to vote , we ought to bear in mind that the text of Amendment 21 is exactly the same as that of paragraph 4 .
So if we act in this way , we will have the same text twice in the report .
If we wish to change the text , we ought to reject the first paragraph and then approve the amendment .
( ES ) Mr Protasiewicz , please clear up Mr Cocilovo 's doubts .
, rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , Mr Cocilovo is right .
Voting against the deletion of paragraph 3 and paragraph 4 means that if a vote is held on Amendments 20 and 21 , we will simply be covering the same ground .
For this reason I would ask this House that now we vote against , and then vote in favour of Amendments 20 and 21 , which means that the text itself will remain the same , but it will only be moved to a more suitable place in the report .
- Before the vote on Amendment 37
( FR ) Mr President , please could you tell the French booth that we are talking about paragraphs , not recitals .
It would appear that people are closing ranks in defence of the French language in this House .
That is very good .
- Before the vote on Amendment 21
, rapporteur - ( PL ) Mr President , may I point out that as a result of the vote on paragraph 3 , which was not deleted , and Amendment 20 , which we adopted , in the report we now have two paragraphs which say the same thing .
I therefore ask you to vote against Amendment 20 , as we previously left that text in its old place .
( EL ) We do not recognise you today , you are somewhat slow .
Thank you for that morale boost , Mr Sifunakis .
14 .
Motion for a resolution ( vote )
- Resolution :
- Before the vote on Amendment 10
Mr President I have a brief comment concerning amendment 10 .
The initial amendment was apparently mistranslated into German to mean exactly the opposite of what the English said because the English text was ambiguous .
So the purpose of this is to remove the ambiguity .
I am sorry that there was not time to clear this with all political groups , but I hope that they will support it because it is not trying to change the text .
It is merely trying to clarify and remove the ambiguity .
( FR ) Mr President , I believe that it is humanly reasonable to stop this vote , even if it means restarting it tomorrow , at 11.30 a.m.

( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to endorse that comment .
We need to stop the vote now .
It would be unreasonable to continue voting now , especially given the length of the reports .
If necessary , we will have to curtail the speaking times tomorrow or keep strictly to them , so as to be able to start voting at 11.30 a.m.
In response to your request , we shall now suspend the vote .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results of the vote and other voting information : see Minutes )
Mr President , it is a ludicrous state of affairs to commence voting at 12.40 on 48 pages of votes .
You , Sir , have been doing remarkably well in organising Parliament so that we vote at proper times in order to deal with these large voting lists .
We should have started at 11.00 , not at 12.40 .
I urge you to revert to type and ensure we do not do this again .
( Applause )
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 2.25 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Eurozone ( 2007 ) - European Central Bank ( 2006 ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Dariusz Rosati on behalf of the Committee for Economic and Monetary Affairs on the Eurozone annual report 2007 ( 2007 / 2143 ( ) INI ) and
the report by Gay Mitchell on behalf of the Committee for Economic and Monetary Affairs on the European Central Bank 's annual report for 2006 .
I am very pleased to welcome the President of the Euro Group , the Luxembourg Prime Minister and Finance Minister Jean-Claude Juncker .
I am also delighted to welcome the President of the European Central Bank , Jean-Claude Trichet to the European Parliament .
Let me also extend a warm welcome to Commissioner Joaquín Almunia .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I am pleased to present the second ever report of the European Parliament in response to the Annual Report of the European Commission on the Eurozone .
The Commission 's report presents the economic situation in the Eurozone in 2007 .
The results of the report are cause for satisfaction .
The economic growth rate in the Eurozone rose to 2.7 % , which is the best result since 2000 , whilst unemployment fell to 7.6 % , the lowest in 15 years .
At the same time the Eurozone has become an increasing factor in stabilising the world economy .
This generally optimistic picture , however , should not conceal some negatives , and these are what we focus on in our report .
Firstly , the rate of fiscal adaptation , particularly in countries with large budget deficits , is too slow , bearing in mind that the stability and growth pact obliges Member States to maintain as balanced a budget as possible in the medium term .
That involves building up a budget surplus in good times to have a financial reserve for times of recession .
In this context we are critical of the behaviour of some Member States who are not making use of the current period of growth to implement the necessary cuts in public spending .
Secondly , Parliament points out that the good average results for the whole of the Eurozone cover up substantial differences in the economic situation from one Member State to another .
Of particular concern is the declining international competitiveness of some countries ' economies , most frequently due to wage rises in excess of the increase in productivity .
Thirdly , we call for a continuation of the structural reforms required by the guidelines of the new Lisbon Strategy .
We have to increase the speed at which the remaining barriers in the markets for goods and services are removed , and help further integration of the labour and financial markets , which will become an important element in the proper functioning of the Eurozone .
We would like in particular to draw attention to the speedy implementation of the services directive , which has brought accelerated growth in labour productivity and cut inflation in the services sector .
This is particularly important , as services make up 70 % of the GDP in the Eurozone .
Fourthly , Parliament stresses the importance of further extending the Eurozone to strengthen economic and monetary union and the common currency .
We are pleased at the decision to accept Cyprus and Malta into the Eurozone , and look forward to other states joining it in the not too distant future .
We would like to point out that the process for ascertaining the readiness of countries applying for the Eurozone should be transparent and based on uniform criteria , whose economic rationale and political importance should be in no doubt .
In this regard we call upon the Commission and the Council to start a serious debate on the nominal convergence criteria .
Finally , I would like to emphasise the importance of good governance and intensified policy coordination in the Eurozone .
We need this if we are to make full use of the opportunities provided by the common currency .
I am pleased at the decision taken by the Euro group in April this year to adopt benchmarks for the fiscal policies of Member States .
We expect the implementation of these decisions to be closely monitored .
I would like to take this opportunity to assure Mr Juncker that in this matter he has the full support of Parliament .
I would also like to congratulate Commissioner Almunia on preparing the Commission 's second report on the economic situation in the Eurozone and express the wish that the reports prepared in coming years bring just as good news as this one .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I am happy for this report to be debated jointly with the report on the eurozone .
I would add that the report I am presenting was adopted unanimously by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Starting with the economic situation , in 2006 the economic recovery in the eurozone became a self-sustaining process with domestic demand acting as the main driver .
Two million jobs were created in 2006 and unemployment fell from 8.4 % to 7.6 % .
In the context of this recovery , I would like to stress the main points of the report .
Against the background of the recent recovery , any further raising of interest rates should be undertaken with caution in order not to endanger economic growth .
It is crucial that wages increase in line with productivity in order to preserve competitiveness in Member States and to allow for job creation in a non-inflationary environment .
Fiscal consolidation is key and all the more necessary in good times in order to achieve long-term growth .
The report observes that small economies have performed better than large economies since the creation of the eurozone in terms of growth , with notably Ireland , Finland , Greece , Luxembourg and Spain achieving a higher average growth rate than the eurozone average and we say that lessons might be drawn from such developments .
The report expresses concern about the ongoing appreciation of the euro against most major European currencies .
Article 111 of the Treaty assigns responsibility for exchange rate policy to the Council but without specifying how this responsibility should be exercised .
The report calls on the Eurogroup , the Council and the ECB to exercise their respective powers and responsibilities in full coordination .
The report also calls on the ECB to monitor closely developments in the use of the euro as a reserve currency for central banks and , in the context of its annual report on the international role of the euro , to quantify and analyse the effects of this , particularly as regards exchange rates .
Mr Trichet will be aware that every time he has appeared at Parliament 's Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee during the last two years I have raised with him the issue of house prices .
This remains a concern of mine .
Therefore , the report calls for the ECB to monitor closely these developments , which have the potential to have consequences for the real economy .
The report contains a request that the ECB present ways forward with their respective advantages , such as including real estate in the harmonised index of consumer prices or devising a specific type of indicator or suggesting specific measures to be taken at national level due to heterogeneities among the national markets .
I refer later on to the Fed formula .
Perhaps it is time to develop an ECB formula to help forecast the likely effect of interest rate increases on house prices .
My report also raises the issue of sub-prime lending and suggests that lessons can be learned in the EU from the potential difficulties for the US economy of sub-prime lending .
I would like to take a moment to address an issue of particular concern to Ireland but which has potential interest for other eurozone members .
Last year in Ireland house prices were forecast to increase by 9 % by estate agents Hook and McDonald , by between 8 % and 10 % by Sherry Fitzgerald and by 7 % by Friends First and IIB , while Allied Irish Banks forecast an increase of between 3 % and 6 % .
The recent Irish Permanent tsb / ESRI index shows in fact that house prices fell by 2.1 % between January and May 2007 and a further decline in Ireland is expected .
Sub-prime lending - that is lending to poorer people , those with an irregular income stream or difficult history of meeting loans - is projected to grow to EUR 4 billion in Ireland this year .
If the average loan was between EUR 200 000 and EUR 400 000 , then between 10 000 and 20 000 such loans exist in Ireland alone .
Sub-prime lenders are relatively new to the Irish market and generally charge about twice the going mortgage rate to ' compensate ' - as they put it - lenders for higher risk .
In one case a mortgage company operating in Ireland since 2005 has already repossessed 30 homes .
There are also signs of concern in Britain about sub-prime lending .
It has been known for some time that there is a Fed formula in the United States .
The Fed formula devised by the US Federal Reserve , according to one of its former economists , shows that typically , when house prices have been driven up for several years by low interest rates , when interest rates increase , prices begin to decline roughly 18 months to 2 years later .
I believe that the ECB should follow this formula and develop an ECB formula because , at present , we are leaving it to people who are involved in the industry to make the forecasts , and they are the people - the financial institutions and others - who have most to gain .
The report urges the Commission to assess the quality of supervision and offshore location of hedge funds .
It reiterates points made in the past about democratic scrutiny and the need to publish summary minutes .
It draws attention to the fact that overdraft rates in the euro area vary from 7 % to 13.5 % and asks that the ECB evaluate this .
It ends by saying that the number of banknotes in circulation stood at 11.3 billion with a value of EUR 628.2 billion last year , but that it is concerned about the growth in the number of 50 euro , 100 euro and 500 euro banknotes .
500 euro banknotes alone have increased by 13.2 % .
My report , with the support of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee , raises the possibility of criminal activities in the use of these large banknotes and says that it requires further examination by the ECB .
I hope Mr Trichet will be in a position to respond to this report and , in particular - not today , but perhaps over a certain period - to consider my suggestion about an ECB formula to equate with the Fed formula so that there can be a true and accurate measure of the likely knock-on effect of interest rate increases on house prices in the Member States of the eurozone .
President of Eurogroup . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President of the European Central Bank , Madam President of the committee , rapporteurs , ladies and gentlemen ,
We , in Europe , have replaced the fundamental debate with simple words .
We are invited to Parliament - I hardly ever see it - to the plenary , as it is called , and we talk , I note , of the everyday living conditions of Europeans , something that undoubtedly enhances the credibility of our institutions .
European newspapers , especially this week 's , report the words that were supposedly exchanged , during a recent Eurogroup , with an evening visitor whom we had the pleasure of hosting .
I have read a summary of these long debates in editorials that take up scarcely 25 lines , and we complain that Europeans are poorly informed of what is really going on in Europe !
So be it .
On the other hand , I am pleased to note that , one or two nuances aside , there is very little difference between the substance of the report by our friend , Mr Rosati , and our , the Eurogroup 's , joint consideration , since our joint finding is that growth in Europe is on the up again , is expanding , is continuing , and everything rests on our knowing whether , in a few months ' time , we will be able to see whether or not this prolonged recovery , this renewed growth in Europe , will enable us to say that the growth potential of the European Union , and of the eurozone in particular , has substantially increased .
We are agreed in our finding that the levels of underemployment , of unemployment , are going down .
We have had the lowest unemployment level for a very long time now .
There is no doubt about that .
The fact remains , however , that it must be stressed that the European Union , which is meant to be a model for the world but which still has an employment rate that is structurally higher than 7 % , has no reason to seek plaudits from others or to proclaim itself victorious over the phenomenon of unemployment on our continent .
The deficits are decreasing .
We saw a distinct upturn in the situation of Europe 's public finances during the period 2005-2006 .
That is true above all where the deficit is concerned .
Its level of 2.5 in 2005 decreased to 1.6 in 2006 , which clearly proves that the corrective arm of the reformed Stability and Growth Pact has proven itself , and this , despite all the generally poor warnings that were given to us when we amended the Pact .
It is true that , where the preventive arm of the Pact is concerned , we struggle to produce the same successes that we have been able to produce with the recovery of public finances in its corrective part .
We , the members of the Eurogroup - there are 13 of us now and there will be 15 of us as from 1 January - remain committed to the effectiveness of the policies that must be implemented in order to make the preventive arm of the Pact really develop , really take off .
When the economy is going well , when growth rates provide so many grounds for satisfaction , when economic growth gets back on track , it is clear that those times - which , in Franglais , we call good times - must be turned to good account , so that the structural deficits in our public finances can be brought down .
Hence the huge importance that we accord to achieving the medium-term objective quickly , something that requires Member States of the eurozone to redouble their efforts in order to achieve their medium-term objective in time .
It will not have escaped you that , on this point , the informal Eurogroup that was held in Berlin on 20 April took a decision that involves a commitment being made , since we said that all the Member States should meet the medium-term objective in 2008 and 2009 .
Some of them managed to delay this until 2010 , without having their cases clarified .
There was never a question of not meeting the objective until 2012 .
This was , of course , the main topic of discussion when , recently , at the start of the week , we met the French President , who came - and we ought to welcome this - to explain to us , at Eurogroup , the new headings and the new aims of France 's economic and budgetary policy .
We approve heartily of the set of reforms under way , because they are structural reforms sought by the French Government and by the French President , but we would emphasise that which we expect and demand from France : like the other Member States of the eurozone , it must meet the medium-term objective that we have set ourselves on 1 January 2010 .
This is a remark that applies to France ; it may easily apply to countries farther south and , in an ecumenical way , to all the Member States of the eurozone .
However , we have been given reassurances regarding a reduction in the deficit in 2008 , as compared with 2007 , regarding the principle , which has been accepted by the French authorities , of allocating all the profits from revenue made in relation to budget estimates , in so far as the revenue is short-term revenue , and regarding the reduction in the deficit and the debt .
We all believe , since this is a subject that is brought up by the press , both in France and across the border into Germany - we are , after all , in Strasbourg - that no countries tried , in any working language of the European Union , last Monday , in the setting of Eurogroup , to call into question the independence of the European Central Bank .
Moreover , if someone were to take the liberty of doing so , it would not be enough for them to be expressive in voicing a misguided thought , for respect must still be shown for the Treaties .
We wanted an independent Central Bank ; we have an independent Central Bank .
It will , of course , remain an independent central monetary authority .
( Applause )
The strength of the euro is another subject that gives rise to debate .
However , we do not see the ministers of Eurogroup , under the present circumstances - today , even - claim that a strong euro is liable to jeopardise economic growth in the eurozone .
Rather , we believe that the Member States that are uneasy about this strength of the European currency in relation to the outside - strength that reflects the robustness of Europe 's economic recovery - should ensure , within their countries , by introducing the necessary structural reforms , that their national economic systems , that is to say , their systems under the eurozone , become more competitive .
I was sensitive to the remarks made by your rapporteur in his report on the derailing of certain elements of wage policy .
A large number of company managers are being granted allowances that in no way correspond to the appeals made again and again , both by the Bank and by Eurogroup , for a wage moderation policy that is understood properly , that is , for wage moderation that keeps up with the pace of the increase in productivity .
We ought not to be surprised that European workers can no longer get to grips with a Europe in which some people earn a fortune without working , when one sees the volume of work that that requires , and the others have to resign themselves to accepting this , to being subjected to the appeals that we launch to them to encourage them to support wage moderation .
( Applause ) It is economic and social injustice that is now taking hold .
We must react to it .
I agree with your rapporteur that , when viewed from the outside , the economic zone must be represented as being more solid , more of a single entity , but I cannot say that I understood the full scope of his ambition , when he advocates a single representation of the eurozone internationally .
In spite of his qualities , Mr Trichet will not succeed in making me withdraw from the European scene .
I am here , and here to stay .
And , as far as I am concerned , I have no ambition , no vague desire , that is driving me to force the other Jean-Claude to step down .
Which one of us , moreover , could have the idea of eliminating the Commission from the external representation of the eurozone ?
The eurozone may be represented externally by one party , even if there are three of us , provided that there is an agreement among the three partners representing the eurozone externally .
That agreement exists .
It will have escaped no one that , on the key points of monetary policy , be it internal or external policy , we share exactly the same ideas and convictions .
I have restricted my remarks to the key points , Mr President , because that is what is asked of us by your Rules of Procedure , which I find particularly strict when the aim is to talk more vividly about the crucial and , as Parliament often says , everyday , problems of Europeans .
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the European Central Bank , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that it is very positive that , for the first time , we are holding this debate on the situation of the eurozone , which is the second we have held , following the first resulting from the first Commission report on the eurozone , and the report on the European Central Bank simultaneously , leading to an overall reflection on the situation of the eurozone , on the functioning of the Economic and Monetary Union and on the prospects for the future .

I must thank both Mr Rosati and Mr Mitchell for the wonderful reports they have presented to us and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for the work it has done in the debate on the proposals that we are currently discussing .
The proper functioning of the eurozone is a matter of crucial importance to our citizens .
I must tell you from the outset , however , that I am worried that many European citizens , who carry and pay in euros every day , are not showing any great satisfaction with the single currency , at a time when the eurozone 's economy is clearly recovering , when economic growth is above our potential - and above that of the United States - when the eurozone is enjoying a recovery , as Mr Trichet has said , based on internal demand , which was not the case a few years ago .
It is a recovery with investment that is growing in a very satisfactory manner and which heralds future improvements in our economy and with an economy that is helping to generate - in the case of last year - two million jobs in the countries of the eurozone .
And all of this with a practically even trade balance , with an inflation rate currently below 2 % and a stability that any of the world 's economic areas would want .
I believe that everybody , the Commission , of course , but also the Council , and in particular the Eurogroup , the European Central Bank and the European Parliament , have the responsibility to explain to our citizens that this European project , eight years after its creation , is currently yielding very good results .
I believe that this debate must serve to do that .
But it must also help us to learn from experience , to establish which elements of the Economic and Monetary Union are not functioning as we had imagined eight years ago , and to implement the adaptations and political decisions required in order to make the future better than the present , however positive the present may be .
Following the Ecofin meeting yesterday , more Europeans are going to share in this positive present .
Yesterday , Ecofin formally adopted the latest decisions required in order to confirm that the eurozone would be enlarged to include Malta and Cyprus on January 2008 .
On 1 January of this year it was enlarged to include Slovenia .
Next year three new Member States will also have joined the Economic and Monetary Union , sharing the single currency with 318 million other Europeans .
I believe that that is a very positive element which was debated yesterday and agreed to everybody 's satisfaction , not just by the 15 members of the eurozone , but also by the other 12 States that do not yet share the single currency , and I believe that that is worth stressing at this point .
With regard to the economic situation , I am not going to refer to it in detail , since both Mr Juncker and Mr Trichet have already done that .

With regard to the application of the Stability and Growth Pact , which I believe relates to this improvement in the economic situation and this economic stability that we are enjoying in the eurozone , I must say , as Mr Juncker has already said , that the application of the corrective part of the revised Stability Pact , the application of the excessive deficit procedures , is having a very positive effect .
This year , we have abrogated three excessive deficit procedures relating to three members of the eurozone , including the zone 's two leading economies , France and Germany , which are no longer in a situation of excessive deficit .
We have also abrogated the excessive deficit procedure relating to Greece .
Excessive deficit procedures are currently still in place for two countries of the zone , Italy and Portugal .
If things carry on as they are , by the end of the year Italy will have corrected its excessive deficit and it will be well below 3 % , and , if things carry on as they are , then Portugal , if not this year , then next year , will have corrected its excessive deficit by the end of 2008 , as requested by the Council .
With regard to the eurozone , therefore , the application of that element of the Pact , which is the best-known element , and most striking element and the element with the strongest and most powerful instruments in the hands of the Commission and the Council , is being carried out satisfactorily .
It is the preventive part that we are concerned with now .
The Eurogroup debated it on Monday and Ecofin debated it yesterday .
This is the most topical and most difficult debate during economic good times , because during economic good times , it is more difficult , not in economic terms but in political terms , to carry on consolidating public finances and the instruments in the hands of the Commission and the Council to assist in that correction of public finances beyond the 3 % limits and towards the mid-term objective of balance in structural terms .
They are weaker instruments from a legal point of view and they must be based on political consensus , on peer pressure and on the conviction that that is a necessary condition for sustained growth .
We have recently debated once again - this very week - the situation in Italy , which is one of excessive deficit , but we should now be considering how to move its consolidation process forward , and it is being considered with great difficulty .
We are lucky enough not to have to debate the situation in Germany so much , because a lot of progress has been made on fiscal consolidation in Germany .
And we have begun to debate the situation in France .
I am going to tell you my opinion on Monday 's debate in the Eurogroup , expanding on what Mr Juncker has said .
There is one very positive fact . The French President has promised the Finance Ministers of the eurozone and the President of the European Central Bank and of the Commission that he is going to promote a very serious programme of reforms which he will set out in detail between now and September .
There is also a second very positive fact . He has promised to allocate all of the budget surplus to fiscal consolidation and debt reduction .
And something new , at the meeting of the Eurogroup he said , ' if I can adjust the deficit in 2010 , I want to adjust the deficit in 2010 ' , something that was not clear before the meeting of the Eurogroup .
Though it is also true that he added , ' if I cannot do so , I shall have to do so in 2012 ' .
That explanation , however , did not end on Monday , because another element of that meeting that I believe to be very important is that the debate on the French budgetary strategy , and the debate on the budgetary strategy of any other country , will take place , just has it has been until now , within the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact , with France presenting a revised stability programme , which will be analysed by the Commission and by the Council and it will be the ministers , meeting within the Council , in the Eurogroup and also within Ecofin , who will give their opinion on the programme of fiscal consolidation and adjustment presented by France .
I believe that this should be stressed because some people have interpreted what has happened over recent days as the second death of the Pact - which some people had claimed was dead in 2003 .
I believe that it is alive and kicking . The problem is that it is difficult to apply it during good times in the cycle , in certain countries in particular .
That is what the pact 's instruments are for , however : to help overcome those difficulties .
I would like to make a final brief comment , Mr President , relating to the importance that the new Treaty will have when it enters into force in terms of giving the Eurogroup more institutional capacity , in terms of improving the governance of the Economic and Monetary Union , which still has a long way to go , both internally and externally .
I hope that , in the next debate , the Commission can present you with a full analysis of how the Economic and Monetary Union is functioning and how it should function , on the tenth anniversary of the decision to launch the euro , in May 2008 .
Mr President , Commissioner , let me start by thanking the rapporteurs , Mr Mitchell and Mr Rosati , for their work .

With single monetary policy set by the ECB and the euro as a single currency , the Member States in the Eurozone have achieved the highest conceivable level of integration in the area of monetary policy .
Unlike the common monetary policy , economic policy is not set at Community level , and so economic policy decisions remain in the hands of the national governments and parliaments .
A high level of long-term economic convergence within the Eurozone countries is a prerequisite for a strong , stable European currency .
So I am delighted by what Mr Juncker and Mr Trichet have said today .
A lot has been published in the press over recent weeks , and even at the start of this week .
It can be summarised in just one line : the mountain laboured and gave birth to a mouse .
I am pleased that you have been so clear and firm in your statements , but I think that discussions will continue on how the euro and the criteria that shape it will develop in future .
This discussion will require all participants to stick firmly to their guns .
As a representative of the younger generation , I would urge all Member States in the Eurozone not to give up on their efforts to consolidate and to apply budgetary discipline in their national budgets .
In this context , I would like to quote Montesquieu , who said that what counts is applying ' the spirit of the law ' .
The terms of the Treaty on economic and monetary union must be respected , even if the governments have changed .
Here Montesquieu 's excellent advice should definitely be applied lock , stock and barrel .
For example , if one Member State that has produced a lot of inflammatory material in the last few weeks were to change tack , then other , more northerly Member States would follow suit , with disastrous results for consolidation and budgetary policy in the European Union .

For that reason , Mr Juncker and Mr Trichet , I urge you to be tough , to stand firm - do not allow anyone to alter your course in the coming years .
Mr Schwab , it is of course particularly appropriate to quote Montesquieu in this case .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I cannot resist the urge to react to the remarks made by Mr Juncker and his evening visitor , by first recommending that he ought not to let himself be taken advantage of by this evening visitor , especially with regard to the nature of the deficits that he is in the process of examining closely in France .
That said in passing , these deficits have nothing to do with new investment in research , development and innovation , as the Lisbon Strategy suggests , but are basically due to a EUR 14 billion tax reduction , targeted at the most well-off people in France , a reduction that prompts most economists to wonder about its supposed positive knock-on effect on EU growth .
I shall digress no longer .
At present , I should like to thank Mr Mitchell for his report and the work he has done in this regard within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
This report makes some important progress and advances , not least in terms of transparency in the work and decisions of the European Central Bank and of the democratisation of appointment procedures .
This text also calls for more caution regarding a possible rise in interest rates in order not to jeopardise growth ; it calls for caution , too , regarding hedge funds , so as to enhance surveillance and regulation in the interests of financial stability and transparency .
Finally , we can be pleased with the consensus that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has been able to reach on the need to invest huge sums in research , education and training .
That being said , I would return to the issue of exchange rates because , contrary to the fatalism and to the prevailing ultra-conservatism , we would like to point out that the instruments with which we can take action do exist .
Article 111 of the Treaty merely stipulates that , I quote , ' in the absence of an exchange-rate system in relation to one or more non-Community currencies ( ... ) the Council , acting by a qualified majority either on a recommendation from the Commission and after consulting the ECB or on a recommendation from the ECB , may formulate general orientations for exchange-rate policy in relation to these currencies ' .

That is what we are asking you for , Mr Juncker , Mr Trichet and Mr Almunia : general orientations for exchange-rate policy in relation to the currencies of our major partners and competitors , rather than a general laissez-faire policy and not very credible declarations on the lack of economic impact of a largely over-valued euro .
Finally , I should like to say a few words about an issue on which there is major disagreement between the two sides of this House : wage policy .
Like you , Mr Juncker , we note that the share of wages in the GDP of the Eurozone keeps on falling and that , at the same time , the wages , golden parachutes and other stock options of the directors and managers of large companies are a real provocation for European workers , whose purchasing power is weakening .
Like you , Mr Almunia , we are calling for a legal minimum wage in every EU country or at least in the Eurozone .
Encouraging the social partners to agree on significant wage increases , as the social partners of Germany 's metallurgical industry have done , means not only aiming for a better distribution of the fruits of growth , but also , in our view , helping to perpetuate growth by giving households more confidence and by increasing consumption .
Agenda
In view of the heavy workload this week , and given that we were unable to complete today 's votes , I declare that tomorrow morning 's sitting will begin at 9.30 a.m. with voting time from 11.30 a.m.

( Parliament gave its assent . )
Eurozone ( 2007 ) - European Central Bank ( 2006 ) ( continuation of debate )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the Eurozone 2007 and European Central Bank report 2006 .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , President Trichet , President Juncker , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament can state with satisfaction that the Eurozone is a fundamental factor for stability within the global economy .

As has already been brilliantly explained by the rapporteurs , Mr Rosati and Mr Mitchell , in this second report , Parliament can compare the unquestionable improvement in the economy in 2006 , which led to a positive change in terms of economic growth and particularly employment , with the creation of two million new jobs , as has already been pointed out .
This is a positive trend that the Member States of the Eurozone have been able to achieve thanks to a healthy and cautious fiscal policy and to the efforts made to carry out the requisite structural reforms , which are also the fruit of a greater degree of interdependence required of the Member States by the Eurozone .
Nonetheless , we need to ask some questions , the main one having already been raised in the report by Commissioner Almunia : how do Europeans perceive this favourable economic situation ?
What are the benefits for individual citizens ?
Unfortunately , over and above the official data , the tangible effects have still not really been recognised by the public .
We must note that the repeated requests for wage moderation , under certain conditions that have a solid basis from an economic point of view , are in fact far from the daily lives of individual citizens , and it is therefore clear that , at the moment , some Member States , including Italy , which is experiencing severe social tensions , are having real difficulties in channelling all additional revenue towards debt reduction .
I therefore believe that , while fulfilling the commitments made in the medium term , we must respond to a challenge : how can we make the rigid rules of the economy compatible with the demands of social justice ?
Mr President , in taking the floor in this debate , I would like to raise two points .
Firstly , we should note with satisfaction that 2006 was unusually good for the Eurozone countries .
GDP increased by 2.7 % , compared with 1.4 % in 2005 , unemployment stood at 7.6 % , which was the lowest in fifteen years .
These results were achieved against an inflation rate that has remained at a steady 2.2 % since 2005 , and a reduced fiscal deficit .
It is puzzling , however , that these figures are consistently worse than the growth , unemployment , inflation and budget deficit figures in three countries outside the Eurozone , i.e. the United Kingdom , Sweden and Denmark .
They also fall behind the annual figures achieved by the US economy .
Secondly , both reports are full of figures , and we have concentrated on these .
However , it would seem that not everybody regards figures as having the greatest importance .
The newly-elected French president said in an interview that economic growth and full employment are so important that the heads of state should deal with them directly , and also that the excessive strength of the euro , brought about by the latest increases in interest rates by the European Central Bank , harms European exporters .
In addition to this diagnosis , the French president also wants to reduce taxation and increase the budget deficit in order to increase economic growth and reduce unemployment in the future .
I am nearly done .
But I have not heard any words of criticism , either from the President of the Europe ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin by saying to Mr Juncker that he should not take offence at the small number of us in this House .
I myself would have willingly stayed in my office to have the pleasure of seeing him close-up on my television screen .
The debating conditions in this room are rather difficult .
I should like , first and foremost , to express my emotion at seeing just how in line the Mitchell report is with the debates that the entire Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has been holding for several years now .
For the first time we have a relatively unanimous report , which will enable us to reach agreements on points that used to divide us .
Firstly , there is the idea that structural reforms can be implemented and can increase the potential growth rate compared with that which we had in the 1990s , and that they may perhaps have already increased it .
Secondly , there is what is , in short , the explicit affirmation that the labour market reforms do not relate to an unconditional wage moderation , but rather , as Mr Juncker said , to a moderation qualified by means of proportionality with productivity growth and that this growth is being created by means of improved human capital , training and research , and not by means of a reduction in social guarantees .
The third major advance of Mr Mitchell 's report is that the issue of paragraph 111 of the Treaty has at last been properly addressed .
It is the responsibility of the Council to set exchange-rate policy .
I would say to Mr Juncker that he should also listen to what Mr Gallois says about the competitiveness of Airbus .
One cannot say that there is one country in particular that has difficulty in adapting to the current exchange rates .


In paragraph 10 of the resolution by Mr Mitchell , we call on Mr Juncker to agree with Mr Almunia , and this should be welcomed .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , it is not governance that the Union needs , but political action on its economies in order to promote a form of growth that creates stable and , above all , well-paid , jobs .
The European Central Bank is harmful because its sole aim is to have the lowest inflation rate possible , when it should include structural policy elements such as growth , as the US Federal Reserve does .
Creating the euro without implementing , at the same time , a federal budget at the level of the Member States concerned has resulted in the demise of the instrument of devaluation , without any other protection methods having been provided .
The undervaluation of the dollar is , from this point of view , a weapon for the mass destruction of Europe 's industrial capacities , and your self-satisfied speeches cannot disguise this reality of the exorbitant and unbearable cost of the overvaluation of the euro .
Europe 's workers and citizens are paying a very high price for this mistake .
The Eurozone can no longer function in its current state ; we must , as a matter of urgency , resort to a change in the statute of the European Central Bank and in the organisation itself of the euro .
We must , as a matter of urgency , have recourse to customs protections .
It is time to implement industrial policies that ensure that the vital interests of the people of Europe are protected and that enable jobs to be created and the common interests of European workers to be protected .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , economic growth is higher , unemployment is down , government deficits are falling a little , but concerns are now being expressed that this growth may be threatened by the strong foreign value of the euro .
While Mr Juncker does not share these concerns , Mr Sarkozy and others have been calling for active management of the exchange rate .
Mr Mitchell 's report draws our attention to the rules that give Member States the responsibility for exchange rate policy , and calls on Eurozone finance ministers to coordinate their influence on the exchange rate with the European Central Bank .
The report then says that this action should not undermine the ECB 's independence to use its interest rates to control inflation .
We do not seem to understand how it works .
The way to bring down the value of the euro is for the ECB to reduce interest rates .
But then it would have to abandon its inflation target .
In these days of free capital flows it is not possible simultaneously to control inflation and the exchange rate .
There is another way , of course , and that is to impose exchange controls .
Maybe this is really what they are thinking .
It would not be out of keeping with Mr Sarkozy 's remarks about defending French protectionism and it would also be disastrous for the market economies of the Eurozone .
( SK ) I would like to emphasise that variations in the rate of inflation are largely the result of structural factors , not unsound policies .
There has been a two-fold increase in salaries in the new Member States of the European Union and the share of energy- and raw materials-intensive output in these countries is greater than in the more developed states of the Eurozone .
At the same time , a major portion of the energy- and raw materials-intensive output is destined for the Eurozone .
Because of such reasons , the new Member States are more susceptible to fluctuations in prices of energy and raw materials ; by the same token , they serve as a buffer , absorbing price impacts on the states of the Eurozone .
However , inflationary pressures in the new Member States may also result from high growth , rising productivity and catching up with the standards of more developed countries .
After all , this is one of the goals of EU membership .
I therefore support the demand to review the convergence criteria , notably with regard to inflation , so that they do not become instruments for creating new divisions in Europe .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Trichet , Mr Juncker , I should first like to congratulate Mr Rosati and , in particular , Mr Mitchell , on the quality of their reports .


I believe that , economically speaking , these are promising times for Europe .
Our objective is to increase production and economic activity .
This is being reflected in new employment opportunities , and with inflation kept under control .
The challenge right now is to consolidate this economic growth , a goal we will not achieve unless our institutional problems are resolved .
The issue in the reports is whether what we are witnessing is a cyclical recovery or a more substantial economic movement .
In this context , we do not have to resign ourselves to the idea that Europe has potential growth of 2 % .
The Member States must from now on synchronise their growth rates . In short , more jobs and more SMEs need to be created .
On this issue , the European Central Bank must also pursue the recommendations contained in Mr Mitchell 's report , namely prudence when it comes to raising interest rates , because decisions that should rest with governments , decisions on reform and much more far-reaching decisions in the fight against protectionism should not be pre-empted .
The major problem we face in Europe is the rhetoric of protectionism , which goes against the spirit of European integration .
To sum up , this is a positive economic time , which , among other things , must be used to ensure that this growth continues and that European citizens are encouraged to identify the euro as one of their sources of well-being , prosperity and , most importantly , fresh job opportunities .
Madam President , I want to use my short speaking time to express , on behalf of the PSE Group , our full support for the Stability and Growth Pact - it is necessary to repeat that several times - and in particular for the reform of the pact .
We have made it more intelligent to take into account the economic cycle and developments .
This is something that has to be applied properly and not deliberately as is now the case .
Therefore , I appreciate what Mr Juncker and Mr Almunia have said , and it is good that we also express this on behalf of my political group .
I wish to draw attention to two specific issues and I should like to hear the reactions from the three of you , whom I am very happy to see together here for this debate .
One is the wage moderation issue .
We support the principle that wage moderation should remain within the productivity growth , and this has been the case for more than ten years .
However , it is now time to look at the rebalancing of the fruits of growth and , where we see that wages lag behind and are a smaller part of GDP , it is also time to look at rebalancing this .
I should like to hear some comments on this .
I know that Mr Juncker and Mr Almunia have also expressed them in this way .
I should like to invite the President of the ECB in particular to comment on this issue .
The other issue I want to raise is not only hedge funds but also paragraph 19 of the Mitchell report on corporate debt restructuring .
This is a major concern for financial stability , and I should also like to ask you how to assess this and how to deal with this issue .
( SV ) I wish to begin by thanking both rapporteurs for their constructive work .
The European Central Bank is doing a good job of fulfilling its tasks .
Even if the debate gets a bit heated sometimes , Mr Trichet always succeeds is calming people down with a use of language worthy of a diplomat .
The ECB has become significantly more open and more transparent than it has been , but Parliament ' demands for minutes to be published remain .
That system works well for other central banks and would strengthen the ECB and increase its reputation .
We also again express our desire for a more open procedure for elections to the Executive Board of the ECB .
It is extremely important to safeguard the ECB 's independence and to support the goal of price stability .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe gives the ECB , Jean-Claude Trichet and Jean-Claude Juncker its full support where this crucial issue is concerned .
We know that a firm stability policy is a basic condition for a growing Europe .
Unfortunately , there are quite a few of us who are concerned that the strident tones of the French presidential election campaign will now continue .
Monday 's meeting in Brussels does nothing to reduce this concern .
That concern is also present in the committee , even if Mr Juncker is trying to reassure us , and it can be heard in the wide-ranging debate in this House today .
There are wordings in the report that could be taken as a pretext for calling the into question independence of the ECB and allowing it to interfere politically to a greater extent .
Those are developments that we reject .
I would point to the wording of paragraph 10 which , in turn , refers specifically , as did Mr Hamon , to Article 111 of the Treaty .
It would be extremely unfortunate if our report could in any respect be seen as calling the ECB into question .
- ( PL ) Madam President , the good macroeconomic results in the Eurozone countries confirm the huge impact economic and monetary union has on the results , which was in fact the aim of introducing a common currency in the European Union .
Higher levels of integration in various areas make it possible to increase development and progress .
However , the problems with the European Constitution , voting , and the strength of certain Member States , are currently preventing further integration .
The two-speed Europe predicted by President Prodi has unfortunately become a reality .
It is also evident in the introduction of the euro in Member States .
Introducing the euro in one , or even two , states over a three-year period cannot be regarded as a resounding success .
We must reinforce and accelerate these activities , as they will allow faster development and further integration .
Let us seize this opportunity .
In conclusion , let me extend my heartfelt congratulations to both rapporteurs .
( SV ) Not quite four years have gone by since Sweden held a referendum on the euro and , by a very large majority , rejected introducing the euro as a currency .
There were , and are , many arguments against becoming a part of the Eurozone .
For one thing , it is a very unstable political project ; for another , it is extremely problematic for a country not to be able to control its own interest rates in order to respond to trade cycles .
These fears have proved to be justified , and we now see how all this is affecting countries that have exchanged their currencies for the euro .
Has Sweden lost out by keeping the krona ?
Recent studies show that trade has been affected , but to a negligible degree .
What Sweden has gained by not introducing the euro is much more valuable .
We are quite differently placed to control our development because interest rates can be adapted to prevailing conditions in Sweden without the Bank of Sweden needing to take account of the trade outlook in other countries .
I therefore think that , contrary to what Commissioner Almunia has said in this House , the Swedish ' no ' vote must be respected and that Sweden too should be given a formal exemption from having to join the Eurozone , just as Denmark and the United Kingdom have .
Anything else would be extremely undemocratic .
( HU ) I am glad this debate is taking place now , so that in relation to some commonalities between the two topics , I may call attention to some consequences for enlargement .
In the first place , I am pleased that not only representatives from candidate countries for the Eurozone and the rapporteur , but also my German fellow Member , Mr Schwab , noticed the problem that the understanding of the reference country with regard to the inflation criterion for admission to the Eurozone - that is , all Member States - is different to the one we use in setting the ECB target , which implicitly applies to the 13 Member States .
In spite of Mr Almunia 's letter sent to us yesterday in reply , Parliament must continue to insist that the reform Treaty should contain a correction that follows logically from the creation of the Eurozone .
Besides , is this not a double standard , not having measures against excessive inflation for Member States of the Eurozone but setting up more stringent anti-inflationary expectations for those who want to join ?
I would like to point out that , while the reference benchmark for the euro is based on 27 Member States , in the ECB board of directors the same definition applies only to 13 States , since I am not aware of any role played in that body by citizens of States outside the Eurozone .
Thus , I see a double meaning of the Treaty expression " European Union 's Member States ” .
We hear a great deal of rhetoric about solidarity , but this is not apparent with regard to the use of euro banknotes .
As a matter of fact , the smallest denomination , the 5 euro note , will be worth many times the value of the smallest banknotes of new Member States ' national currencies , forcing the residents of the latter to run around with bagfuls of coins on the streets .
At the same time , we have the largest , the 500 euro bill , which will often be worth half a year 's pension in those countries .
But I myself have been unable to use this bill for weeks , even here in Strasbourg or in Brussels , to pay for anything .
If anyone could change it , I would be much obliged .
What then could one do with it in Riga ?
May I add that Mr Rosati made a very thoughtful remark about extending the four fundamental freedoms to the internal market .
But I have a question in this regard as well : how is it possible that those participating in monetary integration today can block the free movement of manpower , fearful of Slovakian labour dumping ?
How is it possible that EU regulations indirectly exclude labour-intensive activity from the provision of services ?
Thank you , Madam President , and I hope the expansion of the Eurozone towards the East , towards the former Soviet sphere of influence , will also begin shortly .
( FR ) Madam President , Mr Juncker , Mr Trichet , Mr Almunia , I believe that this is a good week for the euro .


Firstly , because this is the first time that this macro-economic dialogue on the Eurozone has been held here , in the European Parliament .
I hope that this is the start of a good routine ; the euro has visibility in Parliament in this debate , and I welcome that .
And then , this is also the week that a newly elected President of the Republic felt that he himself ought to justify within Eurogroup what he was going to propose to his country .
It seems to me that , a few years ago , that would not have happened in this country in which it was felt that budgetary strategy came under national sovereignty .
The collective debate on what the management of the euro consists of has moved on , and I welcome that .
You have requested the right to judge the effectiveness of the EUR 13 billion in tax gifts that have been proposed , and I can only back your proposal .
However , as far as the future is concerned , I should like to invite you to go even further .
Firstly , because I believe that making use of the preventive arm of the Stability and Growth Pact does not make it possible to implement that which we need , that is to say , ex-ante coordination in order to organise future strategic investment in a coordinated way and to anticipate , together , the effects of the structural reforms , because what happens in a country in terms of structural reforms has an impact on all the other countries .
And then , I should like to invite you to open the debate on the issue of the exchange rate .
This is an issue that Article 111 of the Treaty permits you to address , including at Council level .
It must also be considered as an issue of common interest , as Article 99 of the Treaty calls on you to consider it .
( CS ) Madam President , the introduction of the single currency was supposed to create a single internal market .
The European Union , however , is today in thrall to the concept of rigid political integration and the creation of an over-regulated superstate , rather than creating the economic freedoms which in 1957 helped form the foundations of the common market and which remain unfulfilled to this day .
The failure to adopt the original Bolkestein Directive , the existence of obstacles to the free transfer of production to more efficient areas of the Union , and restrictions on the free movement of labour from the new Member States , as well as other protectionist and regulatory restrictions on the freedom of the common market are turning the euro into an artificial currency .
As a result , we have a single currency in a non-single market .
A typical example of this is that there is on the one hand the brutal forcing through of concessions in the Stability Pact , which some of the large EU states decided they could not do without , and on the other hand the new Member States have nonsensical and long out-dated conditions imposed on them for entry to the Eurozone , which do not take due account of necessary inflation levels and other indicators that are no more than peripheral and incidental manifestations of very dynamic economies that are growing at a faster rate than the EU average .
The narrow-mindedness of the Eurozone and the failure to fulfil economic freedoms in an unfair and non-single market are turning the euro into an unsafe and half-hearted currency .
Madam President , please allow me to make a technical remark .
On the panel above you and on the display , my name has regularly been incorrectly displayed for several months now .
The ' ý ' at the end of my name is missing .
Please take note of this .
( DE ) Madam President , I welcome the three-leaved euro clover too .
The euro has been a success : the euro is the EU 's best response to global challenges .
The euro and the four freedoms are the cornerstones of a strong internal market .
To my mind , the Maastricht criteria and the Stability and Growth Pact are the greatest regulatory principles to have been achieved by the European Union .
From 1 January 2008 , the Euro Group will have an absolute majority among the EU members .
That is good news , and we would like to extend a warm welcome to Malta and Cyprus .
I am struck by the fact that we are getting excited because a Head of Government has promised to do their homework . Homework has to be done .
We need to respect the rules , rather than interpreting them in a protectionist manner .
We are glad that there are economic benefits , and we call for those benefits to be used to reduce trade deficits and public debt , whilst at the same time allowing the workers to share in the benefits .
We are not questioning the European Central Bank 's independence . The Bank stands guarantor for the euro 's good performance .
But an independent ECB and unified external relations for the Eurozone are not mutually exclusive .
A single voice for the Eurozone in external relations has nothing to do with the fact that these three gentlemen influence foreign exchange rates .
The foreign exchange rate is determined by the market , and the European Central Bank decides interest rates .
I want to make that clear to the left .
Nowadays we all sing the praises of the euro and the economic data , but we have forgotten that the euro should also be seen and presented as beneficial for Europe 's citizens .
Let us emphasise how much we are saving in exchange rate costs . Let us emphasise the euro 's effect on stability in the Eurozone and the internal market .
Let us not forget that we are currently doing better than the dollar : that is a real sign of success .
When we introduced the euro , that is what citizens wanted .
( FR ) Madam President , I feel as though I am taking part in a debate of deceptions : the deception of our guests , who are faced with an empty Chamber , and deception on the right , where Members are getting worked up about the ECB 's losing its independence , when the European Central Bank is and will remain independent .
France changed its Constitution so that the ECB could be independent .
For the statute of the ECB to be changed , it would take an agreement among 27 governments and 28 parliaments , including ours . That is a mission impossible !
Furthermore , the ECB is doing some rather good work ; the euro is the second currency of the international reserve and , since 2000 , it has appreciated by some 25 % against the dollar .
It costs us less to buy raw materials , petrol and gas .
Inflation is lower in the Eurozone than in the United States and the United Kingdom .
If I have one criticism to make about the ECB , it is that it is too obsessed with combating inflation .
Inflation is harmful , especially for the economically weak , but , as inflationary pressure is currently limited , the Bank could do more to support EU economic policy .
The purchasing power of many Europeans has decreased , which is not stopping the ECB from advocating wage moderation .
I hope that Mr Trichet will also recommend moderation to President Sarkozy , who is renouncing the commitments made by France in order to give tax gifts to the rich .
The final deception is this : what is the point of a European Charter of Fundamental Rights if it is not applied throughout the Union ?
How can the European Court of Justice apply this Charter when it will not be applied in the United Kingdom ?
This final question is obviously addressed to the great European that is my fellow countryman , Mr Juncker .


( FR ) Madam President , Mr Juncker , Mr Trichet , ladies and gentlemen , it is neither paradoxical nor contradictory to endorse the conclusions of the excellent reports that have been submitted to us and to support the courageous and determined action of the French Government to carry out the necessary reforms and to promote growth .
It is neither paradoxical nor contradictory because France has made a comeback in Europe .
By solemnly declaring his commitment to European integration , the President of the French Republic has made a powerful contribution to reviving Europe and to breaking the deadlock that it was in .
The agreement that was reached during the Brussels Summit , thanks to the efforts of Chancellor Merkel , is the first practical example of this .
One of the aims is to improve the way in which the Eurozone operates .
The Stability and Growth Pact , which since 1999 has provided a framework for the budgets of the Eurozone countries and which defines the budgetary discipline that the Member States must apply in order to prevent any excessive deficits from emerging , must be applied systematically , because it helps to establish monetary stability .
Quite clearly , France , despite what may have been said , is not calling into question the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact , which remain fundamental .
However , we need to adhere to its criteria without losing sight of the objective of growth .
It must be applied intelligently and dynamically .
It is in this spirit that the President of the French Republic was anxious to provide the necessary explanations regarding the ambitious structural reform programme that he is going to implement .
The fruitful dialogue that has begun has made it possible to clarify the positions .
Mr Sarkozy has confirmed his commitment to do everything possible to meet the objective in 2010 , if the boost to growth that he expects from these measures produces the results that he anticipates in terms of tax revenue .
France has already committed itself to bringing its government deficit down to 2.4 % as from 2007 .
There will be no let up in the efforts to consolidate the budget in order to reduce the public debt .
I am among those who believe that Eurogroup 's role must be strengthened .
Equipped with a stable and high-quality president , it must pursue its quest for consistent and coordinated national economic policies .
Finally , in this way , with respect shown for the independence of the European Central Bank , Eurogroup will be able usefully to counterbalance the implementation of growth- and employment-oriented economic policy .
( SK ) Last week I attended talks at the Ministry of Finance in Dublin .
The Irish economy has been growing at the remarkable rate of 6 % on average over the last 10 years .
Per capita GDP is 40 % above the EU average .
Unemployment is at 4.2 % , and the Irish will clearly manage to attain the Lisbon Strategy goal as regards unemployment .
Their concern , however , is that inflation will reach 5 % this year .
Had Ireland not already been part of the Eurozone , it would not have been able to join today under the current regulations .
In this context I would like to recall that in fast growing economies structural inflation is higher .
Such a situation is part and parcel of the monetary union .
Inflation is a part of the process , particularly for the new Member States that are seeking to catch up with the more developed countries .
The Council and Commission should therefore develop a new analysis and review the convergence criteria .
It is essential to continue with political discussions concerning the application of these criteria to the future members of the Eurozone .
President of Eurogroup .
( FR ) Madam President , I am taking the floor at the end of the debate in order to make a few remarks further to what was said , or not said .
I shall begin by mentioning wage policy , since this is a subject that I am dealing with and that concerns me .
I remain convinced that , if the current policies are pursued , that is , the policies that consist in further widening the gap that exists between those who work and those who say that they provide work , we are heading for disaster .
Europeans , especially simple and modest Europeans , who are no less intelligent than the others , do not understand this gap that is getting bigger every day between those who have and those who aspire to have .
( Applause )
I believe that several us of have said this , including the President of the European Central Bank , who recently opposed these ever-widening gaps .
I believe that we must stick with the principle of wage moderation .
I believe that wage moderation can be explained simply : so long as wages evolve in line with advances in productivity , wage moderation will result in neither a loss of competitiveness nor surplus inflation .
If , on the other hand , wages were to deviate from the path mapped out for them by a development in productivity , we could - and certainly would - have a problem .
I believe that we need to look into a modern way of allowing as many people as possible to share in the fruits of growth .
Not everything depends on nominal wage increases .
We must look into the possible forms of worker participation ; we must look into forms of profit-sharing ; we must look into other forms of employee training that could enable as many people as possible to share in the fruits of economic growth , which , I might add , should not be vilified or criticised in principle , as it tends to be by some quarters .
Rather , it must be perceived as an instrument enabling the Eurozone and the European Union to increase their rate of participation on the labour markets and , by extension , to reduce their unemployment rate in relation to what we are experiencing at present .
We want growth because we want jobs ; we do not want growth to be an objective in itself .
As regards the free movement of workers within the Eurozone , I will say - together , I might add , with the President of the European Central Bank , which goes to show you just how completely aligned our positions are - that , yes , there is a contradiction between the fact of being part of the same monetary area and of not sharing fully in the four freedoms .
I therefore agree with those who say that Slovenian workers , for example , should be able to move freely within the Eurozone .
However , you will not find , either in the Treaty , or in the accession arrangements , provisions enabling us to say that , yes , Slovenian workers must be able to move within the territory of the 12 members of the Eurozone but not within the territory of the others , any more than you will find provisions enabling us to say that , no , Czech workers , Slovakian workers and Polish workers cannot move , only those who are members of the Eurozone are permitted to do so .
I did not write all the passages of the Treaty , or even the smallest part of it , but you will not escape the cumbersomeness that at times characterises all of these texts .
It follows , then , that this is a debate that we must have , but we need to realise that we cannot resolve the issue at the level of the Eurozone alone ; we really must resolve it at the level of the European Union as a whole .
Much has been said about the person whom I called ' our evening visitor ' , last Monday in the Eurogroup .
This is , moreover , Mr Hamon , an expression that I have taken from a period in the history of the Elysée Palace that does not entirely correspond to that of today , since others , before the President of the Eurogroup , used to be in the habit of receiving evening visitors .
This was more a phenomenon of the 1980s , in France .
In Europe , this phenomenon is rather new , and we will see whether this is the start of a great tradition or whether it will amount to the epiphenomenon that was .
That being said , I should like briefly to point out some commitments made by France .
Firstly , France has not put an end to budget consolidation , France has not started to put its financial consolidation effort on hold .
Secondly , the 2008 deficit ...
( Addressing Mr Goebbels , who had heckled him )
...
Yes indeed , Mr Goebbels , we shall see .
I am not responsible for French budgetary policy , so we shall see ...
Finally , I should like to say to you , my dear friend , Mr Goebbels , that , if France 's public finances were in the same health as the finances of the country for which I am responsible , we would not be having this debate , and we would not have had our visitor on Monday evening .
( Laughter )
That being said , France is fully committed ; France will do everything it can to meet the objective in 2010 , just as we all made a commitment to do in April this year .
France is not the only country to have problems in meeting the objective by the deadline set .
We will be as strict and tenacious in analysing the results of the other countries , which may not perhaps manage , under the conditions set , to meet the objective at the desired time , but Eurogroup expects all the Member States of Eurogroup to meet their medium-term objective in 2010 , at the latest .
As for France , it will submit an updated stability programme to us in September so that , together , the Commission and Eurogroup can see whether the structural reforms begun by the French Government will be likely to lead to the desired result , that is to say , the return of buoyant French growth and the guarantee of the viability of French public finances in the longer term .
I am quoting the Stability and Growth Pact in its amended version .
With regard to the enlargement of the zone , and independently of the debate that we could have on the accession criteria , I should like to repeat before Parliament that , of course , the Eurozone and the Eurogroup are neither a zone nor an exclusive club .
All Member States that meet the accession criteria not only can join the Eurozone , but must join it .
No member of the Eurozone , State or politician can turn down a request to join the Eurozone .
On this point , the Treaties are crystal-clear .
We can of course , and will no doubt , discuss this , but we must discuss it in depth , and not avoid the fundamental questions , such as : should we base the criteria more on a nominal reading , as the Treaties call on us to do , or should we think instead about real convergence ?
I have already guarded the new Member States - an expression that I still detest - against the notion of real convergence .
The Member States , those that are referred to as the new Member States , in fact have nothing to gain by our having recourse to analyses that are based more on real convergence than on a nominal reading , but this is a debate that we can have over the next few months .
I did not understand very well the question that my friend , Mr Goebbels , put to me at the end of his speech , when he questioned me about the Charter of Fundamental Rights in Europe .
I do not really see the connection with the debate that we are currently having , unless it is to suggest that there is no more reason for the United Kingdom to request an opt-out concerning the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and that there is no reason for it to persist in wanting to opt-out at any price on monetary matters .
I am , moreover , of the opinion that the United Kingdom will one day apply the declaration of fundamental rights on its territory - because the time will come when it wants it , for one cannot forever defy common sense - before applying the single currency there .
The virtuous union of the declaration of fundamental rights and that of the Council of Europe , which relates to the same subject , will therefore create a solution that , by combining these two sources of law , will enable the European Court of Justice to ensure that , on this point as on others , praetorian law will have demonstrated that it is sometimes ahead of the reality that is shaped by those who want more Europe and those who , unfortunately , want less .
The great contribution that the European Parliament makes to our debates is , as a general rule , to find itself on the side of those who want more Europe .
We have nothing to gain from wanting less Europe each day or from selling off the Europe that we have in sections that we make available to those who would like to dismantle a project that has not stopped expanding or impressing the world ever since we started work on it .
( Applause )
ECB Chairman .
Madam President , I have five points to make in response to the question .
First of all , I should like to say again that the reports by Mr Rosati and Mr Mitchell were very impressive and full of very important ideas and recommendations .
First , on Mr Schwab 's remarks : it is clear that there is a question of institutional philosophy .
There are 13 exemplary political democracies in the euro area , and next January there will be 15 .
In the future , there may be 25 or even more .
It is inconceivable that changes would occur three or four times a year because of changes brought about by the normal functioning of our democracy .
Clearly , commitments made within the Eurogroup are either kept or they are not .
If they are not kept , then it is impossible to have a Eurogroup which has authority - which , I am sure , is the wish and the will of all the countries concerned .
My second point concerns jobs .
Figures are figures .
I regularly hear that the euro is not designed to create jobs , that we have a problem with growth and jobs and so forth .
The euro was created on the basis of a philosophy that is shared the world over : that price stability , and credibility in ensuring price stability , are prerequisites for sustainable growth and job creation .
That is the decision that Europeans have taken , but they are in good company , because it is a consensus .
What are the figures ?
More than 12 million jobs have been created since the euro was set up - more than 12 million ; two million , as the rapporteur said very eloquently a moment ago , were created in 2006 .
Since the euro was launched , we have created more jobs even than the US .
We have the lowest unemployment rate for 25 years .
We are not satisfied , and we are right not to be satisfied , because we have to do much better .
However , let it not be said that the euro is playing against job creation - it is not true , and we can prove it .
As regards the obsession we might have with price stability , I have already said that price stability is a prerequisite for sustainable growth and sustainable job creation .
Let me also say that this sentiment is fully shared by our fellow citizens .
All the surveys show that they are fully in favour , by an incredible margin , of price stability , and that they are not necessarily fully satisfied with the present situation ; they are encouraging us to be as credible as possible .
If , today , we have a 50-year rate of 4.67 % and a 30-year rate of 4.65 % ( the 50-year rate applies to France , where bonds are issued for 50 years , and the 30-year rate to Germany ) , these figures are still much lower than the 10-year rate in the United States .
Why are they so low ?
Because we are credible - on ensuring price stability over 30 years and , even , over 50 years .
That is the contribution our credibility makes in Europe .
Let me mention the exchange issue , which is very important .
Firstly , the rules are clear - they are set out in the Treaty .
They are exactly the same as the rules in operation in Germany since the foundation of the Bundesbank after the Second World War .
They are exactly the same as those used under the French system introduced in January 1994 , when the Banque de France became independent , as called for by the Treaty of Maastricht and agreed unanimously by the French Left and Right , who decided , as Mr Goebbels said , to change the Constitution of the Fifth Republic to make the central bank independent .
So , the rules are clear .
They are the same as in a number of countries .
In practice , as has been said here very eloquently by an honourable Member , this means that we are in a floating exchange rate system , and we have a forum to discuss those matters : the G7 .
To my knowledge , Jean-Claude Juncker and I signed the G7 statement , together with our US partners - the Federal Reserve as well as the Secretary of the Treasury - with our Japanese partners and with our other partners , the UK and Canada .
This is how we have discussed matters since the establishment of the floating exchange rate system .
That is not to say that the situation is easy or very nice , but let us be as responsible as possible in the present circumstances and let us be sure that we have this dialogue - between ourselves , certainly , and with our partners .
It is inconceivable that we could do things that would be contradictory to our partners ' wishes .
It will not work .
Madam President , I do not want to bore you by restating what we have said , but together we are saying to China that we are not satisfied with the present situation .
We are , certainly , echoing what has been said by our Japanese friend , that the markets are not fully recognising their present fundamentals , and , as regards the United States , we said together that we noted that the Secretary of the Treasury and the monetary authority had said that a strong dollar vis-à-vis the euro was in their interests .
I shall not say anything else on that point , but we have to know exactly what the situation is .
I come now to the last point , which is also an important one : independence .
I noted with great attention the fact that all governments in Europe have said that they would fully respect the independence of the Central Bank .
Jean-Claude Juncker , on behalf of the Eurogroup , said that a moment ago .
Independence is in the Treaty and is the absolute key for credibility .
How could we be credible over the next 50 years if we were not deemed independent by all those who are taking decisions - here in Europe , in New York , in Tokyo , in Singapore , in Hong Kong and elsewhere ?
They trust us because we are independent , but independence is not only based upon full respect of the Treaty by our partners , the executive branches , it also depends on us .
I wanted to say , on behalf of the Governing Council - if I could I would say it in several languages to make sure I was well understood ! -
( FR ) I will preserve most firmly the independence of the ECB in all circumstances .
My 18 colleagues and I intend to adhere strictly to the Treaty on this point , as on all the others .
It will be about the Treaty , the whole Treaty , and nothing but the Treaty .
( DE ) As President , I am firmly committed to maintaining the ECB 's independence in all circumstances .
My 18 colleagues and I intend to adhere strictly to the Treaty , the whole Treaty and nothing but the Treaty .
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to end this very interesting debate by making a very brief comment on the application of the Stability and Growth Pact , because in this debate - as in many other debates that we have held inside and outside of this Parliament - some people are calling upon the Commission and the Council - upon the Commission in particular , and quite rightly - to apply the Pact firmly .
And I entirely agree .
The Commission and myself intend to propose to the Council that the Pact be applied as it stands , as it has been agreed .
So a firm application , without exceptions , without breaking any rules , which does not mean a rigid application .
We have had bad experiences when firmness has been confused with rigidity .
Firmness does not mean rigidity .
Firmness means rigour , and rigour , in the face of different and difficult situations , requires a combination of firmness and flexibility if the aim is to achieve the results of budgetary discipline , which is a necessary condition for economic growth .
I now come to my second consideration . Some of the honourable Members have referred to other efforts that we need to make in order to sustain growth and prolong growth and employment .
We must carry on developing the internal market , and there will be a debate on that before the end of this year .
The Commission has promised the Council that it will present an analysis on the functioning of the internal market and how we believe it should continue to develop .
This is an important debate which is going to follow on from debates such as those that have been held in this Parliament and in the Council on the Services Directive - and we will now have to see how it is applied - a debate that is linked to the increasing integration of financial services , which is crucial in terms of improving the functioning of the Eurozone in particular .
We must carry on talking about the Lisbon Strategy and over the coming months we are going to discuss the review of the integrated guidelines , of the broad economic policy guidelines and the employment guidelines .
The structural reforms within the context of the Lisbon Strategy are beginning to bear fruit .
The good results , the wonderful results in employment terms , that the President of the European Central Bank has just mentioned , would not have been possible without the labour market reforms that have been included within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy , and neither do I think - although we do not yet have all of the analytical elements in our hands - that it is going to be possible to explain some of the productivity improvements over recent quarters without relating them not just to the economic cycle but also to certain reforms in the product markets , in the services markets , to certain processes , or without the , once again , firm and rigorous but not blind application of the competition rules that the Commission has to oversee in particular .
My final comment , which has been mentioned on several occasions and to which Mr Juncker has already replied , relates to the issue of wages .
I have mentioned it here in Parliament on several occasions , and in discussions outside of it .
I entirely agree with the position laid out by Mr Juncker .
Wages must develop in line with productivity .
While there are improvements in productivity , those improvements must be reflected in the development of wages .
We cannot recommend the negotiation of wages in line with productivity when productivity is not growing and then forget that recommendation when productivity increases .
My feeling is , however , that at the same time we cannot forget the need to moderate the development of wages , not to lose competitiveness and , in the case of the Eurozone , to analyse very thoroughly the reasons for , and alternatives to , the divergent development of unit labour costs between Member States of the Eurozone that can create significant problems in terms of the functioning of countries that are losing competitiveness by this means .
I therefore suggest that we expand this debate a little further .
We must not just focus on wages but also talk about the development of inequalities , because - and I shall link this to the final idea I wish to mention in this debate - the citizens ' perception of the euro is a significant element of their perception of Europe and the idea of Europe .
Perceptions of the euro are undoubtedly affected by the citizens ' perception of economic development , and we must tell them the truth .
When the economy is going badly , we must say so , but when the economy improves , we must also let that be known .
We must not forget that now that the economy is improving , we must also communicate those improvements to the citizens , whose individual economic situations do not perhaps provide them with a view of the overall development of our economies .
However , that perception of the economic situation , of the effect of European integration , of economic and monetary integration , on individual economies , is also affected by uncertainty about the future , uncertainty about the future of social protection systems , uncertainty about the consequences of globalisation and ageing of the population , and we must respond to those uncertainties without jeopardising the foundations of the Economic and Monetary Union that we have been analysing today .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday 12 July .
Palestine ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Palestine .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Madam President , honourable Members , I should like to tell you that the Council sincerely wishes to debate with Parliament the dramatic events that took place in Gaza last month , as requested at the plenary session of 19 June .
The Council and the Commission reacted promptly , as was made clear in the Council 's conclusions of 18 June , which stated that we will not abandon the ordinary people of Gaza .
Every effort is being made to ensure that humanitarian support reaches Gaza , namely our efforts to provide finance and to ensure by political means that Israel allows humanitarian convoys to enter that territory .
We are also keeping our border assistance mission at Rafah on standby .
If all parties can reach agreement on the reopening of the mission and if conditions on the ground permit , the EU will once again continue to support the proper operation of this crossing-point between Gaza and Egypt .
We support the emergency Government of Prime Minister Salam Fayad .
Relations between that Palestinian Authority Government and the EU were immediately normalised .
Israel also has specific obligations .
It must act in the same way and finally make available all Palestinian tax and customs revenue , and facilitate access to , and movement around , the West Bank and Gaza , to enable the Palestinians to trade .
Above all , Israel must contribute to the credible peace process which Palestinian leaders such as President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayad are working to develop .
That would be an enormous help .
The appointment of Tony Blair as the new envoy of the Quartet leaves no doubt that the international community continues to be actively involved with this issue .
We are delighted that the former British Prime Minister has made himself available for the task and we sincerely hope that his work will help to strengthen the EU 's role in the peace process .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , since the last debate in this House , the situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory has profoundly changed .
There are several developments that we should welcome .
Israel has finally resumed the transfer of tax and customs revenue , the European Union has decided to normalise its relations with the Palestinian Authority and there is now a new Palestinian Government headed by Prime Minister Salam Fayyad .
After a three-month interruption , the bilateral meetings between Abbas and Olmert have resumed . Finally , like many others , I was delighted to hear that the BBC correspondent Alan Johnston had been released after more than three months in captivity .
On the other hand , after the Gaza takeover by Hamas , there is now a high risk of separation between parts of the Palestinian Territory .
The people of Gaza are being isolated from the world , and the tensions between the Palestinian factions have never been so high .
The creation of a viable Palestinian State is , at least , at risk .
We must continue to work on the development of a political perspective in order to provide peace and prosperity for the region .
I hope that the upcoming bilateral meeting between President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert , which , it is to be hoped , will take place on 16 July , will help to frame a credible political perspective for the Palestinian people and that it will pave the way for their joint meeting with the Quartet later on .
I hope that the Quartet can continue its cooperation with the Arab partners , and I look forward to the upcoming meeting of the Quartet , which will most probably take place next week , when all these issues can be discussed .
I welcome the appointment of Tony Blair as Quartet envoy , which will certainly further dynamise our role in the Middle East peace process .
He can become a new vector of progress along with the Arab Peace Initiative .
I will , of course , provide him with every possible assistance , as we did for Jim Wolfensohn , including the staff for his team in Jerusalem .
With regard to assistance , the Commission has been quick in reacting to the new situation .
I received a letter from Prime Minister Fayyad , which describes his priority needs .
We are ready and are , of course , already mobilising our assistance to provide support to the new Government .
The Quartet and the General Affairs and Foreign Affairs Councils have endorsed the extension of the Temporary International Mechanism ( TIM ) until the end of September .
In order to fund TIM operations in the third quarter , we have sent a request to the budgetary authority for a transfer of EUR 80 million .
I am delighted , and I thank you that the Committee on Budgets has this week agreed to this transfer .
We are now able to provide support , through the TIM , until the end of its extension .
Direct financial assistance to the Palestinian Authority is already being prepared in the form of a scheme to reimburse private sector arrears , as Salam Fayyad has asked us to do .
This would have a doubly beneficial effect on the financial situation of the Palestinian Authority and of the Palestinian private sector .
We are identifying some funds for this .
The Commission has resumed its long-standing efforts to build the institutions of the future Palestinian State .
We are also providing technical assistance to the Ministry of Finance .
A project to assist the Ministry of Finance in the area of internal control and audit has just been launched , and we will launch two more shortly .
One is the management of customs , and the other the management of tax revenue .
Finally , a few words on Gaza .
We will not , of course , abandon the people of Gaza or the goal of a viable Palestinian State .
We are providing humanitarian and emergency assistance to the people of Gaza , and ECHO partners are working on the ground .
The TIM is delivering social allowances and fuel .
However , the situation may deteriorate further because access to the Gaza Strip is still a problem .
Therefore , we have to work even more with the Egyptians and the Israelis in order to open the Rafah and Karni border crossings .
Their continued closure impedes the effective passage of humanitarian personnel and goods and it is to be hoped that this will not have devastating consequences for the economy of the Strip .
Finally , border crossings have to be open both for humanitarian access and commerce .
If the economy collapses , there will be serious implications for the security of the whole region , for the future of the Palestinian State and , indeed , for the Commission budget .
We should not let the population of Gaza become 100 % dependent on external aid .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , tomorrow Parliament is set to adopt a new resolution , which has achieved consensus on the basis of the usual procedures , on the Middle East situation .
In addition , however , Mr President , there are two points that I should like to raise in this speech .
The first is the appointment of ex-Prime Minister Tony Blair as special envoy for the Quartet .
Apparently , and this is a question I should like to address to the Presidency-in-Office of the Council , one of the tasks of this post will be to ensure that funds from the international community for the region are used properly .
The second point I should like to raise , Mr President , is the letter signed by 10 foreign ministers , including the Portuguese foreign minister , who is also the President-in-Office of the Council . This letter has been roundly criticised by the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
This letter says that the Union suffers from a lack of conviction in its Middle East policy ; it makes the damning assertion that the roadmap is finished and that we all share responsibility for this state of affairs ; and it suggests that the conditions imposed by the EU and the international community as a whole have served to exacerbate the situation .
I should like to ask the Presidency-in-Office of the Council if , as I believe to be the case , it agrees with these statements . I should also like to know if they were just personal remarks from the Portuguese minister , or if they were made on behalf of the EU .
Lastly , Mr President , I should also like to ask about the letter 's proposals , namely an international conference on the Middle East situation and the mobilisation of an international force such as NATO , or under Chapter VII of the UN Charter , charged with upholding a cease-fire and keeping the peace .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , many crocodile tears are being wept over the situation in the Middle East .
Yet we should have known that it could very easily reach this point .
Of course , it was impossible to predict just how far the political forces in Palestine would go down the road of self-destruction , but how much support has Israel shown for President Abbas over the past few years ?
When did we raise an outcry because of the lack of support for Mr Abbas ?
Where was the European Union 's visionary and independent strategy ?
And why , President-in-Office , Commissioner , are we simply ignoring Mr De Soto 's criticisms of the Quartet 's policy ?
Is it because we have a bad conscience ?
Is it the fact that something has gone badly wrong here ?
Because , Mr Salafranca , we have to admit that something has gone very wrong .
I do not want to stir up past history however , because we need to look to the future .
What needs to be done ?
Recently my group held a conference on the Middle East , chaired by Pasqualina Napoletano , and our findings were similar to those of the ten foreign ministers who recently stated their position in an article .
I would have liked to see all the foreign ministers involved .
We need to support the Abbas / Fayad Government actively , at least for now .
But we should not believe that any such support would mean that the problems with Hamas had been solved nor that the Hamas problems can be resolved by military means - namely by arming President Abbas ' troops , as some people believe .
That is most definitely not the way to win the hearts and minds of Hamas voters .
As a starting point for the negotiations , Israel must at last recognise the 1967 borders - admittedly , that will delay some things .
We need a comprehensive discussion of all the issues , from allowing exiles to return through to the wall .
These matters will not be resolved easily , but they need to be discussed openly and honestly .
We also need to incorporate the Arab Peace Initiative if we are to achieve genuine peace between Israel and her Arab neighbours .
Our objective must be to prevent violence , but we have to be fair .
If we require one side to renounce violence , then we should demand the same from the other side , which has not been the case in recent months .

Let me say a few words about Tony Blair and his mission : we would have been happier if Tony Blair had pursued an active , progressive and successful Middle East policy during his ten years in government .
There was no evidence of any such policy .
Perhaps Tony Blair will now break loose from some of the ties that bound him - cross-Atlantic ties and others - and will be able to take on a different role .
If that is the case , it will be very welcome .
We wish him all the very best in his efforts for the region , but he will have to work hard to pursue a new and different policy .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the previous interventions have already clearly demonstrated that our attitudes have changed considerably towards the situation in the Middle East in general , and the Israel-Palestine issue in particular .
I too will bear witness to this , but what I will not do - unlike some - is to distance myself , as it were , from these attitudes , because I , also on behalf of my group , actually feel partly responsible for everything that has so far come to pass - or not , as the case may be .
It would be too easy to say : it is they or them and we are the good ones , because we know what should be done from now on .
I think we are all partly responsible for the course of events , for some countries failing to act or others acting too late .
Whichever way , what happened in Gaza looked like a total deadlock , but has , at the same time , led to a number of developments that represent windows of opportunity , as it were .
These include the courageous stance by the President of the Palestinian Authority and the Prime Minister , the fact that talks have been resumed with Israel , the freeing of Alan Johnston , which is , of course , a cause for delight , and the release of a number of Palestinian prisoners .
We would want to see more people released , though .
Equally hopeful signs include the renewed initiative of the Arab League , which is crucial , and the evidence of willingness on the part of Egypt , Jordan and other Arab countries to step up their commitment considerably , to get much more involved in further talks .
This does not mean , of course , that the situation in Gaza is not wretched for those involved .
This is why I welcome the Commission 's renewed initiatives , as I do the fact that Israel , even though it has waited for far too long , has actually made a start on transferring taxpayers ' money to the Palestinian Authority .
I should like to conclude - because I want to respect your request to keep to my speaking time , Mr President - with an appeal to us all , namely for us now jointly to muster the political courage to show determination in working towards the solution with which we are all familiar : two viable states that live peacefully alongside each other within internationally recognised borders .
If we can muster this political courage , all of us , and put our minor and sometimes major differences to one side , then the sun may yet dawn in the east .
thar ceann an Ghrúpa UEN . - A Uachtaráin , cuirim fáilte mór roimh an sceál gur scaoileadh an t-iriseoir , Alan Johnson , ón BBC saor ó Gaza tar éis dó a bheith gafa le ceithre mhí anuas .
Tá áthas ó chroí orm go bhfuil sé saor agus go bhfuil sé sa bhaile anois lena mhuintir agus lena chairde .
Cuirim fáilte freisin roimh shocrú rialtas Iosrael an deireadh seachtaine seo caite 250 príosúnach a scaoileadh saor .
Ach tá cúrsaí daonnachta in Gaza dona go fóill .
Caithfear ord agus eagar a chur ar an soláthar bia atá ag dul isteach go muintir na Palaistíne .
Níor cheart cead a thabhairt d 'údaráis Iosrael cosc a chur ar an mbia ag teorainn Gaza agus Iosrael .
The biggest problem facing the people of Gaza is a humanitarian one .
The fact that Hamas now controls Gaza and Fatah controls the West Bank does not help the Palestinian cause one iota .
This means in essence that the Palestinians can be accused of speaking in two different directions at the same time .
In other words , Israel can hide behind the fact that the Palestinians are divided and that they are not now speaking with one voice .
I also believe that the European Union is in a very strong position to act as an honest broker on many political issues in the Middle East .
In fact , Europe must engage politically to a greater extent so as to ensure that civil war is avoided .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , you have appealed , Mr Antunes , together with nine of your colleagues , for a new approach in Palestine .
That is a good starting point .
The report by Mr de Soto , the United Nations Special Coordinator , roundly criticises the strategy of the Quartet , and does little for the reputation of the Union itself .
The Union 's strategy has not been able to encourage the normalisation of Hamas in the political arena , or Israel 's compliance with its international obligations , or the Palestinians ' efforts towards unity .
The disaster , today , is human ; it is economic and social ; it is political .
What new approach should be developed , then ?
The European Union , Commissioner , is not a charity .
It must commit itself politically and , in the first place , offer a credible prospect of the conflict 's being resolved once and for all .
The potential of the peace plan presented by the Arab League must be totally exploited to this end .
The Union must commit itself to an international peace conference involving all the parties .
It must do so resolutely , even if it means taking the Quartet firmly by the hand .
Every channel must be used by the Union in order to put the Israeli authorities in a position to meet their international obligations and to obtain tangible results in the field of law , for the benefit of Palestine 's civilian population .
The Union should assume its responsibilities at the Rafah border crossing and denounce , if need be publicly , the obstacles preventing it from carrying out its control mission .
The blockade on the Gaza Strip , which creates conditions conducive to an explosion in violence and which has been followed by a show of strength by Hamas , must be lifted .
The movement of persons and goods , between Gaza and the West Bank , and between Gaza and Israel , must be re-established .
I will conclude , Mr President , by saying that , in a case such as this , the Union should propose to its partners that they examine the appropriateness of having an international force , so that peace is given every chance .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I really hope that Tony Blair is in a phase of redemption after his sins concerning the Iraq war and that he can help to bring peace and justice to the Palestinians and peace to the Israelis .
I am therefore truly grateful for the input provided by the ten European Foreign Affairs ministers who gave Mr Blair four fundamental points on which to work .
These are urgent and truly tragic points .
In order to help Mahmoud Abbas , the Palestinian people and Israel , I believe that it is truly vital to negotiate an agreement of resolution and to end a brutal military occupation that has lasted over 40 years .
This is fundamental , but the crisis is equally fundamental .
As the European Union we have responsibilities : to reopen the Rafah crossing , where there are 6000 persons without shelter , without anything , unable to return home .
We must ensure that the EU BAM works .
With regard to political prisoners , it is absolutely vital to free Gilad Shalit but also the Palestinian political prisoners , including Marwan Barghouti , who could act as an element of unity both in political terms and for peace in the Middle East .
Please allow me to express my and our group 's satisfaction with the motion for a resolution we are going to vote for tomorrow .
To our satisfaction it does not criticise the Quartet as was perceived by some political groups .
On the contrary , it expresses support for its future intensified action .
The motion for a resolution clearly expresses full support and understanding for the extraordinary decisions taken by Mahmoud Abbas .
The resolution will take note of confidence-building talks between Salam Fayyad 's government and the Israeli Government , as well as the renewal of security cooperation .
We welcome the decision on taxes and revenues as well as the start of the release of political prisoners by Israel .
Nevertheless , Mahmoud Abbas must go for real democracy , for political party congress and for work with young Fatah .
Israel should seriously consider the lifting of roadblocks as was the state before December 2000 and stop the extension of settlements .
Egypt should be part of the solution to the Gaza problem .
Sending international forces to Gaza would be an incredible risk to all of us , and for the European Union the composition of the proposed international conference should be a matter of great concern .
Syria should be held responsible for its external action .
Only then can it be part of the dialogue and the solution .
We try to help those in the West Bank , Palestinians , as much as we can via financial help and in every other way .
Nevertheless , 90 % of those in the West Bank are peasants , the Felaheen .
They depend on agricultural exports .
We urge Israel to open the flow of goods , and my question is , how does our agriculture hypocrisy work ?
Are we ready to open our markets to Palestinian West Bank agricultural products ?

I thank the Commissioner and colleagues across the House for the support they have expressed for Alan Johnston , whom we are all glad to see released and safe at home in my constituency in Scotland .
However , that is one bright spot amid a sea of pain , and we must recognise our own part in that failure .
I agree with the Commissioner that , at long last , there may be some scope for optimism .
However , when I , Mrs Morgantini and others were in the West Bank and Gaza last year it was clear then that EU policy is a sticking plaster , not a cure .
The Quartet is discredited in the eyes of much of the Arab world .
It is certainly discredited in the eyes of many of the Palestinians .
The EU should step up to the plate and provide real leadership and clean hands .
I echo the scepticism of colleagues on the appointment of Tony Blair as envoy .
Speaking for once as a British Member , the idea that that deeply compromised individual can credibly represent peace to the Middle East fills me with dread .
This is important , because we only need to look at the bomb attempts in Glasgow and London to see that the consequences - direct or indirect - of our continued failure in Palestine will haunt all of us .
( EL ) Mr President , unfortunately we do not have time to analyse the situation in Palestine .
We are in the European Parliament and we are being called upon to give immediate replies to a extremely urgent and complicated issue .
I shall therefore only comment on four important points :
Firstly , the European Union is responsible for the present situation , because it did not support the national unity government .
Secondly , the solutions and acts we have seen recently on the part of the Quartet and Israel may appear on the surface to support President Abbas , but they place before him more obstacles to a viable solution to the problem of the de facto partition of Palestine .
Thirdly , I call on all parties to work hard for unity , because it is the only way we will get out of the crisis .
Fourthly and lastly , there is the question of the humanitarian situation , which is tragic both in Gaza and on the West Bank .
In Gaza especially , measures must be taken immediately for the economic and social viability of its inhabitants .
To close , I should like to put a request to the Council and the Commission : at some point , even if unity is found between Hamas and Fatah , you must decide on the Union 's future policy in this sector , where the mistakes of the past must not be repeated , with the European Union negotiating selectively with half the government and pointedly ignoring the other half , regardless of whether the entire government was the outcome of free and democratic elections .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we , in the world 's village , Europe , are expressing dismay today because , in the square , close to our borders , human beings are slitting their throats .
Instead of taking action , we are crying and shouting like old women .
That is called failure to assist a person in danger , a crime that is punishable by law .
A great wise man once said that saints and prophets are worth more than artists , men of letters , statesmen , soldiers and tradesmen .
But where are the wise men and the prophets today ?
We need a new Saint Francis of Assisi .
He also lived during an era of crusades , but he was interested in others , in those against whom the crusaders were fighting .
He did everything he could to go and see them .
Finally , during the fifth crusade - during the siege of Damietta in Egypt - saddened as he was by the behaviour of the crusaders , he said ' I have seen evil and sin ' .
Deeply distressed as he was by the sight of the dead on the battle fields , Saint Francis crossed the frontlines .
He was captured , chained up and taken to Sultan Saladin , who was born in Tikrit .
The meeting must have been very special because , after a conversation that continued long into the night , the Sultan let Saint Francis return the next morning , safe and sound , to the crusaders ' camp .
I hope that each one explained his reasons to the other , that Saint Francis spoke of Christ , that the Sultan read some passages from the Koran and that , in the end , they came to an agreement on the message that poor Saint Francis of Assisi used to repeat everywhere : ' Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself ' .
Tony Blair was one of the crusaders in Iraq .
Can he become the Saint Francis that Europe needs in the Middle East ?
Mr President , the Palestinian question , and Palestine 's relations with Israel , not only split families , but political groups in this House and in other assemblies around the world - and , indeed , institutions .
One of the dilemmas for today is those very institutions that we represent here , and our part in the Quartet in recent years .
Some hope that the appointment of Tony Blair , with his very specific role in relation to the Palestinian people , might revivify that process .
I do not know .
I think what is important is that the values that gave rise to the European Union itself should continue to inspire people across the Middle East , but especially in Palestine and in Israel .
Like others , I rejoice at the release of Alan Johnston .
I am a patron of the BBC World Service Trust .
He was reporting from Gaza when elections were held that led to the election of Abu Mazen in January 2005 , followed in January 2006 by the election of a Hamas-led Government in Palestine .
The dilemma for the democratic nations - what used to be called ' the West ' - was whether or not to recognise that Hamas Government .
Well , we know what happened , and the consequences still face us today .
I wonder whether the European Union can genuinely feel satisfied that it has played an adequate role in this period .
I am pleased that the European Parliament is now discussing the setting-up of a working group in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , something I first proposed two and a half years ago .
I am pleased that we are hosting a United Nations Conference at the end of August , but I still think that there is work to be done , intensive work by the parliamentarians of Europe , working together with the elected parliamentarians of the Arab world - which includes some we might not normally want to do business with .
We have to face things in a different way in the future .
Mr President , it has been said that there are five intertwined crises in the Middle East .
We can see that Iran has a hand in all of them .
Gaza may be controlled by Hamas , but Hamas is not its own master : there is a veto in Tehran .
Perhaps , therefore , it is more accurate to say that there is just one conflict in the Middle East , and that is between extremists and moderates .
We have an obligation to encourage and support the moderates .
There is a danger that some regard Hamas as some sort of social service with attitude .
This would be a profound error : Hamas is essentially a terrorist organisation .
Its power comes from intimidation and murder and it wants to impose its own distorted view of Islam on a frightened population .
I remember only too well the plea made by the internationally renowned Palestinian , Dr Hannan Ashrawi , at the time of the legislative elections 18 months ago .
She said : ' We must defeat the forces of darkness ' .
The people of Gaza cannot really express themselves freely .
Meanwhile , Israel is under constant attack and , yesterday , mortar bombs were fired from Gaza at the Kerem Shalom crossing , a route for humanitarian aid from Egypt to Gaza .
Let us not forget that , while we are delighted and relieved at the release of Alan Johnston , Corporal Shalit was abducted a year ago , and we know nothing of his situation .
Members of his family were in Parliament yesterday .
So what is to be retrieved from this confusing and dangerous mixture ?
For its part Israel has acted with restraint : it has recognised the government of Salam Fayyad , it has released hundreds of Palestinian prisoners , it is transferring some USD 400 million in tax receipts paid by Palestinians , and it is actively engaged in talks with the leadership of the PA .
However , it will take a third party - Arab or possibly European - to make real progress .
The Arab Peace Initiative of 2002 still offers the most promising way ahead and I am sure Israel recognises this .
Just as we must support the forces of moderation and oppose the terrorists , so moderate Arab governments must be willing to engage more actively and flexibly in the peace process : politically , economically and financially .
It is in our interests - and theirs - that they do so .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , thank you for your understanding .
The European Union must support the pragmatic forces within the Palestinian camp , which means that aid and resources should be shipped to the Palestinian Authority on the West Bank , but not to Hamastan in Gaza .
We must also insist on the Israeli authorities transferring any customs revenue to the Palestinian Authority on the West Bank and on the restrictions with regard to the movement of people between the West Bank and Israel being relaxed as much as possible .
It is indeed of huge importance that the influence of Iran be restricted .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Mr President , allow me firstly to greet Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , and also to draw your attention to her first speech , which was very clear and illuminating on the action the EU is taking in Palestine , under the authority of the Commission , a speech for which I am most grateful .
I should like to mention briefly two questions raised here by Mr Salafranca , the first regarding the appointment of Tony Blair as envoy of the Quartet , and the second regarding the letter signed by ten EU Foreign Ministers .

I think we should be delighted with Mr Blair 's appointment , firstly because he is a European , secondly , because he has been President of the European Council , and thirdly because he is a politician of extraordinary experience in international affairs , and partly also because he is a man of conviction .
I therefore consider that the Quartet , the EU and all of us as Europeans stand to gain from this appointment , and we should give him all the assistance we can .
His mandate is defined and well-documented , and Mr Blair will naturally act within the limits of the mandate conferred on him .
Obviously , we hope that his work will benefit the peace process in the Middle East and we wish him well in his mission .
With regard to the aforementioned letter , I have to say that it was drawn up and signed in the context of a specific informal group of ministers , and the Portuguese Foreign Minister signed it precisely in that capacity .
If you look at the letter , it does not say Luis Amado , Foreign Minister to the President of the Council of the Union , it says Luis Amado , Portuguese Foreign Minister , and it was exclusively on that basis that the letter was signed .
We may or may not agree with its contents or its wording , but there is one thing I think is important . In spirit at least , the letter draws attention to the urgency , the complexity , the need for the EU as a whole to play a central role in resolving this conflict , in resolving a conflict that began 40 years ago , and thus to respond to the call made by many Members in this Chamber for the EU to endeavour as far as possible to play a decisive role in the matter .
I have to say , honourable Members , that in our Presidency we shall seek , in cooperation with the Commission of course , to work as hard as possible to ensure results , and to ensure that the peace process in the Middle East moves forward , that it makes positive progress .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I will be really brief .
We must take from this discussion the positive elements in this very difficult peace process and try to put the puzzle together in such a way that there is a step forward .
I hope that the next meeting of the Quartet , where , I think , the political horizon and the political settlement will at least start to be mentioned , will be such a step forward .
Secondly , I would mention all the daily improvements for the Palestinians : the mobilisation of international assistance , the institutional and governmental needs of the Palestinian State and the plans to promote Palestinian economic development .
In this respect , we are also ready to revive our interim Association Agreement with the Palestinian Authority , which , among other things , provides for the importation of agricultural products from Palestine - although , of course , on the basis of a quota system .
We all try to do our best , but it also depends on the political will of both sides , which , unfortunately , we cannot substitute for .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 12 July 2007 .
Situation in Pakistan ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Pakistan .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Mr President , honourable Members , I welcome the opportunity to speak here about Pakistan , undoubtedly a very important country which , as it happens , does not always receive the attention it deserves .
I know that some of the honourable Members consider relations with Pakistan to be of particular interest , so I am delighted to be able to set out the Council 's position on the country and hear your opinions .
The situation in Pakistan is developing rapidly in the run up to the elections and we hope that cooperation with the European Parliament will remain good over the coming months .
The EU a long history of relations with Pakistan , dating back to 1976 when our first cooperation agreement was set up .
Unfortunately , for a number of reasons lasting recent years , relations have not been as close as either side would have liked .
It was for this reason that in 2005 the EU embarked upon a review of its policy towards Pakistan , since the Council recognised that certain issues in the country were posing challenges .
It was also firmly agreed that the only effective policy would be resolutely to maintain regular contact with the Pakistani government .
From this decision came the joint EU-Pakistan declaration , adopted in Berlin on 8 February .
Thus , our political dialogue was formalised and the way was open to implement the 2004 cooperation agreement , also known as a third generation agreement , in full .
As a result , relations between the EU and Pakistan have been operating on a new footing since the beginning of this year .
It is our hope that this will contribute towards better understanding between the two sides .
This is a step forward in a long-term process to establish cooperation that we hope will be fruitful .
It is also an acknowledgment of the importance that the EU ascribes to Pakistan as a partner country .
At the same time , although we have defined our long-term direction , there are some matters that must be dealt with in the short term .
We know that Parliament has certain concerns regarding recent events and we share some of these .
All our attention over the last week has been focused on the fighting around the Red Mosque in Islamabad .
I do not want to get into a discussion as to what gave rise to the current situation .
Rather , I would like to commend the government on its decision to face up to those who preach intolerance .
Naturally , we would all have liked to see a peaceful outcome to the impasse but the fact that the government took a stance against radical extremism is important .
A distinction must be made between those who preach violence and those who demonstrate peacefully .
The Council was extremely concerned about the violence that broke out in Karachi in May .
It is essential that everything possible is done to prevent the same thing from happening again .
The Council is monitoring the situation in Pakistan closely through its permanent contacts with EU embassies in Islamabad .
We hope that all sides will show restraint and , in particular , that the force of law and order will act proportionately and use as little force as possible when dealing with civilians .
The Council is also following the case of Supreme Court Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry very closely .
It is important that the legal proceedings against Mr Chaudhry are handled fairly with no undue interference .
The media must also be free to carry out its mission of informing without suffering intimidation .
In general , it is the EU 's desire to see Pakistan continue along its path towards informed moderation , respecting international norms where democratic principles and the rule of law are concerned .
This is the understanding upon which our relations are based .
As Article 1 of the 2004 cooperation agreement states , respect for human rights and democratic principles constitutes an essential element of the agreement .
We intend to work on this basis .
The general election means that Pakistan is faced with a choice in 2007 .
The EU fully supports all steps taken towards a sustainable democracy in Pakistan , the strengthening of its democratic institutions and good government of the country .
The EU considers it important , therefore , that Pakistan 's next elections be free and fair .
We consider it equally important that the next President of Pakistan be elected in accordance with the law .
The salient point is that the government must be given strength arising from democratic legitimacy .
This will be needed if it is to rise to Pakistan 's many challenges .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , we have all witnessed , as the Council President has just mentioned , the events around the Red Mosque in Islamabad and the latest reports say that most of the compound has now been cleared and that the operation has entered its final stage .
I sincerely hope that no more lives will be lost .
It has come as a shock to me to see these scenes take place in the very heart of the Pakistani capital with hundreds of men and women involved .
It is very regrettable that those who continue to resist did not , as Mr Lobo Antunes said , accept the peaceful solution .
I very much appreciate the patience shown by the government in trying to reach a negotiated solution in order to avoid bloodshed , especially as children have been forced to stay behind in the mosque against their own will and that of their parents .
What this episode has clearly demonstrated to the people of Pakistan and to the wider world is what dangers religious fundamentalism and intolerance can pose for us and for what is essentially a moderate and peaceful society .
Over the last couple of months the students and clerics of the Red Mosque have in effect tried to take the law into their own hands .
I firmly believe this is not the direction in which the people of Pakistan would like their country to move .
The government is right to address this phenomenon in a decisive manner .
Other events , including several recent bombings in North-West Frontier Province and last Friday 's alleged attack against President Musharraf 's plane , clearly show that Pakistan needs to remain vigilant and determined to ensure that terrorism and extremism will not succeed .
EU policy is to stay constructively engaged with Pakistan .
Key objectives of our engagement are to promote regional and internal stability , to encourage democratisation and to support Pakistan in consolidating its position as a moderate Muslim state .
I am pleased to inform Parliament that , on 24 May , we held the first Joint Commission under the third generation Cooperation Agreement in Islamabad .
The meeting was a useful opportunity to open new ways for cooperation with Pakistan , for instance , by setting up a sub-group on governance and human rights as a forum for a more intense dialogue in this area .
We have also significantly increased the volume of our cooperation with Pakistan to EUR 200 million over the next four years , notably in the areas of rural development and education .
In so doing , our aim is to contribute towards a more prosperous and stable Pakistan .
Pakistan 's political environment is currently characterised by uncertainty .
The country is rife with speculation on possible electoral scenarios .
One such scenario is based on President Musharraf 's announced plan to get himself re-elected by the sitting assemblies in advance of the parliamentary elections .
Another is a possible arrangement between the President and the opposition parties which could result in early parliamentary elections and Musharraf 's possible re-election by the new assemblies .
As Pakistan approaches crucial parliamentary elections later this year , I believe it is necessary to continue to place emphasis on the importance of strengthening democratic institutions and building a more inclusive political process .
As you are aware , Pakistan is a priority country for a possible EU Election Observation Mission .
I will carefully assess the findings of the exploratory mission sent last month and will then take a decision on whether to deploy a mission in due course .
I think there are serious concerns about the way the electoral rolls have been prepared .
Several million voters appear to be missing from the list and serious action should be taken urgently to rectify this .
In conclusion , we need to assess carefully whether it would be advisable to deploy an Election Observation Mission in a context in which there are some serious concerns , which I highlighted , about the conditions for democratic elections , and we need to keep developments under review in the coming weeks and months .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I have been a critic of Pakistan 's government for some time .
From the toleration of nuclear proliferation by A. Q. Kahn , to the appalling treatment of religious minorities .
I have also been sceptical at times as to the real determination of President Musharraf , ostensibly our ally in the war on terrorism , to really stamp out radical Islamist Jahadis and stop youngsters , including EU citizens , being educated in the hardline Deobandi madrassas .
We now witness the bloody storming of the Red Mosque , where armed Islamists were holed up with women and children .
Musharraf stated the militants were linked to al-Qa 'ida .
So why was this matter allowed to fester since January as the security forces ignored the illegal occupation of land , the stockpiling of weapons and the abduction of women into the mosque complex ?
Was this in order to engineer a bloody showdown ?
Or to demonstrate the risk posed by extremists and prove the President 's anti-terrorist stance to the West , which has been more critical recently , with claims now that the all-powerful Pakistani Military Interservices Intelligence Agency has been secretly helping Taliban forces regroup in the border areas with Afghanistan ?
It is also alleged that Abdul Aziz , the cleric leading the Red Mosque militants , had family links to the ISI .
For sure this crisis is a welcome distraction for President Musharraf , under pressure now for dismissing his Chief Justice , attempting to justify five more years in power and keen , of course , to retain the pervasive influence of the Pakistani army .
The EU should rightly fear instability in an Islamic state with nuclear weapons , and I now call on President Musharraf to allow two former civilian secular Prime Ministers to return from exile and campaign in democratic elections against dangerous extremists and help build a tolerant and democratic country that can survive President Musharraf .
on behalf of the Group PSE . - This is an important and timely debate .
It is interesting that there will be three UK speakers , but that reflects the communities we represent .
We know that across Europe many people are concerned about the situation in Pakistan and the uncertainty that surrounds President Musharraf at the moment - his future - and we recognise that is linked very much to the future of his country .
I do not intend to be as critical as Dr Tannock , but the motion for a resolution we have put down is expressed in a spirit of concern , because many of us have visited the country - we have met the President both here and in Pakistan - and we wish Pakistan well .
We recognise the very real challenges that Pakistan faces , not least in the very hard task of facing terrorism on its own territory .
We respect the international role they have played in the fight against global terrorism .
We give them credit for what they have done already and we pledge support for future efforts .
However , the fight against terrorism cannot be used as a smokescreen to cover malpractice or wrongdoing .
The Commissioner spoke about the serious incident at the Red Mosque , as indeed did Dr Tannock , who also referred to the suspension of Chief Justice Chaudhry and what followed on from that .
I want to pick up on the elections , which the Commissioner and Mr Lobo Antunes both spoke about .
The Council representative said that we support steps to sustainable democracy - and of course we do .
I recognise and welcome the Commissioner 's commitment to a subgroup on governance and human rights for Pakistan .
I want today to urge President Musharraf to ensure that these forthcoming elections not only take place but that they do so in an environment that will be conducive to ensuring that a clean bill of health can be given to them by any international observer mission , whether it is one sent by the European Union or anyone else .
This is vital for the credibility of any president of Pakistan , or any government or , indeed , any government anywhere .
Specifically , I hope that the preparations for those elections ensure that they are conducted properly , and that includes allowing more women to stand for election .
As the Commissioner said , the electoral roll must not just be above scrutiny , it must be so that people do not feel that they have been left out .
We need a free and open press in an election , where journalists feel safe to say and write what they want .
I hope that in the interim period , whilst the election is taking place , the interim government will be genuinely neutral .
Pakistan is a large country with a proud people and a far too troubled history .
I am sure I speak for all in this Parliament when I say that the European Parliament stands ready to do all it can to support Pakistan in difficult times to allow it to grow and support it as fully functioning and peaceful democracy .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - The unfolding and tragic events at the Red Mosque in Islamabad show that Pakistan faces a clear and present threat from extremist ideology .
They are a danger to the majority of moderate Pakistani people and to NATO forces stationed in Afghanistan .
The knock-on effect that these events have had in Peshawar , Balochistan , Waziristan and Bajor illustrates the footholds that the extremists now have across many parts of the country .
Yet the popular condemnation by the majority of Pakistanis of the violence of the militants shows that extremism remains a fringe minority activity in Pakistan .
It is this majority moderate core that the Government must embrace if it is to develop a broad-based political consensus .
The EU 's relationship with Pakistan is based on a commitment to democracy , peace and stability , trade and development and respect for human rights .
This year , the Council and Commission have taken significant steps towards strengthening that relationship and we must continue to exert our influence as a key donor in the region to improve the lives of the Pakistani people .
The EU must continue to support health and education projects in Pakistan so that the poorest people will have a genuine alternative to the madrassas .
We must insist that the Government respect the independence of the judiciary , the rule of law and the human rights of the Pakistani people as the country moves forward to democratic elections .
We must condemn all attempts to stamp out free speech and media freedom and we must stand in solidarity with the entire legal profession of Pakistan when we deplore the suspension of Chief Justice Chaudhry .
Ultimately , the European Union must send a clear message to the President that the transition to civilian rule through free and fair elections is ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
in writing . - I am deeply concerned that Pakistan 's fragile democracy is in peril .
The dismissal of the Chief Justice of Pakistan and resulting media clampdown does not bode well for having free and fair elections .
There are many reports of official and unofficial acts of intimidation against members of the legal community and abuse of the Anti-Terrorist Act to persecute political opponents .
I have been informed by Pakistanis that moderate political parties , journalists and civil society are being marginalised , whilst the extremist groups are being empowered to have a greater influence over its society .
I very much regret that recent unrest has seen the loss of civilian lives and would urge President Musharraf to ensure that the Pakistani authorities fully respect human rights .
Furthermore , I would request the President to abide by the assurances that he gave to the EP Delegation during the December 2006 visit to Pakistan , about the transition to civilian rule and to agreement on building up democratic institutions and most importantly the assurances he gave us on media freedom .
I would like to call on the Council and the Commission to make a strong representation to Pakistan on restoration of democracy and respect of human rights .
Future agreement on Kosovo ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Council and the Commission on the future agreement on Kosovo .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Mr President , honourable Members , a brief statement about Kosovo .
Significant progress has undoubtedly been made over the last years with regard to stabilisation in the Western Balkan area .
However , a key challenge still remains for this progress to be consolidated : the conclusion of the process to determine Kosovo 's future status and the implementation of the result with a strategic objective .
What is needed is a timely and sustainable resolution that lays the foundation for a democratic and multiethnic Kosovo , committed to establishing the rule of law and promoting regional stability and the region 's European perspective .
The determination of Kosovo 's status is a crucial prerequisite to consolidating stability in the region .
The EU has invested a great deal in the Balkans in both economic and political terms , so we have no wish to see the region destabilised once more .
As it is a European region , the European Union should be at the forefront of attempts to resolve matters relating to Kosovo .
Consequently , a solution must rapidly be found via the United Nations Security Council .
The status quo is not sustainable .
In accordance with the declaration of EU Foreign Ministers in Luxemburg on 18 June , the Council confirmed its support for special envoy Martti Ahtisaari and reiterated its position that his Comprehensive Proposal constitutes the basis for settling the status issue by means of a new resolution by the United Nations Security Council .
The European Union remains entirely committed to ensuring the timely adoption of such a resolution by the United Nations Security Council , which will also serve as a basis for the international and EU presence .
A continued united stance by the Member States , in addition to a firm and coherent approach to Kosovo , will be decisive in achieving this objective .
The Council also reasserted its conviction that the resolution of this question is entirely unique and does not establish a precedent .
The EU continues to be available to play an important role in implementing the resolution of Kosovo 's future status .
Our planning on the ground is well underway and has been undertaken based on the global approach adopted by the Council in December 2006 , and on the assumption that a new resolution conferring a clear mandate on the EU will be adopted by the United Nations Security Council .
We are determined to guarantee a successful transition and to this end have been working in close collaboration with the United Nations Mission in Kosovo , which has given assurances that it will fully maintain its operational force until its mandate expires .
Member of the Commission .
Kosovo 's future status is the last remaining status issue that resulted from the break-up of Yugoslavia .
It is vital to get movement in the UN Security Council at this stage .
The Security Council members need to carry their responsibility for resolving Kosovo 's status and set up a multilateral framework giving the whole region a sustainable outcome .
I call on Serbia to play a constructive role in the next phase of the process .
I call on all those involved not to pursue unilateral actions , whether declarations or veto threats , which would only harm the interests of us all in a stable region that can fully become part of the European Union .
In March you adopted a resolution on Kosovo here in Parliament .
In my view our institutions share much common ground .
You took the view that the only sustainable settlement is one that respects all communities , helps Kosovo 's economic recovery and provides an international presence to safeguard the interests of all ethnic communities .
In June , the Council confirmed the EU support for UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari and his comprehensive proposal as the basis for the settlement of Kosovo 's status and a new UN Security Council resolution .
We support the proposal as the best possible available compromise that can ensure that all communities have a future in Kosovo where democracy and the rule of law can take a firm hold .
The key elements of this proposal are the building blocks of any modern society .
They include the protection of the rights of communities , protection of cultural and religious heritage and basic constitutional and security provisions .
All these are vital for a democratic and multiethnic Kosovo .
In a nutshell , we must do three things now .
Firstly , we must settle Kosovo 's status without unnecessary delay .
Secondly , we must preserve the essence of the current settlement proposal and thirdly we must further support Kosovo 's European aspirations and progress towards the European Union .
As Commissioner , I have already opened up several instruments under the stabilisation and association process .
The Commission engages in a regular dialogue on reforms .
We provide generous assistance .
We monitor progress on the basis of European partnership , and we have opened up regional cooperation activities with Kosovo .
Delaying the process for delay 's sake is a potentially dangerous exercise .
It can hardly merge the diametrically opposed positions on status , but it could increase the risk of instability on the ground .
Hence , we must show the Kosovars that there is movement and that there will be a solution .
We must not allow the hardliners to gain the upper hand .
The Balkans and Europe would suffer the consequences of such a development .
Kosovo is indeed a profoundly European matter .
We have much at stake to achieve a sustainable settlement .
As you said in your March resolution , finding a solution on the basis of Mr Ahtisaari 's proposal is of the greatest importance for the stability and further development of the entire region .
Both Serbia and Kosovo are due to become part of the EU , like their neighbours , since the future of the Western Balkans lies in the EU .
Indeed , neither Russia nor the United States is as directly affected by what happens in the Balkans as Europeans are .
It is Europe that would pay the price if the status process failed , and therefore Kosovo 's status should not be settled by unilateral declarations or unilateral veto threats , but by effective and responsible multilateralism .
A sustainable settlement is indeed best achieved by a managed and multilateral process .
Let me close by reiterating that delaying the status process for delay 's sake will get us nowhere .
It would only risk instability in Kosovo , prolong the agony in Serbia and delay the region 's movement towards the European Union .
This is the time , therefore , when Europe , the EU and its Member States , must show leadership and help bring a sustainable solution to Kosovo .
We owe it to Kosovo .
We owe it to the Balkans and we owe it to Europe .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for being so clear .
Yesterday , the new UN General Secretary also stressed that the continued failure to resolve the status issue constitutes a serious threat to peace .
If Kosovo , where 90 % of the population is Albanian , does not finally get what it deserves , namely independence under international supervision , then economic instability and political unrest could ensue .
It is high time that we took a pragmatic line .
Seventy-five per cent of this House voted in favour of the Ahtisaari plan .
We made it clear that we favour independence under international supervision .
The Commission , most Member States , and also the USA , have taken the same line .
So it is high time that we put an end to the deadlock in the Security Council .
Russian and Serbian nationalism can no longer be allowed to delay a peaceful solution that will give the Serbs in Kosovo extensive , internationally-guaranteed rights that are far better than those accorded to other ethnic minorities in other European states .
Now is the time to push forward with a solution , not least because our vital EU mission needs both a stable international legal basis and broad acceptance among the Kosovans if we are to avoid being seen as an occupying power .
It is therefore essential that we push ahead , with a view to achieving a long-overdue political solution .
Mr President , I would like to make it clear that we are not willing to allow the West to fall into the trap of allowing the Serbian constitution to make territorial claims on Kosovo and the Russians to say they will veto resolutions until Serbia agrees - which it will be unable to do because of the constitution approved by a dubious referendum .
An artificial barrier is being created that represents a serious threat to peace .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate is not being concluded as speedily as some might wish .
I can see the risk referred to by the Commissioner , but I also see this as an opportunity .
We should use this opportunity , rather than always looking at the negative side .
What do we want ?
We want to send a message to Serbia through a Stabilisation and Association Agreement and by reducing visa restrictions - provided Serbia cooperates with the ICTY - to say that the country is welcome in the European Union , and we want to see an end to this constant self-flagellation and inferiority complex .
Secondly , we want a new status for Kosovo on the basis of Mr Ahtisaari 's proposal for a resolution .
I am not saying that we would not be willing to accept some changes , but that requires talks , and the Serbian and Kosovan representatives must be willing to talk to one another .
I do not think that they will agree , but they should at least clear up those points that can be cleared up .
Both sides need to act responsibly , because they are still going to have to live alongside one another in the region in future , particularly if they want to be part of Europe .
There is no room for a threat to stability .
So I fully agree with the Commissioner that we cannot defer matters just for the sake of it ; instead we need to make good use of our time .
I am delighted that the Prime Minister of Kosovo has said that he does not want to take any unilateral measures in the coming months .
That is more than some speakers in this House .
I am also very pleased to hear , if it is true , that the USA will not support any such steps , since the European Union would be the primary victim .
We call on Russia to abandon its veto and its blocking of the resolution .
Russia cannot gain anything for Abkhazia and Transnistria that it has not already obtained through military force .
What we are trying to do now is ensure a peaceful transition .
It is also in Kosovo and Albania 's interest to tie Serbia into the new status as tightly as possible and to send Serbia a clear signal from Europe .
Albania and the Albanians in Kosovo could not ask for more .

Mr President , I was unable to hear the Commissioner 's speech because I was engaged in other parliamentary business . From what I have heard , however , I very much share the view that , on the one hand , time is running out , but that , at the same time , we do not feel under pressure whereby if we do not take a decision today there will be violent conflict on Europe 's doorstep , which is what some would have us believe .
In this regard , the statements made by the Prime Minister of Kosovo are most welcome and should be received positively .
Firstly , I feel that efforts must be made to understand Serbia 's position and to send out a message of respect to Serbia , one of respect for its history , its present and its future .
It is obvious that Serbia must be required to cooperate closely with the Court , but it is also clear that some messages from the EU run the risk of being taken in Serbia as disrespectful .
Secondly , there is one thing that I should like to see addressed , at least on the EU 's part and that of all actors with a stake in Kosovo 's legal and political future , and that is Kosovo 's economic situation .
Listening to some of the rhetoric , one may be forgiven for thinking that only a declaration of independence , only a UN resolution establishing Kosovo 's legal future , will create wealth in Pristina , provide jobs for thousands of people in an area with over 50 % unemployment and create the kind of economic stability that will bring investment .
This is not true .
What is lacking is an economic plan for Kosovo .
A Kosovo without economic viability , ruined and with 70 % unemployment will remain a tragedy for us all .
Now is the time to think about this , now is the time when we can exert some influence , which should not in my view be conditional on such independence ; rather , we can help Kosovo 's economic structures , whether or not we see an independent Kosovo in the future .
This is the EU 's responsibility , which I do not feel it is exercising .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - I should like to thank the Commissioner and the President-in-Office for their comments .
Martin Luther King said : ' Peace requires not only the absence of violence but also the presence of justice ' .
If you think about the tragic history of the whole Balkans region , one of the aspects that had been missing for so long was this idea of justice .
There can be no peace without justice .
In Martti Ahtisaari 's proposals we have an opportunity to take that big step , to take that jump , to find not just the peace but also the justice within it .
In an ideal world it should have been left to the people themselves to solve the problem , but they could not find the capacity at the time to come together and find the solution , so one had to be proposed to them .
This is our best opportunity to try to find a long-lasting and just peace settlement between the different traditions and the different peoples there .
It is essential that , not only in presenting a new opportunity to Kosovo , we also take into consideration the unique and special concerns that Serbia has .
It is important that we have a dialogue not only with Kosovo but also with Serbia , to give them the encouragement to move forward and to find a new path in the nation-building process .
As well as that , from my own experience in Ireland , over the last 10 years the one key element with regard to the solution of conflict and of discrimination and of hatred , is dialogue .
Get the sides talking , keep them talking .
As slow and difficult as that is , it is the only way to find the just solution to this problem .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , anyone who has closely followed recent statements by the EU representatives on Kosovo , and particularly on the role of the EU in future , is bound to be left confused .
Of course , everyone is trying to put together the various pieces of the jigsaw in New York : how can we secure a resolution by the Security Council .
In other words , how do we prevent a Russian veto ?
Of course everyone is doing what they can to guard unity in the European Union , and of course we urge the Kosovans to remain calm .
So far , everything is clear .
What , however , will be the precise role of the EU in the near future , and when will the EU be fulfilling it ?
A random selection from newspapers over the past few days tells me that , according to Cristina Gallach , spokesperson for Mr Solana , the EU will face up to its responsibility and take a decision about Kosovo if Russia continues to say ' no ' .
In other words , even if we do not get a resolution , the European Union will take action .
On 10 July , Mr Solana stated that it is impossible for us to send a mission without a mandate , and this is why we expect a resolution .
According to an anonymous EU diplomat on that same day , the EU is hopeful that the new UN resolution will allow for an extensive mission to be sent , even if the future of the province remains unclear .
In other words , a mandate will be granted , but there is no need to say anything yet about independence .
Commissioner , Council , I would urge you to tell us finally what a resolution should contain as a minimum in order to spur the EU to send a mission to Kosovo in the short term .
In fact , when will we be discussing the sending of a mission ?
Originally , it was the intention to do this four months after a resolution .
Is the EU now prepared to send a mission even though there is not yet any news about independence ?
I would appreciate some clarity on this , which you owe us and the voters alike .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , to be brutally frank , it is pretty clear that we have now reached a stalemate .
Serbia and Russia have both declared that they will not accept an enforced independence , and Mr Bush has since said that he wants Kosovo to declare its independence unilaterally .
So the European Union has a key role to play in the current situation .
There is however a whole range of unhelpful input , such as Mr Barroso 's comments comparing the European Union to an ' empire ' .
That may be borne out by some elements , but is not very helpful in the current situation .
The EU is an interested party itself and wants to make Kosovo a virtual UNMIK protectorate .
It is quite clear that the original Ahtisaari plan will not happen , and everyone needs to take a deep breath and accept that .
An internationally valid solution is needed , where Serbia also agrees to the whole package .
We in the European Parliament urgently need details of the planned CFSP mission in Kosovo .
We have not yet received the information , and we urgently need it .
( PL ) Mr President , today we are debating the territorial integrity of Serbia and the future of the Kosovo region where every day fundamental human rights are being broken .
The Serbian population faces a humanitarian crisis , while the common Christian heritage of Europe is being subjected to systematic destruction by Islamic terrorists .
I am surprised how often the events and the current situation in Kosovo are presented to international opinion in a biased way which is damaging to the Serbs .
The unprecedented plan to grant Kosovo independence means destroying the territorial integrity of Serbia and further escalating the conflict .
The decision to separate Kosovo from Serbia threatens stability throughout the European continent , which may have a domino effect in many other ethnically disputed parts of the continent .
What concerns me is that the authorities in the European Union wish to take sides in this Balkan conflict without having either the right or the mandate to do so .
It is clear that the future of Europe and the world should be decided by sovereign states and peoples at international forums such as the UN .
For this reason , I also thank Russia and those countries on the forum of the UN Security council who oppose the displacement of borders in Europe . I thank you .
( SK ) The international community is facing an extremely important task .
A decision must be taken on the future of Kosovo and the coexistence of different communities in the region , based on the principles of equality .
The eight years of stabilisation and the search for the most appropriate solution have culminated in the comprehensive proposal from Mr Ahtisaari , which offers an opportunity for a peaceful future for Kosovo .
This , however , requires a unified approach from the entire Union .
Hindering the solution could generate dangerous tensions , even warfare , in the region , which is something nobody wants .
We are fully aware of the fact that the controlled sovereignty of Kosovo with a permanent international presence may only be instituted subject to a final decision of the UN Security Council .
The dismissive attitude of Serbia , stubbornly supported by the Russian Federation , must not erode our resolve .
In the given situation , we must always act on the basis of a rational assessment of the causes of this complex problem , which go back eight years , to the time when international forces assumed administration of this territory following the bloody events there .
This specific situation and ensuing developments have demonstrated that the integration of Kosovo into Serbia is unrealistic .
Serbia has de facto lost any entitlement to this territory .
Despite the concerns of some European politicians and Member States of the Union , e.g. the Slovak Republic , where a schizophrenic state of mind has evolved in connection with the Kosovo problem , I am convinced that this solution will not establish a precedent for other countries .
The initial situation in Kosovo was atypical and non-standard .
A very important component of stability in this region is the creation of a community of equal citizens , granting minority communities a legal system which would enable them to preserve and develop their identity .
In the case of the Serbian community , this means extensive autonomy .
It is essential to expedite the decision-making process in the UN .
Only stability and peace in this region may secure the prospect of the Balkans , and specifically Serbia and Kosovo becoming part of the European Community ..
( NL ) Mr President , I will endorse what Mr Swoboda said before me .
I think that the delay that has been agreed upon with the Security Council offers scope for yet another all-out effort to reach agreement within the Security Council .
In fact , an agreement such as this is the basis for everything : for unity within the European Union , for the EU 's future operation in Kosovo , but also for keeping together the region of former Yugoslavia .
In that sense , it is also important to show the Serbs - even though we support the proposals by Ahtisaari , because they form the backbone of what we want Kosovo to achieve - that we are willing to make another serious attempt to sit down and talk with them about what may still change , about the kind of concessions that are still possible .
We should not leave the new Serb Government out in the cold , because it is important , as before , to maintain good relations with that country .
Whilst I am pleased that , over the past few weeks , Commissioner Rehn has made good progress in the contacts , relations and negotiations with the new government , it is important not to confuse progress in relations with Serbia with the Kosovo issue .
In short , an all-out effort is called for to still reach consensus , and perhaps at the end we may reach a sound agreement to disagree with our Serb partners in the region .
( NL ) Mr President , even in the autumn of 2006 , it became evident that the Ahtisaari report would favour independence , with special measures to protect Serb and other minorities .
It also became clear that Serbia would refuse to agree to this , and was counting on a Russian veto in the UN Security Council .
Since then , the question has been raised whether such a veto will lead to a unilateral recognition of Kosovo as a state by other states , including the United States and the EU Member States .
This is the controversial model by means of which , in 1992 , independence of Slovenia and Croatia was recognised by Germany prior to any European or international decisions .
Do you assume that , if necessary , this model will be used once more ?
Could the application of the controversial model be prevented if the region north of Kosovo 's Mitrovica , where the Serbian inhabitants of Kosovo are concentrated , were to be handed back to Serbia ?
Is , in that case , Serbia 's and the Russian Federation 's blessing still to be had ?
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we had really hoped that by now Kosovo would no longer be an international issue , and that the politicians would have been able to take over responsibility themselves .
Unfortunately President Milošević 's legacy lives on after his death and is putting a great strain on the democratic government in Serbia .
In 1996 , I demonstrated against Milošević in Belgrade together with the members of the current government , and I could wish for nothing better than for this government to be the one to bring Serbia into the European Union .
I also experienced the apartheid imposed in Kosovo by Milošević from 1989 until the NATO intervention .
It saddens me that far too much nationalism still creeps into discussions in Serbia .
If Belgrade were truly concerned about the quality of life for Serbs living in Kosovo and not about the loss of territory , then Belgrade would approve Mr Ahtisaari 's plan . It gives the Serbs in Kosovo a degree of self-determination that other minorities in Serbia and the Balkans can only dream of .
If UNMIK leaves now and we cannot fill the vacuum created by the absence of a Security Council resolution , we will be faced with a hopeless situation .
Commissioner , you have not provided any answers on this head .
As so often in the past , it seems that Europe is not actually willing to take the necessary action in the Balkans .
This indecisiveness is a major problem and will create huge difficulties .
It is not in our interest to keep on putting off the Kosovo issue to another day .
The collateral damage of our failure to act will be immense .
Like many other states , Russia was part of the Contact Group .
So Russia is fully aware that there have been no talks between Belgrade and Priština .
It is unrealistic to call for negotiations now , after rejecting Mr Ahtisaari 's proposal and refusing to adopt a Security Council resolution .
So I urge this House to follow the Commissioner 's lead and do everything possible to accommodate Russia 's interests , which have nothing to do with Kosovo or Serbia , so that this issue can be resolved .
( HU ) A settlement that rewards the Albanians and reserves only punishment for the Serbs will not be durable .
The EU is caught in a trap , hostage to the poor Russian-American relations , hostage to Russia 's growing power politics .
We cannot give in to Russian blackmail , but without Russia there is no good or enduring solution .
We cannot give in to Albanian blackmail either , because without EU help , Kosovo is not viable as an independent country .
Serbia lost trustworthiness over past decades , it lost Kosovo through its action against the Albanians of Kosovo , and as a result , Kosovo 's independence is inevitable .
This matter has to be discussed further , however ; unilateral steps must be avoided at all costs .
The Ahtisaari plan is good in part , but not sufficient .
Its part about minorities is good , and so is territorial autonomy , yet at the same time , the whole of Europe is beholden for having failed for decades to clarify questions of national self-determination and territorial autonomy .
These must be spelled out .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Mr President , allow me firstly to greet Mr Rehn , as I did not have the opportunity during my first speech and would like to do so now .
I should like to made four or five brief observations .
The first is to reaffirm what I said in my first speech : that simply maintaining the status quo in Kosovo is not sustainable ; we must make progress .
We are convinced that to maintain the status quo would be a huge mistake for which we would have a high price to pay .
Secondly , as a number of honourable Members have already said here , it is fundamental that the European Union maintains a united stance ; in other words , the Member States must remain united with regard to the Kosovo question .
We made this appeal on a number of occasions as a Member State and now , during our Presidency , we naturally reinforce it .
We have no desire to see the EU divided once again , especially over a fundamental issue that , into the bargain , is happening on European territory .
For this reason we have always appealed to the EU and its Member States to remain united in the search for a solution to the impasse in Kosovo .
Thirdly , we believe that we should continue to make every effort on the diplomatic front with the United Nations Security Council towards obtaining a new Security Council resolution on Kosovo .
This resolution , as I have said , serves as a basis for the international and European Union presence in Kosovo .
We must step up our efforts , and , within the sphere of its competence , the Presidency will continue actively to seek agreement in the Security Council on this new resolution .
Finally , we see very clearly that we must offer the Western Balkan countries , and Serbia in particular , a genuinely European perspective , since Serbia meets all the required criteria and conditions for this European perspective .
We were pleased at the decision to re-open negotiations with Serbia with a view to a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU .
We believe that this is a crucial step .
Ensuring the European perspective for Serbia is of vital importance because it is a vital factor in the stability of the whole of the Balkan region .
Member of the Commission .
I shall start with Serbia .
Serbia has a tangible European perspective , with the ultimate goal of EU membership once it meets all the conditions of EU accession .
That is our point of departure in our relations with Serbia .
After the new democratic government - which is Europe- and reform-oriented - was formed , and after this new government made a clear commitment to cooperation with the ICTY and carried out such effective and practical action to match that commitment , we were able to resume the SAA talks with Serbia about a month ago .
It is worth recalling that the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , apart from being a significant agreement , especially in economic and trade relations , is also the gateway , the waystation towards candidate status in the European Union .
I have repeated this numerous times in the Serbian public debate , I shall continue to do so and I will show that Serbia has a European future , as long as that country is willing to meet the conditions that this future requires .
We cannot expect that there will be any trading over concessions on Kosovo because of the European track for Serbia , but we can expect that the political debate in Serbia could finally move from the nationalist past towards a European future .
What we can expect is that , if there are further talks for a limited period of time , then Serbia should take a constructive attitude and a realistic approach in these talks , instead of repeating the same set phrases that we have been hearing over the past couple of years .
My second point is that international supervision covering both political and security issues will be necessary for some time in Kosovo .
Its purpose must be clear : to supervise the implementation of a status settlement that ensures the rights of all communities and the sustainable development of Kosovo .
For that we need a resolution from the United Nations Security Council .
It is difficult , frankly , to operate under conditions of political uncertainty while the process in the United Nations Security Council is still going on .
We have every right to expect that all Permanent Members of the UN Security Council realise their responsibility in the future security and stability of Europe .
We have every right to expect that all the Members in the Security Council realise the great responsibility they have .
In the Commission we are working hard to ensure that the EU will be ready to deploy civilian missions to supervise the implementation of the status settlement .
It will be a different mission from that of UNMIK , and we need a sound legal basis in the form of a UN Security Council resolution to ensure the success of this mission .
Finally , all in all , Kosovo and the status process of Kosovo show how much we need the better steering and coordination mechanisms that the reform Treaty should finally provide .
It is indeed high time to create more effective and efficient instruments for establishing the EU 's Common Foreign and Security Policy .
The debate is closed .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The question of the future of Kosovo is part of the aftermath of the horrible wars in the Balkans .
We are talking about an area in the heart of Europe .
Delaying the question is not an option .
Quoting President Ahtisaari , who conducted 14 months of negotiations between the Serbs and Kosovars , ' a solution will not only be in the interest of the people in Kosovo , but also of vital importance for the regional peace and stability ' .
It is hard to disagree .
Last March he concluded that there was no ground for agreement between the parties .
Later he proposed independence for Kosovo .
The plan has wide international backing .
It is time to look ahead not , of course , forgetting the rights of the Serb minority in Kosovo .
Slovenia was the first of the former Yugoslav states to join the EU .
Macedonia is a candidate .
The rest are queuing .
Hopefully all will end up as members and the past borderlines will loose their significance .
Sometimes borders have to be first drawn in order to erase them .
This seems to be the case in Kosovo .
According to Commissioner Rehn the Commission supports President Ahtisaari 's plan .
I think that we should too .
TRIPS agreement and access to medicines ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Council , by Gianluca Susta and Johan Van Hecke , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , Kader Arif , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Georgios Papastamkos , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Vittorio Agnoletto and Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , Carl Schlyter , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and Cristiana Muscardini , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the TRIPS Agreement and access to medicines B6-0130 / 2007 )
the oral question to the Commission , by Gianluca Susta and Johan Van Hecke , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , Kader Arif , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Georgios Papastamkos , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Vittorio Agnoletto and Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , Carl Schlyter , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , and Cristiana Muscardini , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the TRIPS Agreement and access to medicines - B6-0131 / 2007 )
author . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs and the secretariat of the Committee on International Trade for the help they gave me during this work .
For us , access to medicines by the poorest countries is a priority , and that includes where the international obligations we have assumed are concerned .
We therefore cannot be content to blindly accept the protocol to the TRIPS agreement and believe that this will resolve the issue .
Members of the Commission , members of the Council , there are no longer sufficient generic commitments .
The European Union can and must do more , and if it is not realistic to suggest renegotiating the protocol , the Council , if it wishes to obtain the assent of the European Parliament , must make a firm commitment to state that the mechanism created by the WTO decision of 30 August 2003 is only a very small part of the solution to the problem .
This means ensuring that the Member States can resort to Article 30 of the TRIPS agreement in their national laws on patents , in order to authorise production and exporting , to tackle the public health needs in importing member countries .
It means restricting the Commission 's mandate in the negotiation of economic partnership agreements with the poorest countries , so that provisions are not included that go further than the TRIPS agreement .
It means supporting developing countries that use the flexibilities included in the TRIPS agreement , to provide essential medicines at reasonable prices .
It means supporting grouped supply strategies to achieve economies of scale in the production of generic medicines at affordable prices and to stimulate direct investment in local production facilities .
It means actively supporting the work of the World Health Organisation 's intergovernmental working group on public health , innovation and intellectual property .
It means recognising that the European Union must urgently adopt additional measures to promote the transfer of technology , research , capacity-building and regional supply mechanisms for the world 's poorest regions .
It means guaranteeing a specific level of funding with which to develop or construct pharmaceutical production facilities owned by regions within developing countries , and increasing overall funding for public-private partnerships undertaking research and development in medicines that are particularly important in developing countries .
We therefore believe that we have made an active contribution to this issue , the urgency of which is demonstrated to us by the pictures that reach us from the poorest parts of the world .
The ball is now in the court of the Council and the Commission , and if we receive swift , precise replies , not generalities , then the European Parliament will give the requested consent without delay .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if we have sought today to question the Council and the Commission , it is because the consent requested of us to amend the TRIPS agreement for the purposes of making the August 2003 transitional solution final is raising many issues .
Indeed , following the debate held in parliamentary committee on this mechanism , all the experts heard were unanimous in criticising this solution , which only solves a very small amount of the problems faced by countries that have no pharmaceutical manufacturing capacity and , therefore , the difficulties their populations have in gaining access to health care .
Although it was supposed to provide a fast and effective response , this mechanism is deemed to be complex , even inefficient .
Despite the commitment made by the Council and the Commission to Parliament , no assessment has been carried out .
Doubts therefore remain on this issue .
' It has never been assessed because it has never been used ' we are told by the Commission , which claims that that does not mean that it is inefficient .
That is a fine piece of rhetoric based on a reversal of logic , but it is by no means a well-argued response .
The questions being asked by the MEPs are as follows : why has not this solution ever been used ?
Is it equal to the scope of the problem posed ?
If not , what new measures ought the Union to introduce in order to achieve the stated objective ?
There can be no discrepancy between what we say we are going to do and what we actually do .
In its declarations , the Union supports the Doha Declaration , the flexibilities of the TRIPS agreement and the Member States that have recourse to them .
It also makes a commitment not to call for developing countries to be made subject to new intellectual property rules that are more stringent than those laid down at the WTO , as that would undermine genuine access to treatment .
However , these declarations have not been put into practice .
Let us start by understanding what we mean .
For example , what do we mean by flexibility ?
In our opinion , this concept encompasses all the flexibilities , not just the 2003 solution .
However , in its declarations , the Commission refers solely to that one .
As for the intellectual property rules that go beyond the TRIPS agreement , how do we define them ?
Do we identify the same ones ?
In its declarations , the Commission refrains for resorting to such rules , but the negotiations that have been conducted do not necessarily reflect this commitment .
The Commission 's representatives even at times justify its resorting to these rules for the sake of combating counterfeiting , but this comes under an entirely different debate .
Finally , clear political support must be given to every country that uses a flexibility instrument , whatever it may be , which is not the case in practice .
What we are asking for is transparency and a balance between the public discourse and the negotiations conducted behind closed doors .
We are convinced that the problem raised goes far beyond our simply assenting to an international protocol .
This is a far-reaching political and humanitarian problem that requires a genuine political will to match the challenge posed .
We now want clear commitments , and commitments on many points , all of which are included in our resolution due to be put to the vote tomorrow .
This hinges on a joint policy statement , with Parliament , before our vote .
We will not be content with yet another debate that lacks any precise commitment .
We want a solemn commitment by the Council and the Commission that guarantees that Europe will become more involved in finding new solutions and that it will strive to do as our fellow citizens want and become a leading player in the fight to secure access to medicines at affordable prices for everyone in the world .
Madam President , I thank my honourable friends for their cooperation , which allowed us to formulate the joint motion for a resolution .
As you know , the Union has played a decisive role in achieving the agreement under discussion within the framework of the WTO .
It is one of the few members which have adopted internal implementing legislation .
We of course recognise that no use has been made to date of the mechanism provided for .
Doubts as to the efficacy of the mechanism provided for in the Protocol to the TRIPS agreement are reasonable .
However , the amendment to the TRIPS agreement was the result of lengthy and laborious negotiations within the framework of the WTO .
Renegotiation , even if it were to be considered feasible , will have uncertain results .
The Union is being called on to make the mechanism in question operational with all the means at its disposal .
At the same time , the transfer of know-how and technology and research in developing countries must be encouraged .
Compulsory licensing is just one aspect of the problems relating to public health in developing countries .
At the same time , measures are needed which aim to improve health care systems and infrastructures .
Targeted development aid from the Union can play an important role in this direction .
I should also like to emphasise the importance of safeguards against the diversion of trade .
Drugs must reach and stay with the people in the countries for which this mechanism was created .
I consider that the European Union must accept the amendment to the TRIPS agreement as quickly as possible .
To close , I should like to say that a global approach is needed which includes both prevention and treatment .
( Applause )
author . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the export mechanism provided for in the decision of 30 August 2003 has added such a number of restrictions and administrative / technical obstacles that to date , as is pointed out by ' Médecins sans frontières ' in a publication from September 2006 , it has never been used .
Parliament asked the Commission and the Council to make a specific commitment in its resolution of 2 December 2004 .
On 30 November 2006 the European Parliament again adopted a determined position on the issue of access to medicines in the south of the world and unanimously adopted a resolution calling on the Commission , and I quote , ' to recognise , five years after the adoption of the Doha Declaration , that its application has been a failure , inasmuch as the WTO has received no notification from an exporting or importing country of compulsory medicines nor any such notification under the Decision of 30 August 2003 of the General Council of the WTO on implementing paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration ' .
Secondly , Parliament called on them ' to take the necessary steps within the WTO , in association with the developing countries , to modify the TRIPS Agreement and its provisions based on the Decision of 30 August 2003 ... , in order in particular to abolish the complex and time-consuming procedural steps in the authorisation of compulsory licences ' .
So far , six months later , neither the Council nor the Commission , despite having been requested to do so by all the parliamentary groups , has not dignified the European Parliament with any reply .
Defending to the bitter end a mechanism such as that of 30 August 2003 , reproduced word for word in the amendment to the TRIPS agreements that the EU would like to ratify , signifies a very clear choice of sides : it means siding with the large pharmaceutical multinationals and abandoning millions of patients in poor countries to the mercy of diseases that , in their case , are fatal , such as AIDS , tuberculosis , malaria and dozens of other forgotten illnesses , without research or treatment .
This is a choice that this Chamber , convinced as it is of the primacy of human rights for all over the profit of a few , cannot accept .
author . - ( SV ) Imagine going to the doctor 's and , in order to afford treatment , being forced to pay the whole of your family 's annual wage .
Imagine going to the doctor 's and being forced to choose between obtaining medicine for yourself and no food for the children , or food for the children and no medicine yourself .
That is a choice facing millions of people today .
Two years ago I was involved in starting the Drugs for Neglected Diseases Initiative .
There were many of us who took the initiative here in Parliament to produce this report , and the cooperation between us has been excellent .
We are very much in agreement on these issues .
I wish to emphasise to the Commission that Parliament takes a very serious view of the need for rules guaranteeing access to medicines .
Today , 12 million people per year die due to lack of medicine , above all that designed to combat tropical diseases .
The patients are poor , and it is not profitable to do research on their behalf , so we do not get any new medicines .
We therefore have to resolve , firstly , the issue of access to existing medicines and , secondly , that of research into new medicines and the development of these , because these countries will never be able to leave poverty behind if their populations are at home ill .
The TRIPS + agreements must definitely not become incorporated into the economic partnership agreements and undermine these countries ' ability to provide their populations with medicines .
In the period allotted to me in which to speak , I do not even have time to run through all the ways in which the Commission is at present endeavouring to force the inclusion of the various patent-related issues into the negotiations on economic partnerships .
We would ask you to stop doing that .
When it comes to research , we need to have a fund at EU level or a global profits tax on pharmaceutical companies .
Otherwise , we shall never produce the medicines that can raise these people out of poverty .
The right to survival comes before all other rights .

author . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Susta and all my fellow Members who have enabled this work , which covers many areas , to develop , and who have made it possible to launch this political initiative aimed at guaranteeing the residents of the world 's poorest countries access to medicines at prices that are reasonable and affordable for those people .
While extreme poverty is a serious social hardship , when it is accompanied , as it often is , by serious diseases , it constitutes utter misery : that is the central message that we want to put across .
The agreement achieved within the WTO , which is probably the only practical legal way within the context of multilateralism to facilitate access to medicines at low prices , creates great confusion on many scores .
An exemption mechanism is set up , certainly with laudable intentions , but it is not operational : this is because of the restrictive clauses accompanying it , the numerous and complex administrative formalities that make it difficult to put into practice and the inability in practice to access the benefits of the proposed mechanism by countries that are potential beneficiaries .
Few countries have ratified it so far and - even more worryingly - no country has requested the help of this instrument .
We need to calmly verify that something is not working , and work out how to put it right .
We need to have the courage to go further and to realise that the de minimis agreement is only a partial solution to the fundamental problem , which casts doubt upon the effectiveness of the WTO 's multilateralism rules .
We need to put forward measures at European level that go beyond the agreement and that are able to offer a sound contribution to access to medicines at affordable prices , thus helping to save many human lives .
We must encourage the transfer of research and technology to facilitate the production of medicines in poor countries .
We must be vigilant - and this is the Commission 's task - because too often counterfeit medicines are sent to poor countries , and this is why we must also act decisively to combat this distortion of international trade .
Above all , though , we must undertake to be vigilant to ensure that the citizens of poor countries do not have to suffer this insult also .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Madam President , honourable Members , on 6 December 2006 , the Council sought Parliament 's approval , under Articles 133 and 300 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , for the Commission proposal for a Council decision relating to the acceptance , on behalf of the European Community , of the protocol amending the TRIPS agreement , signed in Geneva on 6 December 2005 .
In developing and negotiating the aforementioned protocol , which will result in citizens of developing countries having increased access to drugs at affordable prices , the Community , from a political point of view , played a key role .
This was one of the greatest successes achieved in the run up to the WTO Ministerial Conference held in Hong Kong in December 2005 .
The fact that that forum on standards in international trade addressed an issue of such importance for developing countries , constitutes a concrete application of the principles of consistency in the development policies set out in the European Council , agreed in 2005 between Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
It also constitutes a significant practical step towards meeting Millennium Development Goal 6 to combat HIV-AIDS , malaria and other diseases .
A number of members of the WTO , including the United States , have already ratified the Protocol , and it is desirable that the Community , as the main advocate of the measure , should follow suit by December 2007 at the latest , once internal procedures in the Commission , the Council and Parliament have been completed .
As far as both technical and wider-ranging questions raised by the honourable Members are concerned , it is not the Council 's responsibility to assess the technical effectiveness of the mechanism , created by the WTO 's decision of 30 August 2003 .
The Council recognises the complexity of the issue , but also underlines the fundamental political importance of ratifying the protocol for developing countries .
The Council does not intend to amend the mandate conferred on the Commission regarding economic partnership agreements since these are in the final stages of negotiation .
The Member States meeting with the Commission on the European Development Fund Committee will seek to ensure that adequate resources are channelled to meet Millennium Goal 6 , in particular for the ACP countries .
The Council takes this opportunity to call on the European Parliament to fulfil its vital institutional role , in order that the European Community can accept this important protocol , and so that trade standards may be amended in such a way as better to serve the interests of millions of human beings in developing countries .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , the Commission shares Parliament 's view that access to medicines for poor developing countries is a matter of huge political and humanitarian importance , and the Commission has taken a number of initiatives to facilitate access to medicines for poor developing countries through existing programmes .
From the outset , the European Community has been at the forefront of the debate on TRIPS and access to medicines .
In the WTO , we played an active role in bringing together almost irreconcilable positions .
Developing countries were grateful to the European Union for our role as an honest broker .
The debate in the WTO first led to the adoption of the declaration in Doha in November 2001 .
This declaration reaffirms the right of WTO members to use , to the full , the flexibilities contained in the TRIPS Agreement , including the use of compulsory licensing .
For those countries with no manufacturing capacity in the pharmaceutical sector and that could not make effective use of compulsory licensing under the TRIPS Agreement , a temporary waiver from the normal rules of patent law was adopted in August 2003 .
Parliament , together with the Council , implemented this waiver decision by adopting it at first reading - Regulation ( EC ) No 816 / 2006 - to allow manufacturers of generic drugs to produce patent medicines for export to countries in need without sufficient capacity to produce them .
The protocol amending the TRIPS Agreement aims at transforming this decision into a permanent and legally secure solution .
This flexibility , to be introduced into the TRIPS Agreement , can help save lives without undermining the patent system , which is one of the main incentives for the research and development of new medicines .
We are now at the very end of this WTO process .
The last step is the acceptance of the TRIPS amendment .
I come now to the specific questions raised in the oral question , and I have discussed these responses with my colleague , Mr Mandelson , who is in charge of trade policy in the Commission .
I should like to make four specific , concise points .
First , the mechanism created by the WTO decision of August 2003 and the Protocol to the TRIPS Agreement is the result of long and difficult negotiations between almost 150 countries .
It represents a balance which was difficult to strike .
This mechanism must be seen only as a part of the wider issue of access to affordable medicines for developing countries , which goes far beyond the issue of patent law .
Second , the Commission can confirm that the European Community is committed not to include , in the economic partnership agreements and in other future bilateral and regional agreements with poor developing countries , any TRIPS + provisions which could affect access to medicines or undermine the TRIPS flexibility contained in the Doha Declaration on TRIPS and public health .
Third , the Commission encourages pharmaceutical companies to adopt schemes , such as tiered pricing , under which medicines are sold in poor and developing countries at considerably lower prices than in developed countries .
Fourth , the Commission supports local production capacity .
Local production can promote competition and make pharmaceutical products more affordable .
It is also important to encourage technology transfer to ensure that locally produced pharmaceutical products can meet internationally agreed standards .
To conclude , I hope that Parliament has been reassured that access to medicines remains a priority for the Commission .
Now that the European Parliament has all the elements in its hands to make a well-informed decision , and given the role played by the European Community in forging this permanent solution , it would be regrettable if the European Community could not accept it in time .
It is essential that Parliament and the Commission continue to cooperate closely to facilitate access to medicines for poor developing countries .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , every year , some six million people die of the effects of AIDS , malaria or tuberculosis .
Every year , millions of people , particularly in Africa , are denied the treatment that could save their lives , not because the medication is unavailable , but simply because it is unaffordable .
Whatever the exact reason may be , this is , of course , a downright scandal .
Since 2003 , a temporary WTO regulation has been in place for countries that do not have the capacity to make their own cheap medicine for their people .
What the Commissioner said is right . In Doha , we managed to secure a huge victory in 2003 when we made the breakthrough in this respect .
This is something for which the EU deserves enormous appreciation .
Whilst we may be able to discuss the causes ad infinitum , the trouble is that this regulation is still ineffective in practice , and all these millions of people have not received this medication , which is what we desperately want and why we welcomed this breakthrough at the time .
You are now asking this Parliament for permission , really , to make the agreement permanent .
Needless to say , before this House can add its signature to this regulation , which has not been workable to date , with all the underlying causes and complexities , we want firm guarantees .
The Commission and the Council have tried to say a few things .
First of all , it is essential that use is made of a practical regulation , as this simply requires much more assistance - practical , legal and political - from the countries involved .
We know that many of them consider it very complex to actually use it .
My suggestion would be to do what we did at the time of the trade negotiations , namely to set up a European cheap-medicine team , the ' A-Team ' of the European Union , so that direct aid can be given , as it were .
This aid should not just be financial but also take the form of information and legal expertise .
Secondly , I understand that you , the European Commission , have pledged not to incorporate any TRIPS + in bilateral agreements .
This would be a very crucial element , provided it is clearly confirmed by the Council .
Thirdly , the long-term solution is to enable developing countries to take care of their own production , which , of course , brings the developmental perspective into the equation .
The expertise is there .
This is what a number of countries , including Tanzania , are doing .
I think that this same European A-Team would be able to pull this off again without any trouble .
If this is the direction you are heading , we will be able to sign on the dotted line .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the TRIPS amendment is both overdue and ahead of its time .
It is overdue in that , for a long time , there has been a need to give poorer countries assisted access to drugs .
It is ahead of its time because the extension of patent regimes to cover drugs in India and other countries in 2005 has not yet bitten .
It takes years for a drug to get from development through clinical trials and it is only after that that this amendment might come into play .
But it could come into play earlier if the Indian patent office is not upheld in its line of rejecting patents for minor modifications of older drugs .
Now the amendment alone cannot solve the problem that generic drugs still available now are not affordable , but it will establish in TRIPs that production for export legitimately comes under compulsory licensing and so also loosens the constraint of the legitimate interests of the patent owner , at least as regards territory , in other articles .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wonder whether the Commission and the Council are here to pull our legs .
I intend to ask the Presidency if I can have a recording of this part-session , because I believe that playing it in Africa will explain better than any words the absolute and utter indifference of the Council and the European Commission to the problem of access to medicines .
All the groups are putting this question to you concerning a regulation that has been in force for three years but not once implemented ; are you replying that this regulation will allow developing countries access to medicines ?
But it has not allowed it for three years !
What , do you have a magic wand ?
That is as far as the Council is concerned .
The Commission tells us : ' We have worked so hard to reach this agreement ' .
But if it does not work - regardless of whether a large or small amount of work has been done - the agreement must be amended or in any event we need to find other ways to make progress .
The Commission and the Council also talk about ' asking the pharmaceutical firms to offer lower prices for the south of the world ' , which amounts to saying : ' Let the pharmaceutical firms themselves do a good deed , because we are completely unable to guarantee a right ' .
They also talk of ' increasing local production capacity in the south of the world ' .
But how ?
There is endless talk of the transfer of technologies , but absolutely nothing is being transferred to the south of the world .
These regulations hinder production !
They are just fine words , and then you come here to say that the Millennium Development Goals are being achieved in this way .
It seems to me that there is a total lack of interest on the part of the Commission and the Council in the issue that we have raised .
Madam President , the Commission and Council are right to remind us that the 2003 waiver was greeted in this House as a great breakthrough in terms of access to medicine , but I think we are right as a Parliament to remind the other two institutions that four years later , not a single drug has been supplied to a single patient .
As others have said , the reasons for this are complex .
It is partly because of the expense of utilising the waiver , it is partly because of the complexity of the mechanism itself and it is partly because of economic pressure put on certain countries by other countries and by big pharmaceutical companies .
The Commission is right to say that we cannot go back and renegotiate this waiver .
It was a complex deal that was struck and we are not asking for that .
What we are saying is that if we are to give our assent to this waiver , we want the Commission to commit itself to giving technical , financial and political support to developing countries in order to enable them to utilise the mechanism .
The four points that Commissioner Rehn made were all very valid and welcome , but he has to go beyond those four points and make it clear that he will give the backing that the developing countries need to access medicines today , not in 10 or 20 years time .
( NL ) Madam President , thanks to my report of December 2005 , a compromise has been reached at first reading on a regulation which guarantees the uniform application in the EU of the WTO Decision of 30 August 2003 .
Nearly four years on , though , it now looks as if this decision is nothing but an empty shell .
The fears at the time have now been realised .
The system is far too elaborate and does not work .
I share Mr Agnoletto 's dismay over the response by the Council , which has managed to sidestep every question or concern expressed by this House .
The ratification of the TRIPS Protocol should force the EU into careful reflection and , above all , to a more cohesive policy which should enable the poorest countries to develop their own capacity to produce vital medicines .
Without a strong signal in that direction , I am not convinced , Madam President and Mr Susta , that we should sign this waiver just like that .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Madam President , honourable Members , as I said earlier , In developing and negotiating the aforementioned protocol , which will result in citizens of developing countries having increased access to drugs at affordable prices , the Community , from a political point of view , played a key role .
Mr Rehn has also made it clear here that this was achieved after lengthy and difficult negotiations and we believe that , in the light of the circumstances , the outcome is a balanced one .
All that remains for me to do , therefore , is once again to call on Parliament to accept this important protocol so that trade standards may be amended in such a way as better to serve the interests of millions of human beings in the developing countries .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , thank you for this very responsible debate on a very important issue .
I would like to give a response to an issue which was raised by David Martin and some other speakers concerning what the Commission is doing in order to support technology transfers leading to the local production of affordable key pharmaceuticals .
The issue also concerned what we are doing in the field of prevention , treatment and care as regards HIV , malaria and tuberculosis .
This is one of the objectives of a specific initiative dedicated to aid for poverty-related diseases in the developing countries which provided a combined total of EUR 81.2 million over the past two years .
The European Union is also a major funder of pharmaceutical and health-oriented clinical research including health systems research and capacity building in various sub-Saharan African countries through the European developing countries clinical trials partnership .
Moreover , during the period of implementation of the Sixth Framework Programme for Research , EU support for R [ amp ] D devoted to poverty related diseases amounted to more than EUR 455 million .
For the same period an additional EUR 78 million was spent by international scientific cooperation on various projects covering the fields of neglected infectious diseases , health systems policy research and reproductive health .
As you can see , the Commission is doing a lot to help developing countries , in particular the least developed countries , to enhance their access to affordable medicines , including local production capacity .
Is that enough ?
Probably not .
Is the Commission ready to do more ?
Yes , provided we have the resources needed . And this is an area where Parliament has a key role to play .
There was another important issue raised concerning the fact that the mechanism has not yet been used , which implied that it does not work .
It is important to understand how compulsory licensing works .
The mechanism can operate without any compulsory licence actually being granted .
The usefulness of compulsory licenses comes mainly in the leverage they give to developing countries in price negotiations with pharmaceutical companies .
In other words , compulsory licenses can deliver the expected results , i.e. make medicines more affordable without being actually granted .
Finally , I hope that Parliament has been reassured that access to medicines remains a very strong priority for the Commission and for the European Union .
We hope that Parliament will give its assent to the protocol as soon as possible .
The outside world would not understand a delay or refusal from the European Union .
This would undermine the EU 's credibility as a whole in this field and as an international partner in general .
I have received one motion for a resolution in accordance with Article 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 12 July 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The right agreed in 2001 for developing countries to produce generic medicines was a welcome one .
But , as is only too obvious , many developing countries have neither the technological capacity nor the finance to do this .
The Agreement of August 2003 to add an annex to the original WTO Agreement that allowed these countries to import generic drugs was thought to solve this problem .
Yet four years later , not a single developing country has proved able to do this .
Four years on , not a single patient has received a single drug .
Alongside agreeing to sign the Annex we must ensure the necessary resources and will are available to transform what to date has proved to be mere rhetoric into reality .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.10 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Council Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0133 / 2007 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Council .
Subject : Aids for shipwreck rescue operations
Since there are Member States which are in open breach of their international obligations concerning shipwreck rescue operations by refusing to accept in their territory persons rescued by vessels from other Member States , can the Council state whether it intends to adopt measures to ensure that the above obligations are complied with throughout the Union , including , where appropriate , aids to individuals or public institutions taking responsibility in terms of humanitarian obligations under international law ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) As the honourable Member is aware , the Council is not in a position to verify whether or not the Member States are complying with their various international obligations under international conventions .
The current situation relating to the European Union 's southern maritime borders was debated in the Council of 12 June .
The Council intends to carry out an in-depth analysis of certain proposals put forward by Malta relating to the recent events in the Mediterranean Sea , which will take pertinent international instruments such as the SOLAS and SAR conventions into account .
Due attention will also be given to the Commission 's study on international legal instruments relating to illegal immigration by sea .
In addition , the need to provide Frontex with the necessary resources to carry out its mandate efficiently was noted , and the Commission intends to increase its operational budget for 2007 .
The Member States were also call on to honour their commitment to ensure that data is registered in the centralised record of available technical equipment .
( ES ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to begin by thanking you for answering my question first .
I wish the Portuguese Presidency every success , because we all need you to be successful .
Secondly , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to express great concern at the inadequacy of the 2 June agreements .
The EU , which is the wealthiest Community of states in the world , cannot allow itself to continue to allow a country to let dozens of shipwrecks perish in the sea due to a lack of practical measures .
I believe that the EU has sufficient means at its disposal and yet the resources we have to deal with such situations - in particular Frontex - are completely inadequate .
It is shameful and unacceptable that the EU should behave in this manner due to a lack of economic measures .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) I would firstly like to thank the honourable Member for his kind words in wishing the Portuguese Presidency good luck .
I would like to say that this is a question that the Portuguese Presidency considers not just important , but in fact a priority .
In his speech in the Chamber this morning , setting out the priorities for the six-month period of the Portuguese Presidency , the Portuguese Prime Minister had stressed that issues relating to the fight against illegal immigration would be a priority for the Portuguese Presidency .
We shall indeed be working hard to address these issues , but always from a humanitarian perspective , which , for us , is fundamental .
As you are aware , certain measures in this area were taken by the last European Council .
Obviously , we could always do more , and perhaps should do more .
However , I repeat that we consider this issue to be a priority .
They form a major part of the Portuguese Presidency 's list of priorities so the honourable Member can rest assured that we will be doing everything possible to address the justified concerns that he has expressed here .
Subject : Provision of adequate , high-quality childcare facilities in the Member States
The lack of adequate care structures and the fact that they are not available at a low cost often hampers the equal participation of men and women in the labour market and the equal sharing of responsibilities in the context of family life .
The 18-month programme of the three Presidencies ( document 17079 / 06 , December 2006 ) states that the Portuguese Presidency will focus on boosting the availability of high-quality childcare facilities on the basis of the decision by the Barcelona Council ( 2002 ) , as well as care structures for other dependents .
What action will the Council take to ensure the adequacy and quality of care services ?
How might proposals aimed at meeting the needs as regards reconciling family and working life through the provision of care facilities for children and other dependents boost employment and lead to the recognition of atypical work and the consolidation of skills acquired through experience , possibly by means of additional theory-based training ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) The honourable Member has raised a highly pertinent question in the context of the changes under way in the European labour market in the light of the Lisbon Strategy .
With regard to the honourable Member 's specific question on the action planned by the Council and the possible impact of the proposals in this sector , obviously the Council can only act through legislative channels based on a Commission proposal . This is what is stipulated in the Treaties .
At this moment no legislative proposals relating to childcare are being analysed .
Adequate , high-quality provision of childcare services still falls to the Member States .
Although the Barcelona objectives have been implemented throughout the EU , the Council reiterated them in the European Pact for Gender Equality adopted in March 2006 , when , the Council decided that the availability of high-quality childcare structures should be increased , commensurate with the internal objectives of each Member State .
We would also point out that the Council moreover reiterated its commitment regarding family-orientated policies , including childcare , in the conclusions adopted on 30 May 2007 on the importance of family-orientated policies in Europe and the creation of an Alliance for Families .
The honourable Member also mentioned the 18-month programme covering the German , Portuguese and Slovenian presidencies establishing that one of the major goals of the three Presidencies is to strengthen the European social model , which is an integral part of the Lisbon Strategy .
The programme also establishes that , in this particular context , the emphasis will be on a better balance between work , family and personal life , adequate childcare infrastructure , and support for the elderly and the disabled .
In its effort to achieve this goal , the Portuguese Presidency is also organising a conference on the balance between work , personal life and the family : fresh challenges for the social partners and public policies .
The conference will be held in Lisbon on 12 and 13 July 2007 , beginning , therefore , tomorrow .
( EL ) I too welcome the new Presidency and thank the representative of the Portuguese Presidency for his reply .
Of course the 12 and 13 July are tomorrow and the next day .
In order to revive everyone 's interest , I should like to ask if measures can be designed within the framework of qualifications , an issue on which we have other legislative decisions by the Council and Parliament .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) I thank the honourable Member for her kind words in wishing success for the Portuguese Presidency .
When reading the list of priorities for the Portuguese Presidency , you will have noticed the attention and importance which we have attached to social issues and , specifically , to those concerning the relationship between work and the family .
Regarding the specific question you have just raised , the Council is obviously open to studying and considering all proposals and the Commission naturally has an important role to play in this matter .
As soon as the Commission proposes complementary or other measures in this field , the Council will obviously be ready to discuss and debate them .
Since the Portuguese Presidency underlines the importance of the social policy and European social model within the scope of its programme , it is naturally particularly keen to consider any proposals that may be submitted .
Subject : Failure to agree framework decisions on procedural rights
Is the Council proud of having been unable to agree to a measure on legal rights for suspects and defendants throughout the European Union ( the proposed Framework Decision on procedural rights in criminal proceedings ) ?
What signal does it send to the EU 's partners that the 27 Member States are unable to agree on safeguards to ensure fair treatment and trial , in a measure conceived as an essential and promised accompaniment to the European Arrest Warrant ?
How does this strengthen the EU 's voice supporting human rights in the world ?
What action will the Portuguese Presidency take to revive this much needed instrument ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) The Council is disappointed that an agreement could not be reached on this issue in the session held in Luxemburg on 12 and 13 June , despite the analysis and adoption of this framework decision having been a priority not only for the German Presidency but also for the preceding presidencies since the presentation of the Commission proposal to the Council on 28 April 2004 .
In this context , I would like to remind the honourable Member that on 1 and 2 June 2006 the Council agreed the principles that should govern subsequent work on this proposal .
It was concluded that the scope of the proposed framework decision would be limited to the right to information , the right to legal assistance , the right to free legal assistance , the right to an interpreter and the right to translation of the procedural documents .
At its session of 15 and 16 June 2006 , the Council called for negotiations on the procedural rights in criminal proceedings to be concluded .
At its session of 19 April 2007 , the Council concluded that work on this question should continue , with a view to obtaining a consensus on the scope of the instrument at the June European Council .
The question to be resolved was whether the Union had competence to legislate on purely national cases or whether the legislation - and I would point out that at least 21 Member States shared this opinion - should be applied solely to cross-border cases .
I should emphasise that the German Presidency in particular undertook every effort to obtain a consensus on this matter , unfortunately without success .
In turn , the Portuguese Presidency will attempt to find a way forward .
At this moment we are analysing the content of the dossier resulting from the Council debates of 12 and 13 June 2007 .
In some Member States the delivery of the rights set out in the European Convention on Human Rights is poor , so we need a measure spelling out rights to information , legal aid , interpretation and so on .
Indeed , the Council of Europe has welcomed the framework decision , completely undermining claims - by , for example , the UK - that it would undermine the ECHR .
I welcome what the Presidency has said .
President-in-Office , do you think that expected changes in the Treaty to move to QMV and codecision will help ?
Will you , perhaps , try to find a way through for enhanced cooperation ?
Will you try to promote something like a Prüm Treaty for rights - perhaps a Member State initiative ?
How will you make sure , in practice , that we get this absolutely vital measure to match the European arrest warrant and other measures which have made prosecution easier , so that our citizens know that their rights are actually important in the EU ?
It is , I believe , still a little early to reply fully to all the questions you have raised .
It was a single question , but one that contained a number of different sections and opened up various possibilities .
I have pointed out that our Presidency began only a few days ago .
We are currently analysing the content of the dossiers to see how we can make headway on this issue .
You spoke , for example , of facilitating the co-decision procedure by means of qualified majority voting , a more frequent application of qualified majority .
As far as I am aware , this possibility is not the one currently to be found in the Treaties , but it should be found in the so-called ' Reform Treaty ' , which is not yet even at the negotiation stage in the Intergovernmental Conference .
What I can assure the honourable Member is , as you will have realised from my speech , that we are attaching great importance and urgency to this issue .
In the light of the entire process thus far , and given the whole history of this issue , we shall be striving to find the solution most deserving of the support of all the Member States .
As the author is not present , Question No 4 lapses .
Subject : Strengthened Mediterranean cooperation
What is the Council Presidency 's view on the proposal by the French President , Nicolas Sarkozy , for stronger Mediterranean cooperation ? What measures is the Council planning to prevent a breakdown of the Barcelona Process ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Obviously , the Presidency welcomes any initiative or proposal concerning relations between the European Union and the Mediterranean countries aimed at reinforcing Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
This region has always been , and will continue to be , at the top the EU 's agenda .
At this moment , we do not have at our disposal specific details of the ideas proposed by the French President on this matter , so I am not in a position to comment on them for the time being .
( DE ) I have two short supplementary questions .
One : how do you envisage improving and increasing cooperation with North Africa ?
It is not satisfactory at present .
Two : would you consider creating a Mediterranean Community as an alternative to Turkey becoming a full member of the EU ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) You will also have seen in our document outlining the Portuguese Presidency 's priorities the strengthening of the relationship between the European Union and the Mediterranean , and our intention , within the scope of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , is to hold a number of high level ministerial meetings on a variety of matters .
This is , in fact , an important area to which the Portuguese Presidency will give its full attention , as the Portuguese Prime Minister also said very clearly here today during the debate on the Portuguese Presidency 's priorities .
With regard to the Euro-Mediterranean cooperation or union , that is to say , the proposal put forward by the French President , I repeat what I have already said : that we have the need and desire to obtain a clearer view of what concrete proposals will effectively be submitted so that we can then make a comprehensive overview of the entire framework of relations between the European Union and the Mediterranean .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Mr President , I would ask the honourable Members to consult the German Presidency 's answer to oral questionof 20 June 2007 , in other words not long ago .
The Council would first like to emphasise that with regard to the new legislative proposals it is naturally the Commission 's responsibility to exercise its right of initiative .
With regard to the specific question of beef imports , we must take account of the fact that , in accordance with Community law , the Commission is competent to manage the safeguard clause .
Consequently , the Council has no direct influence on the decisions taken by the Commission in this area .
The response was brief , but the question is a very serious one and it will not go away .
What is being looked at here is the imbalance in standards between Brazil and Europe ; what we demand of our producers and what our consumers expect , and what is delivered in terms of beef brought into the EU from Brazil .
I note in your priorities , President-in-Office , that you have a special relationship with Brazil and are looking at a specific political dialogue with that country .
I stress that we are looking at a ban on such imports and I think that , in terms of consumer safety and protection , that is the very least we should be looking at .
On the issue of the trade deal , I would ask that you address that particular question and the likelihood of same .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Very briefly , Mr President , I wish to thank you for your kind words wishing the Portuguese presidency success and to tell the Chamber that , on the initiative of this Presidency , the first EU-Brazil summit was recently held in Lisbon .
I believe this summit will very much set the tone for future relations between the EU and Brazil , which we would naturally like to see taken to a new level .
The strategic dialogue that we will be establishing with Brazil is set to be all-encompassing - covering issues ranging from economics and trade to energy and climate change .
I believe that these and other questions will continue to have their place .
This is what I wanted to say to the honourable Member .
Questions Nos 9 and 10 will not be called as the issue with which they deal is already on today 's agenda .
Questions Nos 11 to 13 have been withdrawn .
Questions Nos 14 to 18 lapse , as the authors are not present .
Subject : Kurdish mayor dismissed for providing multilingual municipal services
On 14 June 2007 the Turkish Council of State decided to dismiss the Kurdish mayor , Abdullah Demirbas , and dissolve the municipal council of the southern district of the city of Dyarbakir , for providing official administrative services in Turkish , Kurdish , English and Syrian .
According to a survey of 2006 , Kurdish speakers make up 72 % of the population of the administrative district .
Everyone has the right to use his or her mother tongue .
By this act , Turkey is breaching the cultural and language rights and freedom of expression of minorities , respect for which is a fundamental condition for EU membership .
Will the Council take steps in response to this serious breach of rights ? Will it take up this case in the dialogue with the Turkish authorities , with the aim of reinstating the mayor and municipal council and ensuring peaceful coexistence for all in Turkey ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Thanks to the efficiency of all those who work with me , it was easy to find Question 19 , to which you referred , and I am delighted to give you an answer .
It is our understanding that Turkey 's approach to minority rights continues to be restrictive .
Where cultural rights are concerned , legislative amendments have been introduced , as you are aware , with a view to allowing education and broadcasting in languages other than Turkish .
However , the public education system maintains restrictions with regard to the learning of these languages .
Furthermore , general restrictions remain on the use of languages other than Turkish both in political life and in access to public services .
Clearly , new and significant efforts need to be made by Turkey in this area .
Turkey must guarantee cultural diversity and promote respect and protection for minorities under the terms of the European Convention on Human Rights and the principles established in the Council of Europe 's Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities , in accordance with the best practices of the Member States .
Let there be no doubt that the EU attaches great importance to this matter as an integral part of the ongoing reform process in Turkey , and will continue to closely monitor and evaluate the progress made in the field .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reply is , in principle , highly correct , even though I had also asked whether there was an intention to tackle this issue with specific action .
I gave the specific example of a Kurdish mayor dismissed for having provided municipal language services in his language , in an area in which 72 % of the population is Kurdish .
I therefore wanted to ask whether the Council intends to take any steps to tackle this issue during the dialogue by asking , for example , for the mayor to be reinstated , because in the meantime it is even illegal to write the names of the villages in Kurdish and the office of the governor of Dyarbakir , for example , yesterday opposed and practically dismissed the municipal council , which wanted the names of the streets to be written in both Kurdish and Turkish .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Mr President , I should very briefly like to say to the honourable Member that all questions concerning dialogue on issues such as human rights and respect for minoritiesare subject to very close and thorough monitoring by the EU .
That applies to this case and others .
Please rest assured that we shall be doing this .
( DE ) I wanted to ask another question .
Turkey is always announcing legislative amendments , but never passes the laws , and the situation is getting worse .
So I would like to ask : do you think that the law on language that you mentioned and the freedom of religious expression legislation that we cited will actually go through this year ?
What will the Council do if they are not passed this year ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) All I can say to the honourable Member is that it is my hope and desire that this will effectively be the case .
In fact , the national authorities in Turkey are entitled to adopt whatever legislation they wish .
The Council has no means , as you can imagine , of obliging Turkey to adopt any legislation .
Naturally , the Council can make its wishes known on any given matter , and express its satisfaction .
This is naturally what we have been doing , as you are aware , in the context of the negotiating process for Turkey 's accession to the EU .
Obviously , these issues also have ramifications for this negotiation process .
Subject : Energy security for the EU over the next 20 years
Traditional energy supplies are becoming increasingly difficult to obtain and energy sources are starting to be used as a means of applying political pressure .
What degree of energy security does the Council wish to achieve for the EU ?
Has an operational action programme been established with a view to ensuring energy security over the next 20 years ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Mr President , I would like to say that security of supply is one of the three objectives of the Community 's energy policy ; the purpose of this policy is the highest possible degree of energy security .
However , as with other Community policies , energy policy must also take other factors into account , such as costs , internal market regulations , and , most importantly , the EU 's overall objectives on climate change .
Energy security is not an objective and quantifiable goal to which a numerical value can be affixed .
It must be looked upon as a dynamic process depending on EU interaction with third-party countries and on EU citizens ' preferences with regard to the energy mix and technological development .
In reply , then , to the first question , the Council has not set an objective for energy security , as mentioned by the honourable Member , nor , to the best of the Council 's knowledge , is any legislative proposal of this nature being prepared by the Commission .
The Presidency of the Council would also like to stress that one of the main objectives of the development and implementation of the Community 's internal and external energy policy over the forthcoming decades is to guarantee and improve security of supply in the EU .
This was made clear once again , as you know , in the conclusions of the European Council of 8 and 9 March 2007 , conclusions that may almost be considered historic in this respect .
The main elements of the Community 's energy policy that contribute directly or indirectly to increased security of supply , and that will continue to be the main driving force for increased security of supply in the EU over the next 20 years , as the honourable Member mentions , are , firstly , diversification , with regard to both the sources and suppliers of energy ; secondly , an increase in the use of renewable energies ; thirdly , greater energy efficiency ; and , fourthly , the strengthening of the Community 's energy networks .
In addition to these major objectives and political guidelines , the Council Action Plan , adopted in March , sets out a number of other measures , such as a study of gas storage facilities , the development of effective crisis-response mechanisms , and the creation of an Energy Observatory , which will result in added security of supply for the EU as a whole and for each of the Member States .

( PL ) I would like to thank you above all for your very detailed answer , but I would like to ask if there is any investment programme , as energy investments need to be made over many years and are very costly .
Is such a programme envisaged ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Mr President , what we have in the pipeline is exactly what I have stated , which is the result of the March European Council .
Naturally , it is now the Council 's responsibility , based upon EU proposals , actually to put into practice what were above all strategic decisions , political decisions , guideline decisions .
The honourable Member should be in no doubt that the urgency and importance of energy issues mean that this Presidency , and other future presidencies , will be giving them absolute priority in the Union 's internal and external agendas .
This is an issue that the European institutions will naturally have to approach in comprehensive , in-depth manner , certainly over the coming years , and on this point there is , I repeat , no doubt whatsoever .
Questions nos 21 to 24 lapse as the authors are not present .
Subject : Protocol negotiated by Britain on the Charter of Fundamental Rights
In the light of the recent protocol negotiated by Prime Minister Tony Blair on the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and given that two delegations have reserved the right to sign up to the British protocol , does the Council consider that the rights of citizens in these three Member States will in any way be different to those of citizens in the other Member States , and if so could it outline the differences ?

President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) Mr President , I would like to say that it is not the Council 's responsibility , nor that of the President-in-Office , to comment on the Intergovernmental Conference mandate resulting from the European Council negotiations in June , in particular the matter of the Charter .
However , on this matter , I can refer to the Intergovernmental Conference mandate , agreed by all the Member States .
Annexe 1 to Mandate 5 , footnote 19 , is reproduced in the Protocol ; in other words , the effects of the Protocol are defined in the Protocol itself .
First of all , I want to thank the Portuguese Presidency for its brief answer and I want to wish it well in its term .
I look forward to a good working relationship .
But I suppose , while you say that the Council cannot answer this question , at the same time , as regards the UK and Poland and indeed Ireland , the UK had some reason to look for a derogation , and Poland and Ireland reserved their right to do the same .
Either the Charter of Fundamental Rights has some substance and meaning or it has not .
Either it is window-dressing or it has real clout .
I am very concerned as an Irish MEP that the rights of citizens in my country may be less than the rights of citizens in other EU states if my country does not sign up to that Charter .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( PT ) I would like to add that the Portuguese Presidency received a mandate from the Council , a mandate agreed upon by all 27 Member States .
It is the Portuguese Presidency 's responsibility during its term in office , to transform this mandate into the new Reform Treaty , which we hope to do speedily as the European Union needs this new Reform Treaty .
That concludes Question Time .
( The session was suspended at 9.40 pm and resumed at 10 pm )

Democratic scrutiny under the Development Cooperation Instrument ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on democratic scrutiny under the Development Cooperation Instrument
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , honourable Members , it is a great pleasure to be here .
I would like to thank Parliament and , in particular , the members of the Development Committee for the constructive dialogue that we have been able to conduct in the framework of the democratic scrutiny of our draft strategy papers .
I have on several occasions , notably in my joint letter with my colleague , Louis Michel , to the chair of the Development Committee of 26 March , reiterated our commitment to carefully examining the committee 's observations on the strategy papers in the preparation of the annual action programmes and in the implementation of our projects and programmes .
We are now in the preparation phase of these programmes .
Some of them have already been forwarded to you and the remaining ones will be sent to you by this autumn in conformity with Article 8 of the Comitology Decision .
Attached to these annual action programmes , you will also receive synoptic tables explaining in detail how your observations have been taken into account or why it was not feasible to do so .
Additionally , this week in a separate letter to Mr Borrell , I illustrated the manner in which we have considered your remarks and how these have been transposed in the annual action programmes that have already been sent to you .
I am therefore somewhat disappointed to hear of a motion for a resolution critical of the Commission 's programming .
I would hope that this will not call into question the spirit of open dialogue and cooperation that we are displaying and that we are ready to continue to pursue .
Please allow me now to address some of the issues raised by the Parliament on several occasions , notably in your motion for a resolution .
We are , of course , fully committed to the overarching objective of poverty alleviation and the achievement of the millennium development goals under the Development Cooperation Instrument .
I would like to point out very clearly that all activities planned under our country strategy papers are development activities and fall within the priority sectors identified in the DCI .
It must be stressed at this point that the regulation also states that we need to pursue differentiated approaches depending on the individual development contacts and needs of every country concerned .
The development needs of , for instance , Bangladesh are not the same as those of Brazil .
We agree with Parliament 's view that health and education play a significant role in poverty eradication and the achievement of the millennium development goals .
At this point , I would like to reiterate the Commission 's commitment to respecting the agreed 20 % benchmarking on social sectors by 2009 through project programmes or budget support linked to those sectors , taking an average across all the geographical areas .
The first multiannual indicative programmes for 2007-2010 already show a clear contribution to the overall benchmark for basic health and education .
The annual action programmes under approval for 2007 confirmed this .
As soon as projects and programmes are in the implementation phase , we will provide Parliament with detailed statistics .
On official development assistance eligibility , I would like to reassure you that in the preparation of the annual action programmes we have ensured and will ensure full compliance with the DCI 's provisions regarding the OECD / DAC criteria for geographical programmes , whilst at the same time maintaining the flexibility provided for in the regulation for thematic programmes .
Of course , an official assessment of this compliance will be made during the mid-term review which will start in 2009 .
The Commission intends to make proposals to modify the regulations if it considers it appropriate .
As regards stakeholder consultations , we are well aware that further improvements still need to take place in the consultation process , including the participation of local and regional authorities .
It is , however , also a principle of our development assistance that it should be partner-country-led and contribute to the national development plans .
So we are trying our utmost to encourage the national authorities in each country to consult their national parliaments , regional and local authorities and civil society on their own development plans as an expression of good governance .
Our annual action programmes will explain more clearly what we have done with regard to consultations .
The recent annual action programme on Cambodia is a good example .
As regards other donor activities , the Commission has provided all available information when presenting its strategy papers , as well as progress towards achieving the millennium development goals .
Like you , we have every interest in obtaining an overall picture on the activities of all donors and we are making every effort to provide more information under a new standard mix .
Regarding the mainstreaming of cross-cutting issues such as the promotion of human rights , gender equality , democracy , good governance and environmental sustainability , of course we intend to do this .
This has been a core objective for us since the very outset .
Rest assured that we will put this into effect in the implementation phase .
Lastly , as far as your point on budget support is concerned , I would like to stress that the Commission applies strict eligibility criteria which are reassessed before each and every budget support disbursement .
In the areas of policy and strategy , and of macroeconomic stability and public financial management , when selecting countries which should receive budget support , I have tried to deal with the main elements of your resolution .
Please rest assured that you will receive detailed information on your observations when we send you the annual action programmes in the framework of your droit de regard under comitology .
The Commission remains prepared to discuss the annual action programmes before the appropriate bodies of Parliament .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I very much appreciate the comments and the content of the Commissioner 's response here this evening .
I have to say it is nothing less than that I would expect from her .
I found during the whole DCI process , often when we got bogged down , that the Commissioner certainly was of great assistance in trying to move that situation on , as was her colleague , Commissioner Michel .
I am glad also to hear what she had to say about the annual action programmes because we really do need to deliver on the letter that Commissioner Ferrero Waldner and Commissioner Michel sent to Mrs Morgantini and myself as rapporteur on the DCI , because in that letter it was clear that Parliament would decide for itself what structures it would set up and the programmes and strategy papers it would examine .
I have to say also that given that the DCI was only approved last December and it is very much a new process for all of us , Parliament has hit the boards running .
Where it has been hit and miss , I have heard some very bad reports of the attitude of some people in the Commission in relation to annual action programmes .
In my own experience as chairman of group C , examining some of the Latin American countries , I have to say that the cooperation has been very good .
And I think the Commissioner should encourage the continuation of good cooperation because it creates a good atmosphere all round and creates a very good working relationship .
It allows us all to bring our best experience to addressing the issues which we all want to address , being the Millennium Development Goals and the needs of very poor people in a suffering part of the world .
I want to underscore the importance of the present period .
A lot of work has been done by the Commission and by Parliament to enable the EU to better implement its development policies .
Throughout the negotiations on the development cooperation instrument , we made it clear that we did not want to be involved in micro-management .
Micro-management is for the Commission and Council but we do want to have oversight .
It is right for Parliament to have oversight and the Commission should not fear any involvement of Parliament in that vein .
We , the Commission and the Council should be partners in seeking to be effective , and not competitive and seeking to keep things secretively to ourselves .
How can we cooperate to effectively deliver assistance to the countries we are trying to assist ?
The first steps of the new DCI framework are being taken and we all have responsibilities to get it right .
DCI has formalised structures , recognising the important function that Parliament should play in its role as overseer and adviser .
We have worked hard scrutinising the strategy papers prepared by the Commission and to formulate positions on different aspects of those strategies .
I expect the Commission to give careful consideration to effect our positions on the strategy papers .
As part of our oversight role , we must insist that policy continuously focus on the achievement of the MDGs , which aim to alleviate some of the worst forms of poverty in the world .
Parliament continually needs to receive assurances to its satisfaction .
I was very impressed at the beginning of the year to hear from the German Presidency that they would forward the ACP papers to Parliament in the same way as they had forwarded the papers for the Asian and Latin American countries .
Now I understand that one Member State - although perhaps I am being unfair in this - raised some objection to that .
I know there is a multiplicity of these papers and it sounds very good that this should be addressed in some way by the JPA or the ACP member states .
But , unlike Parliament , the Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the African , Caribbean and Pacific House of that Assembly are not constantly in session , and the structures are not there to cope with that level of scrutiny .
We have three standing committees and perhaps we could on some selective audit basis pick some aspects of these and examine them .
But that should not in any way interfere with the need of Parliament here to take what documents this Parliament wishes and to scrutinise them in the best way possible .
Our objective should always be to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
We are not in competition .
We can work together .
For two years , during the development cooperation instrument process , we tried to persuade the Commission and others that we were really in the business of trying to find a really good instrument .
Eventually , when we were listened to , we found that instrument .
Commissioner , do not listen to bad advice .
Do not listen to people who are creating obstacles .
We are in the same team .
We want to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
Do not keep from Parliament information that it should rightly have in its oversight role .
You will find that we will respond generously and effectively and helpfully .
Thank you very much for your contribution here this evening .
Before I give the floor to Mr van den Berg , I note with some sorrow that , apparently , it will be his last speech in the Chamber tonight before he moves on to other things .
I am sure we all wish you well , Mr van den Berg , although we are sorry to lose you .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I endorse what Mr Mitchell had to say in connection with the ACP policy plans .
On 1 January of this year , the new financing instrument for development cooperation , in which the Millennium Development Goals were to occupy centre stage , entered into force .
The time has come to check whether these laws and principles have also been translated into practice .
In recent months , we in the Committee on Development have devoted much of our time to the inspection of national policy documents .
Members of staff , Members of the European Parliament and secretariats have all worked hard in the committees and in Parliament .
Having carefully scrutinised the policy strategies for the countries and regions of South America , Asia and South Africa , we have concluded that six specific cases out of a total of a huge number of plans were insufficiently underpinned legally speaking , which is why we have returned them by means of resolutions .
In a number of other cases , we have reacted by letter and raised a number of issues .
Commissioner , during the democratic scrutiny , we have also come across a number of fundamental problems , problems which you also undoubtedly face in the Commission .
The primary goal of the development cooperation instrument is to stamp out poverty and achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
This is an overarching goal which , as we see it , was not sufficiently highlighted in the national policy documents , partly because these still bear the hallmarks of the earlier , old-style plans .
I should like to remind the Commission of our firm pledge to achieve 20 % .
I value what the Commissioner said a moment ago : that she guarantees that this 20 % will be achieved by 2009 .
If this is stated so clearly , then we trust that it will also be done .
This may be promoted by the contracts involving the Millennium Development Goals .
After all , budgetary support is given , and this must , of course , comply with the requirements , as you said with good reason .
Imagine , though , that this is done and the corresponding contracts involving the Millennium Development Goals are allowed to lapse .
This means at the very least that the government involved is known to be doing a number of things in the areas of basic education and health care .
This is when it is possible to include it in the 20 % in a justified and much more clear-cut manner .
If not , all this remains very vague .
I should also like to draw your attention to the fact that , next year , EUR 50 million from ' Investing in people ' , the topical line of the development cooperation instrument , will be fed into the World Fund .
The World Fund is a wonderful thing , which we support .
Last year , we gave EUR 62 million .
This does mean , however , that , in practice , you are left with very little funding for the other causes that are listed under this act .
If this happens two years running , you will come unstuck .
I should like to draw your attention to this .
This is something that requires consultation with the ACP partners and the European Development Fund .
Something must be done , though , because , if not , the topical line of ' Investing in people ' will in fact be an empty shell .
The European Parliament will not hesitate to use its budgetary instrument if necessary .
Ralf Walter is active on that score and - you know what he is like - he is a thoroughgoing person in this respect .
This evening , though , Commissioner , I did not want to play the role of Max Mackie Messer from the Dreigroschenoper [ Threepenny Opera ] because , after all , you are the one dressed in ' light blue ' and , as this is my final speech , you have caught me in a good mood .
I should like to end on a personal note .
As you stated , Madam President , I have been appointed Queen 's Commissioner of Groningen from 1 September .
I should like to warmly thank my fellow MEPs and staff , along with everyone in the Commission secretariats for the enormous support I have enjoyed from both Commissioner Michel and Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner .
I am hoping to bid Parliament farewell on 28 August , on which day I hope to see you all again , but for now : all the very best to you all .
Thank you for your contribution to the work of this House .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , that was the previous speaker 's last speech , and this is my first in plenary .
I trust you will treat me well .
I must begin by pointing out that the process of adopting the Regulation establishing the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) has , as we know , been torturous , complex and at times beset by a number of difficulties .
Indeed , the first answer given by Parliament aimed at rejecting the proposal itself was at the time adopted unanimously by the Committee on Development , and similarly supported unanimously by the other three committees that issued opinions on the matter .
All of which led the Commission and the Council to the negotiating table and ultimately convinced both institutions to respect Parliament 's recourse to codecision .
We know all of this already .
As we all know , the proposal was ultimately adopted , although many of the same factors that gave cause for concern more than a year ago have not gone away .
In the intervening year , Parliament has tabled three resolutions warning the Commission that it was exceeding its powers and asking it to rectify the situation , which it has singularly failed to do .
The Commission should also be reminded what may happen if it overdoes comitology with this Chamber .
Parliament is moving ahead without looking at matters carefully , and I feel that the very fact that this resolution has been adopted unanimously in the Committee on Development is highly significant .
For example , the DCI regulation states that ' the Community will promote a development process that is partner country led and owned ' . We should like to know , however , if there was contact with the parliaments of these partner countries prior to the adoption of strategy documents and if so whether there are details of these meetings available .
The DCI regulation also promotes inclusive and participatory approaches and a broad involvement of all segments of society in the development process and in national dialogue , yet we do not have any information on whether or not this series of contacts has actually taken place .
We also feel that there is little or no information on the extent to which the DCI financed these strategy papers .
We should like to know if these strategy papers have benefited from other sources of funding , and if so how much of them will be funded by those sources .
In short , are there any programmes within the strategy papers that do not have a Millennium Development Goals profile , as laid down in the DCI regulation ?
If so , how much money have these programmes been granted ?
Our group continues to have these and many other doubts . Perhaps these doubts will be cleared up in these communications , which you have just announced , from the Committee on Development .
We have not forgotten , however , that the DCI regulation mentions transparency as the key to the implementation of the programmes as many as seven times . We feel that we must lead by example and that the Commission should ensure that Parliament is kept fully informed in order to dispel the concerns engendered by the manner in which this instrument has been managed over the past six months .
( FI ) Madam President , last year during the Finnish Presidency we reached an important compromise on the Development Cooperation Instrument , meaning the Community will in future be able to fulfil its commitments on aid and guarantee the uninterrupted financing of external relations .
The DCI Regulation takes account of the multi-dimensionality of poverty .
It is thus a promising basis for development cooperation and for reducing poverty .
If the Millennium targets are to be hit , there need to be precision weapons .
The Regulation is the first act to reinforce the definition of development cooperation policy provided by the OECD Development Assistance Committee .
This is crucial in guaranteeing that the budget allocated to development cooperation is not used to achieve other political goals .
Unfortunately , practice has not reflected the Regulation 's content .
In its draft country strategy papers for individual countries , the Commission has repeatedly overstepped its executive powers , and not taken the aims of the DCI into account .
In its resolutions , Parliament has already frequently pointed out that the main aim of the draft strategy papers has not been the elimination of poverty .
They have thus not met the requirements of official development aid as defined by the OECD Development Assistance Committee .
The Commission cannot go on ignoring the essential content of the DCI and the core ideas of the OECD 's development cooperation policy .
Under the Regulation , financing may only take the form of budget support if a country 's public expenditure management is sufficiently transparent .
The criteria for eligibility must be strictly applied .
It is also crucial to support the parliamentary control of partner countries .
It is the poor level of control in third countries that is largely the reason why representative democracy cannot respond to the whims of strong governments .
I am also rather disappointed that the Commission has been very unwilling to cooperate on its own initiative .
The Commission should remember that the European Parliament has an essential role in the implementation of the DCI .
( PT ) For the first time , within the scope of this new instrument , Parliament has played a scrutinising role with regard to national strategies .
I consider the dialogue between Parliament and the Commission to have been very constructive and feel that it should serve as a model for further possible and desirable collaboration , as in the case of the ACP countries .
However , there is still room for improvement in the cooperation between the two institutions , namely with regard to data sharing .
Parliament considers it very important to receive clarification on the way in which the various national strategies , as a whole , can contribute to the financial commitment to allocate 20 % of available funds to basic healthcare and education .
With regard to the priorities indicated in various national strategy documents , I regret that , generally speaking , there is not greater investment in the Millennium Development Goals .
The aim of this financial instrument is to combat poverty , in particular by achieving these goals .
A number of national strategy documents include activities relating to trade , higher education , civil aviation and even the promotion of the EU in receiving countries .
Parliament understands the importance of some of these actions particularly for the authorities of the countries in question .
I believe , however , that our priority , and that of the Commission , should be the activities that are directly related to achieving the Millennium Development Goals , which have a far more direct impact on the fight against poverty .
These should be the priority .
They cannot be omitted , as happens in some cases .
I would point out that Parliament has not received answers to all the questions put to the Commission during this process .
I am sure that they will be forthcoming , as indeed we have been informed today by the Commissioner , and for which I thank her .
I am sorry to see Mr van den Berg go , as you mentioned , Madam President .
Nobody is irreplaceable , but there are people who are more easily replaceable than others .
That is certainly not the case with Max !
We Socialists , in particular , will miss him a lot .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , you are well aware that the analysis of the implementation of the Development Cooperation Instrument is now a very important part of the work of the committee I have the honour of chairing .
We attach a great deal of importance to this process and hope that the Commission will fully take on board the comments that Parliament makes .
Parliament in particular must ensure that the core objective of the DCI , which is to eradicate poverty , is achieved and that the funds earmarked for this instrument are devoted purely to this activity .
It must also ensure that 20 % is earmarked for education and health , and yet we do not see very clearly how this 20 % objective can be achieved by 2009 .
Commissioner , it is very important that all stakeholders are consulted and that horizontal policies such as promoting human rights , gender equality , good governance , the rights of children , the rights of indigenous peoples , environmental sustainability and the fight against diseases such as AIDS are also adequately taken into account in all programmes and for all countries .
This is what we want to achieve with our democratic analysis of the proposals you made and we hope that our contribution and the work we put into it , which was characterised by a spirit of cooperation , is reflected in the annual action plans .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , we have done a lot of work together , and , at least in my view , it has been a constructive dialogue under this democratic scrutiny .
It has included numerous parliamentary debates and many exchanges of views between distinguished Members of this House , myself , my colleague Louis Michel and many Commission officials .
We have exchanged a series of letters - the last one , as I have said , to Mr Borrell Fontelles .
As has been mentioned , three parliamentary resolutions have been voted on , with a fourth currently under discussion .
Now we are entering a new phase : the implementation of projects and programmes , where each institution will have to play its specific role .
I agree with Mr Mitchell , who said that Parliament is responsible for oversight .
We absolutely agree with that , but not with micro-management , and we will give Parliament - you can be sure - a maximum amount of information .
To Mr van den Berg , I would say that , first of all , we would like to pay tribute to the great work that you have been doing on development issues , but also , particularly , as chief observer on difficult missions .
I have appreciated very strongly your balanced approach to that .
As regards the specific issue that we are discussing tonight - the consultation on the thematic programme , investing in people - I will inform Louis Michel of the request for consultation within and with the ACP partners , as has been mentioned .
For the rest , I can only say that we have really tried to take things into account .
But , please , give us credit also for being a responsible organisation and responsible stakeholders on this scene .
If we can work as partners , you will have a very responsible partner .
I have received one motion for resolution to wind up the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 12 July 2007 .
Community Statistical Programme ( 2008-2012 ) - Timely transmission and verification of statistical data provided by Member States ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Zsolt László Becsey , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the Community Statistical Programme 2008 to 2012 C6-0427 / 2006 , and
the oral question to the Commission on the timely transmission and verification of statistical data provided by Member States by Zsolt László Becsey and Alexander Radwan , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - B6-0123 / 2007 ) .
rapporteur and author . - ( HU ) I am very pleased because now , after first reading , it looks like we may reach the consensus needed for a joint decision before the summer recess .
A very great work on the part of three institutions lies behind all this .
First of all , let me acknowledge the excellent work done by the Committee .
Their proposal reflects superbly both the Community 's current priorities and the mechanism of the present Treaty of Nice .
I wish to give special recognition to the German Presidency , and more particularly to Mr Radermacher , president of the Federal Statistical Office , who , by setting an incredibly fast pace , made it possible to elaborate and become familiar with the Council 's position .
The priorities of the European Parliament were thus taken into consideration even while the work was in progress .
Similar special acknowledgement must also be extended to the shadow rapporteurs of the other two major groups , the socialists and liberals , for the job they have carried out .
It is thanks to this work that an almost overwhelming majority lined up behind the joint compromises in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
What did Parliament accomplish in this joint text ?
One major result is that in the principal section , the range of otherwise well-chosen items recommended as priorities by the Committee has been expanded .
Considerations regarding innovation , development of human resources , regional cohesion and demographic challenges now come into the picture .
As a result , the list of priorities has become balanced without being overabundant .
Another important result is , in my opinion , the compromise reached with respect to cooperation between administrations at both national and local levels as well as in the area of statistics management .
I hope that this will bear fruit with regard to quality as well , which is a particularly important point that will be addressed later on in connection with the oral question raised about the reliability of macroeconomic projections and short-term statistical data .
What , then , was the priority of the rapporteur ?
In addition to improving the quality and speed of statistical services , I considered my main task to be the lessening of the financial and administrative burdens , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises .
It was also important to make sure that the demands of regulation does not lead to a confusion between protection of individually submitted commercial data and the obligation to provide general statistical data .
We also managed to minimize the burden of supplying the data required by international , mainly UN obligations , thanks primarily to the flexibility of the shadow rapporteurs .
A huge challenge is also presented by our own as well as international commitments , but in this regard I expect a more cautious approach , and that is what we have approved .
We must not overburden ourselves in the area of statistical capability and the export of know-how .
I consider it a good outcome , as well , that we were able to agree on the main points of the 2010 mid-term progress report .
On the basis thereof , I would like to see a Commission proposal for a directive that would help overcome the political problem of the statistical conception determining the work programme of another , new Parliament and Committee , and would ensure instead that our new colleagues can incorporate their programmes of work directly into the clear framework of statistical work .
In addition , we made reference to the major challenges facing us , also expected for 2010 , namely the reforms of CAP and of the Financial Services Directive , the entry into force of the Services Directive or the appearance of new Community policies , the monitoring of immigration , crime and climate change in the area of statistics as well .
The greatest success of Parliament is the fact that , as of January 2010 , the mid-term progress reports will not only reach members of the European statistics network and committees of experts , but will also be formally submitted to the Council and to Parliament , on the basis of the proposal .
As a result , these fundamental institutions will be able to have their say , as of the next parliamentary cycle , about the strategic and tactical problems of the day .
In the area of sectoral priorities , questions by Parliament were also successfully incorporated into the report ; suffice it to mention the challenges presented by the human resources development indicators , urbanisation , equal opportunities for women and the measurement of the processes of agglomeration .
Thank you , Madam President , and now I would like to continue with the other line of questioning .
There is great hope , upon joining , that the macroeconomic supervisory system , and the fact that a Member State 's economic policy is a shared concern , along with the existence of a stability and growth pact , would help us to be more secure inside the European Union than outside of it .
The EC Treaty declares joint responsibility for the economic policies of Member States , and I suppose for their failures too .
The European Parliament votes for and supervises the Commission , which , among other things , oversees Eurostat .
Since 2004 , the Greek and Hungarian problems revealed grave deficiencies in this system .
In both countries there occurred economic policy and data manipulations that even influenced elections , necessitating not only severe corrections later on , but also undermining trust in common institutions .
The Eurobarometer showed a steep decline in Hungary .
In Hungary , since 2004 there have been continual discrepancies of several percentage points between the promised results and the reality that was later acknowledged .
There is great discrepancy between the end of 2005 and of 2006 , for instance : the amount of debt showed a difference of more than 10 percentage points in comparison to the GDP , in other words between the promised and the subsequently demonstrated reality .

Unfortunately , Mr Almunia is absent , because if he were listening now , he would hear that in 2005 and 2006 , instead of taking into account market projections like those of Goldman Sachs and Standard [ amp ] Poor 's , the government 's misleading remarks were heeded instead .
The market saw the catastrophe , and also sensed the unlawful dismissal of the Statistics Office staff .
Yet the forecasting system was a fiasco .
The most shameful situation occurred in May 2006 .
At that time Mr Almunia predicted that all the indices would improve in Hungary , inflation would be low , growth would be high , while the prime minister was predicting extremely grave problems and an austerity programme .
He admitted they had made phone calls to Mr Almunia and used hundreds of tricks .
Afterwards Mr Almunia , - he would hear this if he was present - threw up his hands : we did not include the pensions in the deficit , we did not include the hidden deficits of state enterprises , we did not know how to account for the motorway .
I believe all this is double-talk .
In conclusion : the Hungarian prime minister admitted serious political collusion , regrettably also with a member of the Commission , and it shows .
Such " wizardry ” should never be allowed to happen again , because elections are approaching after all , elections will take place again in the future , and only the admission of truth can help .
I think therefore the Commission must also acknowledge these political conclusions , because the price of this lack of credibility will ultimately be paid not by us but by the population of Hungary .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , Members of Parliament .
I would first of all like to thank Mr Becsey and Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for the excellent report on the Community Statistical Programme for 2008-2012 .
This will indeed allow a timely adoption of the legal basis and a smooth start to the programme in 2008 .
The Community Statistical Programme constitutes the framework for the production of all statistics as well as the financial framework for the production of Community statistics during the programme period .
Statistics are a key element for policy-making and , as such , the new programme has indeed focused on the current priorities of the Union , from growth and competitiveness to sustainable development and security .
Parliament 's amendments , aimed at strengthening the gender and regional dimensions in statistics and substantiating the reporting obligations , are particularly welcomed by the Commission .

I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Becsey , once again , as well as the Committee on Regional Development for their valuable efforts to provide the Community with a solid basis for the production of statistics over the next five years .
Regarding fiscal statistics and the oral question by Mr Becsey and Mr Radwan , the Commission certainly agrees that the quality of fiscal data is vital for the correct functioning of Economic and Monetary Union and its budgetary surveillance system as well as for the assessment of the convergence criteria when evaluating the application of a Member State for entry into the euro area .
Fiscal statistics , like any other statistics , are subject to revision .
Data are routinely revised when new information on government transactions becomes available or when errors or inconsistencies are identified and corrected .
Revision also takes place in a paramount effort to comply better with the accounting rules .
For statisticians , data usually become final only after four years at the earliest .
Most revisions , in fiscal statistics , are small and have no significant impact on economic analysis and fiscal surveillance .
Unfortunately , there have also been some episodes of large revisions in fiscal statistics that put fiscal surveillance under stress .
However , it is important to note that , in most cases , those revisions have not been a surprise .
They were indeed preceded by public statements by Eurostat , drawing attention to the fact that the data initially reported by the Member States were not in compliance with the accounting rules and requiring Member States to amend them .
Whenever necessary Eurostat has even itself amended data reported by the Member States .
In compliance with Regulation 2103 / 2005 , Eurostat has reported - and will report regularly to the European Parliament and to the Council - on the quality of the fiscal data transmitted by Member States .
With regard to forecasts , the Commission regularly assesses the forecasts and projections announced by Member States in their stability and convergence programmes by comparing them with the Commission 's own forecasts .
For several Member States , the Commission has publicly noted on some occasions that the fiscal forecasts contained in the stability and convergence programmes were based on optimistic macroeconomic projections .
The Commission has also pointed out cases where the national projections were not compliant with the accounting rules for specific transactions or where the planned policy measures underlying the forecasts had not yet been confirmed .
In preparing its own forecasts , the Commission systematically compares its numbers with projections released by the IMF , the OECD and other organisations .
Experience shows that the forecasts published by the Commission - both the macroeconomic and the fiscal figures - are not biased and are at least as reliable as those of other forecasters .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Becsey for his report .
I would like to thank him twice , firstly as the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee for Regional Development , and secondly as a representative of my political group .
I will not dwell on the definition of statistics .
I will only say that it is a science that assesses phenomena and processes of a mass nature in a quantitative way .
Its aim is to assess the rules governing these phenomena and quantifying them .
Statistics also make it possible to summarise the results of analyses and to evaluate the accuracy and reliability of the results .
I say this for good reason , as statistical data are often the basis for important decisions taken both at local and regional as well as at national , European and even world level .
It is therefore a good thing that we have a community statistical programme for the years 2008-2012 .
The realistic and responsible preparation of statistical data is exceptionally valuable .
Obtaining them , therefore , involves costs .
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner whether our ambitious programme for the next five years has sufficient financial backing .
We are undertaking a task that will cover 27 Member States with differing degrees of experience in this sensitive area .
So let me ask a second question : what steps have been taken to secure the best possible coordination in statistical analysis ?
The Commissioner was kind enough to emphasise the importance of the Committee on Regional Development 's opinion , and I would like to thank her for this flattering assessment .
To go on to regional issues : in the 2007-2013 Perspective the European Union allocated over one-third of its budget to regional policy in the broad sense of the word , thereby implementing the principle of cohesion and solidarity between regions with very differing levels of prosperity .
This money was European taxpayers ' money , which should under no circumstances be squandered .
That is why we need completely impartial , sufficiently comprehensive and reliable methods of monitoring the implementation of structural policy .
Do we have such methods ?
They involve collating and processing statistical data , both at Community level , at Member State level and at regional and lower , at local level .
The nature of the data must be comparable , both with data recorded outside the European Union and with the data recorded within it , as we often compare ourselves with other countries .
The implementation of short-term or temporary objectives or technical problems have resulted in temporary lapses in compiling statistical data , all with drastic results .
Statistical analyses of regions are based on NUTS units .
The question this raises is does this separation always result in equally reliable data ?
I have my reservations in particular of situations where there is a large gap between the development level and the prosperity of a regional capital and the rest of the area .
Another question I would like to raise is that of development level indexes for countries or regions : is the per capita GDP enough , what weighting should be given to unemployment levels , how can quality of life in a particular area be measured , etc .

These are important issues , and I know that there are no simple solutions .
We often speak of innovation in this House .
So we need to have reliable data on education , science , research and innovation .
The question this raises is what methods should be used to compare data that often come from unofficial sources ?
How can we define the dynamics of change ?
One more question of a social nature .
Changes associated with large-scale migration , particularly of workers , are taking place before our very eyes .
How does this affect the social situation and families ?
And we should not forget either that the high level of reliability of statistical data is always dependent on the reliability of the sources of information , which in turn requires the reliability and frequently the anonymity of the original data .
To finish , I would like to express my hope that the Community statistical programme will serve the fundamental aims of the European Union well .
The attitude of Eurostat , and also of the Polish Central Statistical Office convince me of this .
I hope that this is so .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by congratulating and thanking the rapporteur .
In his report , he has called for the legislative and statistical cycles to be brought into synch , for a reduction in the administrative burden for small and medium-sized companies , he has said that we need to ensure that we receive quality data , which means better data , and that we should also include a number of social and macroeconomic indicators .
He has also reported that we have submitted a request to the Commission , for two reasons .
One reason is the recurring complaints about Member States who supply incomplete statistical data - the main culprits are Greece , Portugal , Italy and Hungary .
In one country , Hungary , the Prime Minister actually admitted to fudging the data and hiding the truth from the public and the Commission .
The second reason is that many requirements have not yet been implemented .
I would like to mention one : the Commission must be entitled to verify the data supplied in the country . It should be possible for the Commission to hold discussions with the national banks , the finance , economy and labour ministries , and with economic research institutes in the country .
We cannot simply rely on the data provided .
The Commission 's data has to be compared with the European Central Bank 's data .
There are various figures of varying degrees of importance that need to be compared .
Thirdly , for all euro-related information - data relating to budgets , the Stability and Growth Pact and the Maastricht criteria - the European Central Bank , the Commission and the Member States have to produce a joint final report .
We need unified , transparent data collection standards .
We are all familiar with the unemployment figures from the Member States and for the European Union .
One is played off against the other for reasons of political expediency .
This creates uncertainty , not transparency , and only engenders distrust .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I would also like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on his excellent work on this report on the statistics programme 2008-2012 .
I think we fully agree that statistics are essential , and how to get the correct data is an important issue .
I agree that it is not only a technical issue , as we can see from this debate and particularly from the oral question that has been asked , it is an issue of high political relevance and not only because politicians try to interfere in statistics but also because they try to use such events in making opposition to the governing coalition or the previous coalition , blaming them for not providing correct data .
These are both things which we should absolutely avoid .
The only solution , in my view , is to have independent statistical offices and guarantees for independent , proper and high-quality statistical data , plus some of the elements that Mr Karas mentioned : the same basic definitions etc .
I have the impression , Commissioner , that a lot of work has already been done on this issue by your colleague Mr Almunia , and some of the things have already been put in motion .
I refer , for instance , to the regulation that has been established on this issue and , in particular , to dossiers with proposals for legislation on the governance of statistics and the governance of the statistical institutions , which we are dealing with at the moment .

I must say to Mr Becsey and Mr Karas that I have been surprised that their political group has not been interested at all in these legislative dossiers that we are dealing with at the moment because , here , we can create guarantees for good governance on the data , and there is no mandate for the Commission or for Eurostat really to interfere or to centralise data provision .
We have to work within the remit and the mandate that exists at the moment and , there , I think the Commissioner is doing a good job in trying to use this to the widest extent possible .
I hope we can have a constructive debate about this improvement of governance and about these better conditions to be created instead of blaming each other and blaming the other political opposition parties for not properly providing this data .
I hope there will be a constructive approach in the future .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Becsey , on his excellent work .
His having helped to achieve adoption at first reading is significant , and demonstrates that this Parliament works well .
As has already been observed by the Commissioner as well as by other speakers , the aim of Community statistics is thus to provide regular verification of the drafting , implementation and evaluation of Community policies .
The Union puts forward and carries out its policies in the economic , environmental and social fields precisely on the basis of this information ; hence the need that it should be as relevant as possible to the actual situation , providing a ' photograph ' of ideal situations , as well as the specific needs of citizens .
As far as the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is concerned , I can confirm in this Chamber that , generally speaking , we are firmly in favour of the proposal put forward by the Commission , in the knowledge that it has dealt with significant problems and issues such as prosperity , competitiveness , growth , solidarity , economic and social cohesion , sustainable development , security and further enlargement of the European Union .
I believe that we , as the European Parliament , have done well to add to the proposal by including innovation and human development , regional cohesion and the demographic challenges that European society must tackle .
Our contribution therefore takes this approach : adding to , and not distorting , the Commission 's proposal .
In fact , we are convinced that there is currently a problem , which we discovered while finalising the adoption of this report : dealing with the quality of data , which is also the guarantee of the quality of decision-making .
We have therefore included in the final text , which was the subject of a compromise , the concept of the preparation of annual statistical work programmes and of the need to take into consideration the optimum use of resources .
This is in relation to the principle of better regulation , which we have already adopted , and precisely in the light of the Commission 's communication on reducing the burden of responding to the simplification of objectives in the field of Community statistics .
Finally , I believe that we have made some important additions : a requirement for the Commission to carry out ex ante analyses of the financial impacts of the new statistical activities planned that involve additional burdens for the Member States , as well as feasibility studies to achieve a quality label for European statistics and to reinforce the credibility of the European statistical system , including Eurostat , the national statistical authorities and other relevant bodies in each Member State that are responsible for compiling and distributing European statistics .
The aim is certainly to have central independent statistics available , but we need to do more work to achieve this .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , I would first like to say that we have an ambitious programme , but do we have the financial means ?
Well , I think so .
The financial envelope for the 2008-2012 programme in fact represents an increase of 15 % compared to the previous period .
I think that is a higher increase than the average increase for the financial perspective 2007-2013 .
So I think that is settled .
With regard to coordination , let me say that this Parliament is currently analysing a proposal by the Commission to set up a high-level advisory board which will then improve the governance of the European statistics system and the coordination of the production of statistics .
I think this will be important .
I also would like to say to Mr Karas that what you mentioned is absolutely right .
We have a possibility as the Commission to examine the methodology that is used by the Member States . But , unfortunately , we do not have the possibility to go further and examine the data as such .
And , unfortunately , I think the Commission has already tried , but the Member States until now at least have not wanted to go any further .
So maybe this is also something that should be brought to their attention again .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 12 July 2007 .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting closed at 23.35 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.30 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Budget calendar : see Minutes
Reducing disparities in the poorest regions of the EU ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the role and effectiveness of cohesion policy in reducing disparities in the poorest regions of the EU .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to warmly congratulate you on having taken up this honourable office .
The European Union consists not only of 27 countries , but also of 268 regions , which have extremely different levels of development .
As a result of the most recent enlargement to create a Union of 27 countries , the population of the Community rose to nearly 493 million .
Around 30 % of these people live in 100 of the poorest regions , namely those covered by the convergence objectives .
Each consecutive enlargement has resulted in greater inequality between the richest and the poorest regions in the Community .
Now , in a Union of 27 countries , differences in the levels of GDP between the regions are significantly more pronounced than they were in the old fifteen , and amount to 24 % in north-eastern Romania to 303 % in central London .
The reasons for the economic under-development of specific regions vary greatly .
The poorest regions mainly lack the basic infrastructure necessary for sustainable , long-term development , further investment and the necessary human resources .
As statistics show , the existing European Union cohesion policy has effectively contributed to the development of many regions of countries which have long been included within its framework , such as Ireland , Greece , Portugal and Spain .
In accordance with the aims of the Community , as stated in Article 158 of the Treaty on European Union , which include harmonised development and the reduction of disparities between levels of development in different regions , we the European Parliament call for decisive action aimed at reducing the most serious cases of under-development in the poorest regions of the European Union .
The new Member States have been particularly affected by the difficulties related to absorbing EU funds , as the fact that they have been granted does not guarantee that they will be used properly , and the authorities in poor regions often do not have the ability , experience or resources required to fully benefit from the funds to which they are entitled .
The application procedures for structural fund aid are often extremely complicated and in no way transparent for the end user .
We therefore call for these procedures to be simplified at all levels , namely at European , national and regional level .
The implementation of cohesion policy should take into account the varied needs of the regions , especially urban and rural areas , regions that are difficult to access , islands and ultraperipheral regions .
It should adapt the aid provided to their conditions and specific characteristics , exploiting their potential for sustainable and long-term growth .
The Member States and the regions should therefore ensure that priority is granted to those projects that contribute to improving accessibility to the poorest regions , ensuring that they have a proper transport and information technology infrastructure .
Cohesion policy should support entrepreneurship and investment in the poorest regions .
New financial instruments , such as JEREMY and JESSICA , can successfully contribute to regional development , but awareness of how to use these instruments at a local and regional level is still very limited .
It is important to encourage Member States to form public-private partnerships and exchange good practice concepts in this field .
The Commission and the Member States should effectively support projects that increase the regions ' abilities to generate and absorb new technologies , while paying particular attention to protecting the natural environment .
An incredibly important problem for the poorest regions of the Union has been high levels of unemployment , up to 20 % .
In view of this , there is an urgent need to invest in human capital in poor regions through better education , constantly improving qualifications , especially for young people , women , and older people , as well as minorities at risk of social exclusion .
Support for equal opportunities for all should form part of all Community programmes , especially those which influence economic and social cohesion , as well as at all levels of planning and implementing projects within the framework of the European Union 's cohesion policy .
The Commission and the Member States should ensure that accurate , comprehensive and comparable statistical data is available .
This is something that we are currently lacking .
The Commission should draw up a new method of measuring regional development , not only on the basis of GDP and unemployment rates , but also on the basis of other qualitative and quantitative indicators which reflect the real living standards of the population .
We should also improve our methods of calculating purchasing power parity by developing regional rather than national indicators .
Taking advantage of the interim review of the Community budget in 2009 , the Commission should analyse the effects of cohesion policy and investigate possible causes of undesirable results .
Finally , I would like to thank everyone who contributed to this report .
I would like to thank you for your valuable amendments , which have enriched the document , and I sincerely hope that this own initiative report will provide the Member States and the regions with a host of valuable guidelines , as well as stimulating the European Commission to improve the effectiveness of cohesion policy in the most needy regions .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , it is a pleasure to come before Parliament to exchange views on the Geringer de Oedenberg report on the role and effectiveness of cohesion policy in reducing disparities in the poorest regions of the European Union .
Once again , as in the case of other own-initiative reports adopted by the Committee on Regional Development , this proves the excellent collaboration between our two institutions .
I am speaking on behalf of Mrs Hübner , who has had to go to Romania , and she sends you her best wishes .
I welcome this report and I appreciate its positive contribution to the debate on the impact and effectiveness of cohesion policy at a critical moment of the 2007-2013 programming period and on the eve of the budgetary review to be carried out in the year 2008 / 09 .
I fully share the view that the cohesion policy is not only essential but also effective in reducing socioeconomic and territorial disparities and in tapping the development potential of all EU regions .
The value added of cohesion policy has already been proved , and we all recognise that it goes well beyond financial transfers to include , among other things , the development of partnerships , exchanges of best practice , budgetary stability and a strategic approach .
I particularly appreciate the theme and the content of your report because it touches on the backbone of cohesion policy .
Indeed , the main goal of our policy is to reduce the socioeconomic and territorial disparities in the poorest EU regions .
The challenge is not negligible .
These disparities have dramatically increased following the recent enlargements , and cohesion policy is the only Community instrument specially designed to this aim .
For instance , disparities in GDP per head between the top and bottom 10 % EU regions have almost doubled after the two most recent enlargements .
In fact , regional disparities in the EU are very important , much more than within the United States or Japan , or of a similar dimension to that in China and India for instance .
Despite impressive growth rates in the new Member States and the convergence of many regions of the EU-15 , there are still 70 regions - home to 123 million Europeans - with a GDP per head below 75 % of the EU average .
In addition , there are a number of regions - the majority of which are among the most developed ones - which are losing ground .
In 27 regions , GDP per head declined in real terms between the years 2000 and 2004 and , in another 24 , growth was under 0.5 % per year .
Nevertheless , as explained in full in the recently published Fourth Cohesion Report , convergence is taking place . This is due both to the accelerated growth of most of the new Member States and to the sometimes sluggish performance of some of the most advanced ones .
On the whole , the periphery of the EU is catching up with the core of Europe not only in terms of GDP per head but also of employment , productivity and other indicators , and this is good news .
This includes the former cohesion countries which , with the exception of Portugal , in the last few years have experienced impressive progress .
This phenomenon - the long-term convergence process - is especially occurring at EU level between Member States and regions .
We know that , at national level , the picture is somehow different , since in many cases growth is increasingly concentrated in the capital region or in the main metropolitan areas , which deepens the internal disparities and causes problems related to agglomeration , like transport congestion , pollution , housing price rises and so on .
Let me underline the substantial contribution of our policy to this overall positive convergence process .
Independent evaluation studies have shown that cohesion policy has supported much-needed investment in infrastructure , human resources , modernisation and diversification of regional economies .
Between 2000 and 2005 , public investment in the four cohesion countries has been around 25 % higher than it would have been without cohesion policy . It has contributed to the growth of GDP .
Increasing GDP levels attributable to regional policy ranged from 10 % in Greece and 8.5 % in Portugal in the period 1989-1999 , and 6 % for Greece and Portugal , 4 % in the German Länder and 2.4 % in Spain in the period 2000-2006 .
Preliminary estimates for 2007-2013 suggest an impact of between 5 % and 9 % in the new Member States .
It has also contributed to reduced social exclusion and poverty .
Cohesion policy cofinances the training of nine million people annually .
More than half of them are women , leading to better employment conditions and higher income .
For example , over 450 000 gross jobs were generated in six countries : Denmark , France , the Netherlands , Spain , Sweden and the UK .
Between 2000 and 2005 it accounted for two thirds of Objective 2 funding .
It has helped shift the policy mix of public investment in Member States towards growth-enhancing investment .
According to the most recent data , the amount of cohesion investment earmarked for research and development , innovation and information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) for 2007-2013 has more than doubled in comparison with the years 2000-2006 .
Clearly , it remains to be seen how these plans will be implemented , but we already see , among both the Member States and the regions , an increasing awareness in their development strategies for the next financial period .
Certainly , one of the keys of this success lies in the fact that cohesion policy is an integrated , fully-fledged policy ; it is not a sectoral policy , or a disjointed bundle of sectoral policies , but an integrated instrument aimed at delivering specific tailor-made solutions for each European region or territory .
At the same time , it is not just an EU policy that operates in isolation but it certainly depends on the active involvement of partners at national , regional and local level .
Your report correctly points to a number of issues which are particularly relevant for the poorest regions if they are to make the best use of the allocated funds .
I shall mention just a few likely to provide them with appropriate technical assistance . The importance of designing tailor-made development strategies , or the value of implementing effective partnership and encouraging good practices .
I took note of your proposals .
I am convinced that some of them will find their way into the current legislative framework that has given rise to the new initiatives recently adopted by the Commission , like the three ' J 's - Jasper , Jeremy and Jessica - or Regions for economic change .
The flexibility of cohesion policy makes it possible to implement the best measures adopted for each case .
In this regard , Mrs Hübner will ensure that the Commission pays particular attention to the needs of the poorest regions in the ongoing negotiations on the programming documents for the years 2007-2013 .
I also appreciate the contribution of your report to the debate on future cohesion policy , which was launched by the publication of the fourth cohesion report .
I welcome these valuable recommendations aiming at increasing the efficiency of cohesion policy .
As you know , we are now at the initial stage of reflection on the future of cohesion policy .
This debate aims at nurturing the review of the EU budget that the Commission has to undertake in the years 2008 and 2009 .
In conclusion , you are aware that the public consultation on the future of cohesion policy will be launched following the cohesion forum to be held at the end of September .
A dedicated internet site will collect the contributions of Member States , regions , cities , EU institutions , economic and social partners and , of course , civil society organisations .
The Commission intends to present the results of this consultation in spring 2008 , together with the fifth progress report on economic and social cohesion .
On the basis of this and other own-initiative reports recently approved , I am very much looking forward to Parliament 's contribution to this debate .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) Madam President , Mr Potočnik , ladies and gentlemen , the differences between the poor and the rich regions of the Community are truly enormous .
These regional differences are more apparent in today 's enlarged European Union than they were in the original fifteen .
There may be various reasons for this , such as geographical location , the type of residential infrastructure , the sector-by-sector structure of the economy , the stratification of society or other reasons relating to the history of a given area .
These differences can be smoothed out to some extent through structural policies , but we will always have richer and poorer regions .
In my view it is therefore very important to aim chiefly for a situation where all of the regions in the European Union have more or less achieved definite economic progress and social development .
We should target structural funds at clearly boosting GDP growth , increasing employment and contributing to sustainable development .
In this regard , I would ask the following questions .
What were the structural measures that contributed to the growth of successful regions such as Ireland ?
What causes regions such as Mezzogiorno in Italy , where decades of structural funding have failed to bring about any major change , to continue to lag behind ?
How can we make sure that European funds are not squandered in the present but invested for the future ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I am not entirely sure that the report we are discussing today provides us with clear guidelines in this issue .
The fact of the matter is , however , that only by providing answers to the above questions can we prevent a repetition of the errors of the past in today 's poorest regions , thereby ensuring that European funding will bring real added value to regional economies and societies .
It is , however , too soon to make a full assessment of the benefits that structural policies have brought to the poorest regions , because the poorest countries have only just joined the Union .
There is still a problem with the complexity of the overall structure .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , allow me also to congratulate you once again on your election yesterday and on your first session in the chair here in the Chamber .
I would like to thank the rapporteur most warmly for this engrossing report , because at the end of the day we all have the one aim , namely to eliminate the disparities between the regions of the European Union .
That is not only in the interests of the poorest regions of the European Union but in the interests of all regions , because the development of the Union as a whole would otherwise stagnate .
The fact is that we have huge potential in the regions we are supporting .
People there want to get involved and to play their part in the European Union , but we must also give them the opportunity to do so .
I would like to focus on a few points which the rapporteur mentioned in her report and which seem quite important to me .
The European Union needs to provide rapid assistance , which means that we must build up the administration and must not tread on each other 's toes in the various tiers of government .
This also requires a functioning system of cross-border cooperation .
I am eager to see how the Member States actually achieve that aim in the coming weeks and months .
I would be delighted if the new financial instruments , Jessica , Jeremy and Jasper , which were invented some years ago , finally became familiar in the Member States and were used to good effect .
Of more than 400 applications submitted so far for operational programmes , however , a quarter at most have been approved .
I would be pleased if that went more quickly ; perhaps it could incorporate scope for subsequent adjustment .
There is one thing I would like to stress : getting rid of disparities between regions also means working to eliminate differences in the opportunities available to men and women .
I therefore urge the House to support the relevant motions here in plenary .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , like my fellow Member , Mrs Krehl , I congratulate you on your election and on your first sitting as President .
Commissioner Potočnik , I should like to say to you that this report , which has been presented exceedingly well by our fellow Member , Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg , is first and foremost a cry from the heart .
Next , it is a necessity for the European Union , as Mrs Krehl just said , and it is an appeal to the Commission .
It is a cry from the heart because the development of poor regions is not just about the development of regions but about the taking account of the situations - tragic situations in some cases - of people who are unemployed or who have to move , etc .
It is therefore a human cry from the heart .
It is also a necessity - the report explains this well - where the development of the European Union is concerned .
That being said , Commissioner , we need to go further , and please do not regard my remark as a criticism , but as an observation ; you yourself made various observations , in six minutes or so , culminating in these words : ' I await proposals from Parliament ' .
Well , in the report by our fellow Member , there are a number of proposals .
What I would like to convey in these few seconds granted to me is that we need clarification from the Commission , today , on the following : who does what , when and how ?
Who ?
What is the European Union 's role ?
I believe that , until now , we have for the most part successfully laid down the conditions in terms of funding , regulations and so on .
The report by our fellow Member contains some additional initiatives relating in particular to financial aspects , to technical assistance aspects , etc . , with the aim of strengthening the pivotal role played by the Commission and of putting it in a stronger position to make proposals and to provide assistance .
But then , nothing , or almost nothing , is said about the role played by the Member States .
The fact is , if we want to help regions in difficulty , it is not enough to say ' there are European funds ' , it also requires the Member States to assume their responsibilities .
At this level , the Commission cannot impose things , given the constraints of the subsidiarity principle .
However , in the light of what has taken place in Ireland and in the south of Italy , etc . , some observations and suggestions can be made .
I must say that , yesterday , I myself actually hosted some mayors of very small local councils of disadvantaged regions , and it is down to them to build projects - they just need to be told how to do so .
To conclude , Commissioner , what I personally expect , in addition to what is given in the report by our fellow Member , is that the Commission does as it should do and clearly indicates to us who does what , and how .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I , too , congratulate you on your new office , Madam President .
One reform leads to another .
That was the reason why we in the Committee on Regional Development , immediately after the reform of the Structural Fund and for the umpteenth time , asked the question how we were to assess Europe 's poorest regions in future .
The aim was to give the cohesion policy a future in the light of present-day experience with regard to the new reform of the Structural Funds in 2014 , for we know that the willingness of the wealthy Member States to pay into the Solidarity Pact is waning .
At the same time , our common commitment to the poorest regions through the cohesion policy is the very thing that keeps the heart of the European Union beating .
Unfortunately , this report hardly deals with these issues concerning the future .
It concentrates on the implementation problems in the new Member States in connection with the current Structural Funds Regulation .
It illustrates what happens when a solid decentralised administrative structure is considered expendable .
I regard it as naive , however , to believe that banks are a substitute for a greater degree of involvement as a panacea for the absorption and administration problems in the very poorest regions .
The Jasper and Jessica initiatives must be used in such a way that democratic action is not abandoned and that the public purse is not saddled with debts for generations to come .
This would mean the European Union keeping the poorest regions permanently on life support , and that cannot be our intention .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) I would firstly like to commend the rapporteur for her own-initiative report , which underlines some aspects that we consider important , although we disagree with others , namely with regard to the debate on the future of the cohesion policy and the fourth report on the economic and social cohesion of the European Union .
It is necessary here to stress that disparities , in particular regional ones , have increased dramatically with the successive rounds of EU enlargement , that the increase in regional disparities and the growth in the effects of polarisation at an internal level in each country has been proven , and that , in general terms , there is still a rich centre and a poor periphery , which has now been further expanded .
By stressing these aspects we seek to make a clear case for the existence of a strong regional policy as an essential tool for the reduction of disparities and the promotion of real , as opposed to nominal , convergence in the poorest regions of the European Union .
A strong regional cohesion policy is all the more necessary with the heightened costs of the internal market , the policy of liberalisation of markets and competition , and European and Monetary Union , as well as of the euro and its Stability Pact for the poorest regions of the European Union .
It is essential that the regional cohesion policy is strengthened , with the much-vaunted social and economic cohesion and real convergence set as a central objective and policy of the European Union , reinforcing the redistributive role of the community budget and providing adequate funding so that the objectives proposed may effectively be achieved .
If regional cohesion policy is to be effective then acts that detract from its value , such as the diversion of its funds to finance other policies and priorities which in no way contribute to achieving the objectives previously expressed , must be rejected .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , can you imagine a family setting the table at home for lunch , with lobster for the father , salmon for the mother , meat for one child , beans for another child , greens for another child and nothing for the other child ?
It simply cannot be and yet that is what is happening in the big European family , which we want to unite under one Constitution .
There are 80 million citizens in Europe living below the poverty line .
There are pensioners in Greece living on EUR 300 a month and they feel just fine , because in neighbouring countries other pensioners are living on EUR 80 .
This is the policy of Europe .
Certain inaccessible areas in Greece , such as Ipiros , or certain other isolated islands near Turkey have suddenly become rich , precisely because the new incoming countries have brought down the average .
This is not logical .
We must find a way of developing the economy equally for everyone .
When there is a racist attitude on the part of the ministers who create the economy , such as the Minister of Finance , Mr Alogoskoufis , who the other day said that blacks are not people , repulsively and insultingly referring to them as ' niggers ' ; when they have this sort of racist attitude , they cannot impose an economy of equality , an economy which will be developed throughout the world .
Poor people have the right to life and we must find solutions .
We are not going to measure standards in Europe by how many people drive a Mercedes 500 , but by how many children do not have a glass of milk to drink in the morning .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , since 2004 , economic growth in the new Member States has been in the order of 5.3 % , which is 2 % higher than in the old Member States .
Export levels have doubled .
Investments are increasing considerably .
These results , which , as Mr Potočnik stated a moment ago , are emphatically and demonstrably underpinned by cohesion policy , are excellent .
Statistically speaking , the number of poor regions is declining .
Having said this , the regional differences in the Member States themselves are still massive .
The Geringer de Oedenberg report is right to draw attention to this .
I also notice that we have to be more critical of the commitment in the Member States themselves .
Too much concentration in central , urban regions does not do much to further the cause of peripheral regions .
The Member States too , together with the European Union , must opt in favour of a territorial approach towards their cohesion policy .
When effectiveness is under scrutiny , we should make far more political assessments of the national plans that are submitted .
Far more political because , ultimately , we fail to accelerate the economic development and cohesion in poor regions .
A reassessment is therefore called for . A fourth cohesion report offers the framework in which this can be discussed .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will need to help take the lead in this .
On 8 November , we will be organising a hearing on this in this House .
By way of conclusion , I should like to say that there are good results , good opportunities for cohesion policy , provided we focus more on synergy at European , national and regional level for the benefit of these poorer regions and resist a multi-speed Europe .
Poorer regions , too , must find their rightful place in the knowledge economy and globalisation .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg on her excellent report .
These regions face a dual challenge in the implementation of the EU regional policy to absorb properly the allocated funds and to achieve the outcomes which are set in the aims for economic and social cohesion .
Special measures for these regions should be taken by the European Commission , governments and local authorities at all levels in order to achieve the best results for the citizens and the whole economic sector .
What is mainly needed is specific technical support that will focus on the development of administrative capacity and improvement of coordination between management bodies at state and local levels .
Otherwise , I agree with the Commissioner .
Specific tailor-made solutions are needed reducing the institutional , administrative and economic shortcomings of these regions will increase the efficiency of EU financial assistance as a whole .
The poorest regions must be encouraged to elaborate integrated plans for development as national documents which could serve as a basis for relating their specific features and potential .
The Member States should be encouraged to improve the legislative framework in the field of public-private partnerships , making it a good basis for simple and transparent rules .
But what the institution and the beneficiaries of these different programmes , including in my own country Bulgaria , need most is an even more active exchange of good practices , mainly amongst the new Member States , know-how transfer towards the central , regional and lowest possible local administrations and organisation of specific training on the whole cycle of project-making and implementation .
There are four key elements we should keep in mind : convergence , assistance , capacity for financial absorption and simplification of the rules .
To conclude , all measures in the report are very important , including , of course , equal rights for men and women , which is a serious problem in these regions .
I fully support the initiative for the adoption of a resolution specifically directed at the poorest EU regions .
( PL ) Madam President , the fourth report on cohesion , recently published by the Commission , confirms that developmental disparities between the richest and the poorest regions in Europe are decreasing , something which was noted earlier .
Assuming that the strongest regions maintain a high , steady rate of economic growth , consolidated by a great deal of investment in innovation , we have to conclude that the weakest regions are displaying an increased rate of growth , allowing them to not only avoid lagging further behind , but even to make significant progress in terms of catching up .
These facts also confirm the theory concerning the effectiveness of the European Union 's cohesion policy and the need to manage and develop it during the next programming periods .
The report we are discussing concerns the poorest regions in the European Union not the poorest regions in the Member States , which are often relatively rich , on a European scale .
Inter-regional disparities at a national level mainly fall within the remit of the national authorities and dealing with them should , especially in the so-called cohesion countries , be supported through European intervention .
A separate and courageous political decision needs to be taken to define what regions we consider to be the poorest and which require specific action to promote development .
Let us remember that the Treaty provisions mention disparities between regions and that cohesion policy needs to cover not only the poorest regions in terms of per capita GDP , but also regions that have fallen behind others in terms of the level of innovation , development of a knowledge-based economy , attractiveness in relation to investment , geographical location and others .
Certain disparities may decrease with economic growth and a deeper common market , but new ones will appear .
Cohesion policy has never been , and is not , a charitable activity and has to remain a flexible intervention tool for the European Union .
( EL ) Madam President , today , seven months after the start of the fourth programming period , and in the run-up to the debate on the future of political cohesion , the European Parliament emphasises in this report , on which I congratulate the rapporteur , that there is no room for failure in the new programming period .
Cohesion policy must not only achieve the objectives it has set and strengthen growth and employment in the poorer regions ; it must also manage to make its results visible , perceptible and acceptable to everyone at all levels .
Giving grants and earmarking funds alone does not guarantee proper use of resources or a reduction in the current widespread inequalities between the European regions .
Proper use requires coordination and participation at all levels .
We are going through a period of acute economic changes and challenges .
We must protect and promote the policy that puts solidarity and cohesion into practice and strengthen its efficacy .
This report contains important recommendations in this direction .
Let us make use of them .
( HU ) First of all , allow me to congratulate the rapporteur for this highly successful , excellent report .
In order for the developments to take place in the regions that truly need them most , we need to take account of their distinctive features .
It is evident that in the initial phase , inequalities within the countries showed an increase .
Growth on a national average can be said to be good , although it is concentrated in the capital and in urban regions .
Meanwhile , in the typically rural , village areas , there is increasing poverty and classic ghettoes have emerged .
This problem far surpasses the potential for rural development , and therefore any hope for change can be based only on deliberate harmonisation of the foundations and on complex developments .
For this reason I consider it necessary to give priority to rural areas .
Similarly , greater emphasis must be placed on helping minorities catch up , and on the training and retraining programmes related to this goal .
Further , I consider it important to increase the absorption capacity of the new Member States , and to further expand the technical aid that this demands .
It is in this way that integration can become a tool for integrating the Europe of the regions .

( PT ) Madam President , Mrs de Oedenberg 's report is not only excellent , resulting from her complete openness and ability to negotiate consensuses , but also highlights the strong regional disparities that exist throughout Europe , both in the new Member States and in the old ones , where a large part of the regions found themselves excluded from the group of poorest regions purely on the grounds of statistics that are not always complete or adequately compared and that , therefore , need to be improved .
Coming , as I do , from an ultra-peripheral region , the island of Madeira , I have made several contributions with the following aims : guaranteeing the adaptation of the cohesion policy to the outermost regions , as mentioned in Article 29 , section 2 ; achieving a clearer definition of the criteria for defining which regions are rich and which are poor ; and reinforcing research and education as the path to development , because the regions in question need to find an effective way out of the situation in which they find themselves .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , without any doubt the poorest regions of Europe need attention .
Some regions in Europe need special attention , for example , regions at a statistical disadvantage , the outermost and isolated regions and cities .
It is important to focus on restructuring structural assistance and to pay more attention to the Lisbon goals of innovation , research and development , as these are activities which will create a solid base for the future economies of those regions .
We should also pay heed to lowering energy consumption through renewable energies , which will provide a solid basis for the sustainable future of the relevant countries .
Gender mainstreaming is a horizontal principle that we will follow in all our actions undertaken under all the structural funds .
Absorption capacity is something on which we are focusing constantly .
All this has received , and will continue to receive , constant attention .
Solidarity with the poorest in Europe is the backbone of the European Union , especially after the two recent enlargements .
We should not deny the problems , but we should not forget the good results we have achieved in the past .
It is important to talk about both successes and problems , because this is a way of securing even greater recognition for cohesion policy and eliminating future problems .
I should like thank you for the excellent Geringer report , your comments and your critical remarks .
It is our duty to address the problems of the poorest in Europe .
The Commission will certainly focus on that .
Solidarity should remain one of the areas where we show the human face of Europe as a whole .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at voting time , in a few minutes ' time .
Ladies and gentlemen , the sooner we vote , the sooner you can start your well-earned recess .
But of course there is still this afternoon 's sitting to come .
I must ask our honourable colleague Robert Atkins to ensure next time that the Members are all here punctually .

Mr President , on a point of order , I am sure that Sir Robert will be delighted to do that if you can ensure that we will start on time !
Your remarks do not apply today , Mr Wise , because Sir Robert has not yet been able to ensure that the ladies and gentlemen of the House toe the line , although he will surely try to do so in future .
We shall then be able to judge each other fairly and objectively .
Mr President , I am sure that if whoever was in the Chair started on time , Members would soon realise that they had to be here on time !
( Applause )
Mr President , many of us were very envious of your skill in extricating yourself from the Chair at lunchtime yesterday .
When we stayed here voting , you went away for lunch .
Are you going to do the same today ?
( Laughter )
I do not know , Mr Chichester , whether you aspire to the office of President of the European Parliament .
Should you be President one day , you will realise that my purpose was not so much to go for a meal as to fulfil numerous obligations .
1 .
Community Statistical Programme ( 2008-2012 ) ( vote )
- Becsey report
2 .
Darfur ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
- Before the vote :
( ES ) Mr President , this resolution is brought to plenary under Rule 91 , as a result of urgency , without debate .
It is certainly urgent and on my own behalf and on behalf of the five Members who have spent five days in Darfur , I would like very briefly to point out the reasons for this urgency .
Darfur today is a lawless territory , in which everybody is waging war against everybody else .
The great problems of our times are condensed there : the conflict between central and peripheral areas , ethnic conflicts , the cynical exploitation of rivalries between groups for political purposes , and perhaps the first war in the world to be caused by climate change .
But it is urgent because security is deteriorating even further , and if that continues , humanitarian workers will not be able to carry on doing their work .
The fate of two and a half million people depends on that work , since they are fed each day thanks to their efforts , and partly thanks to European Union money .
If there is no improvement in security between now and the end of the year , we may find that two million people have been abandoned to their fate in the desert , in danger of creating the greatest humanitarian crisis the world has ever seen .
It is therefore important , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that United Nations forces , which we have asked to be sent to Darfur so many times , finally go , now that the Sudanese Government has no objection .
The Sudanese Government is no longer saying no .
It is now saying yes .
It says that they should go as soon as possible , because it is no longer capable - as if it ever wanted to - of guaranteeing the least security .
The Janjaweed have not been disarmed .
Quite the opposite .
The Sudanese Government is not going to increase security in Darfur .
If we want to avoid the risk of total humanitarian crisis , we must exert pressure in order to ensure that that force gets there as soon as possible .
However , since it will take at least a year to get there , we must support the African Union and we must at least ensure that its soldiers are paid , because you should be aware that we have spent more money on supporting that force than on humanitarian aid .
Those are the reasons for the urgency , Mr President .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Josep Borrell , for this report and for your untiring commitment .
3 .
Towards a future Maritime Policy for the Union ( vote )
- Piecyk report
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) I beg to point out that Amendment 1 should not be placed after paragraph 4 but after paragraph 146 ; that was agreed with the author of the amendment .
This paragraph does not belong at the beginning but at the end of the resolution .
I would be grateful if you could arrange for that to be done .
Our efficient staff have already seen to that .
4 .
First railway package ( vote )
- Cramer report
5 .
Sustainable mobility ( vote )
- Barsi-Pataky report

( ES ) Mr President , this report is still appearing on the monitors as Krahmer , when in fact it is the Barsi-Pataky report .
That may create some confusion .
It confused me .
It is correct now .
Thank you for drawing my attention to what is happening behind the scenes .
6 .
Action to tackle cardiovascular disease ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
7 .
PNR agreement with the United States of America ( vote )
- Joint motion for a resolution
- Before the vote on citation 4 :
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the four oral amendments we moved are a last attempt to obtain a joint resolution .
Let me make it clear , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , that we endorse the criticism .
Criticism alone , however , will not stop the terrorists .
That is why we want to add a constructive dimension to this resolution .
Accordingly , we move firstly that the following specific wording be added :
' Having regard to the joint ruling of the European Court of Justice of 30 May 2006 on cases C-317 / 04 and C-318 / 04 , '
( DE ) In this way we want to include a serious reference to the ruling that we ourselves in Parliament applied pressure to obtain .
That is the first oral amendment I ask the House to support .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on citation 6 :
( DE ) The addition at this point would be as follows :
' ... and the responses he received from Minister Dr Wolfgang Schäuble and Commission Director-General JLS Jonathan Faull of 29 June and 3 July 2007 , '
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- After recital A :
- ( DE ) Then we are moving that another recital be added , as follows :
' whereas the PNR agreement is meant to help prevent and combat terrorism and international crime , '
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- After recital B :
Mr President , I should like to move the following oral amendment : ' whereas the PNR agreement provides the legal framework for the transfer of EU PNR data to the US and , by doing so , provides a basis for the air carriers to operate their business with the US , ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
8 .
Eurozone ( 2007 ) ( vote )
- Rosati report
9 .
European Central Bank ( 2006 ) ( vote )
- Mitchell report
10 .
Palestine ( vote )
- Joint motion for a resolution
11 .
Situation in Pakistan ( vote )
- Joint motion for a resolution
- Before the vote on paragraph 1 :
Mr President , I apologise for this , but colleagues will recognise that this situation is changing daily and the oral amendment is not quite the same as that listed on some people 's sheets so I will read it out : ' Expresses its solidarity with the people of Pakistan who are victims of the violence perpetrated by the armed extremists ; is deeply concerned for the safety of the 1800 or more people in the Red Mosque , some of whom were held as hostages ; recognises the challenges the siege posed to the Government of Pakistan ; expresses its grave concern about the still unknown number of victims and supports the efforts to bring those responsible to justice ' .
( DE ) Since the storming of the Red Mosque has now been carried out , should we not use the past tense , at least in the second part ?
( The oral amendment was accepted )
12 .
2006 Progress Report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( vote )
- Meijer report
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , at the start of the vote on my report , I have to inform the House of two issues .
First , when the vote was being prepared in the AFET Committee , all political groups agreed to use in this report only one term for the state which calls itself the Republic of Macedonia . It is the long sentence ' Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ' , without any abbreviation , such as the English FYROM or the French ARYM .
I therefore propose that if parts of the final adopted text include any other terms , those terms should be replaced on the basis of this broad agreement .
Secondly , the PPE-DE Group proposed that I should merge two amendments on paragraph 13 into one - my amendment 22 and the PSE amendment 6 .
With this is mind , I should like to move an oral amendment to my amendment 22 .
As the vote on amendment 22 is due to be taken after the vote on amendment 6 , this solution is only possible if amendment 6 is rejected .
I should therefore like to ask that the order of voting on the amendments be changed .
Mr Pinior of the PSE Group said yesterday evening that he would be in favour of this arrangement .
I hope everyone understood that correctly .
In that case we shall do as you request .
13 .
TRIPS agreement and access to medicines ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
14 .
Democratic scrutiny under the Development Cooperation Instrument ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
15 .
Negotiation mandate : enhanced EC-Ukraine agreement ( vote )
- Kamiński report
- Before the vote on Amendment 4 :
( DE ) Mr President , it is with a heavy heart that I move this compromise amendment , but it may be the key to a clear majority .
At the end of the amendment , after ' open the corresponding process ' , should be added the words ' including the possibility of membership ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
( DE ) The revised Amendment 6 has been withdrawn .
( DE ) Then paragraph 11 will stay as it was .
16 .
Reducing disparities in the poorest regions of the EU ( vote )
- Geringer de Oedenberg report
I hope you all have a good break , but only after you have voted this afternoon !
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to point out that I cannot be held responsible for the first part of the vote on the Barsi-Pataky report as , at the time , the name of the previous rapporteur , Mr Cramer , was still on the board .
As a result , I may have made an error in the vote on the Barsi-Pataky report .
That will be recorded in the Minutes .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote , see Minutes )
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
( PL ) Madam President , excuse me , but I would just like to explain my voting on the report on Macedonia , if that is possible .
Mr Rogalski , you were not on the list , and I have closed the explanations of vote .
I am sorry .
Next time , please let us know within the prescribed time .
I would also point out to you that you can explain your vote in writing .


( The sitting was suspended at 12.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
The humanitarian situation of Iraqi refugees
The next item is the debate on the six motions for a resolution on the humanitarian situation of Iraqi refugees .
author . - Mr President , Commissioner , Iraq is today in a catastrophic abyss and the Iraqi people find themselves in a state of utter despair and shock .
The confirmed statistics provided by international agencies , such as the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq and other UN organisations , are truly grim and heartbreaking .


Every day on average one hundred people are killed and two hundred wounded ; 50 % of the population is living on less than one dollar a day and unemployment affects more than 80 % of the population .
Only a minority have access to adequate water supplies and effective sanitation .
Electricity supply is severely restricted and is subject to frequent interruptions without warning .
Four out of five doctors have left their hospitals and three out of four children are not at school .
Almost three million people are internally displaced , i.e. they are refugees in their own country , and this number increases by about 2000 every day .
A further two million Iraqis are refugees in neighbouring states , namely Syria , Jordan , the Gulf region , Egypt and Iran .
These people have no formal refugee protection status .
The EU and the international community in general have a moral duty to show compassion and understanding for the miserable circumstances the Iraqi refugees find themselves in .
Additionally , and more importantly , they must take much more effective measures to ensure that these poor people are given the help and support they so desperately need in order to survive indignity and the calamity that has fallen upon them .
This joint motion for a resolution lists a number of measures that are of importance in helping the Iraqi refugees have a more human existence .
So far , I have spoken as a representative of my group , now permit me to say a few words on a personal basis .
Iraq is a relatively new country : it only became independent from Britain in 1932 .
It then followed a history of turmoil and , eventually , Saddam Hussein came to power .
He was a tyrant and a criminal but he was assisted in gaining power by the West , including , unfortunately , some European states .
Sadly , though , even the worst days of Saddam Hussein 's totalitarian rule seem nothing in comparison to the death , destruction and suffering that has fallen on the Iraqi people following the Bush-Blair invasion and continued occupation of the country .
These two ' peacekeepers ' ordered an attack on Iraq , promising to bring happiness and prosperity to the Iraqi people .
Instead , they succeeded in bringing a calamity of gigantic proportions .
Yet some EU circles continue to applaud this invasion and , recently , they have even agreed to rewarding Mr Blair for his ' peace ' services to the Arab world by appointing him Special Representative of the Quartet to the Middle East .
May God bring some sanity to such circles and may God save us from the Bushes and Blairs of this world !
deputising for the author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I shall read Tobias Pflüger 's speech .
' Sadly , not until today have we held a debate on assistance for the Iraqi refugees .
I deeply regret that .
Why did the liberal , right-wing nationalist and conservative groups drop the subject from the agenda of the last plenary part-session ?
Instead , the House engaged in ideological debates about Cuba .
The situation in Iraq is desperate .
Since the US invasion and the formation of the so-called ' coalition of the willing ' , more than 600 000 people have been killed .
More than two million Iraqis have fled the country .
To these may be added two million within the country who have been driven from their homes and more than 40 000 non-Iraqi refugees .
The number of US service personnel who have lost their lives rises daily and has now reached 3 600 .
Regrettably , through their participation in the war and their support of the war , Member States of the EU - and Germany is one of the foremost culprits - bear a substantial share of responsibility for the situation in Iraq .
Real help must now be given to the refugees .
That cannot be the task of the neighbouring countries alone .
The EU must commit funds for this purpose .
Deportations to Iraq must be brought to an immediate halt .
The troops of the United States and its allies in the so-called coalition of the willing must be withdrawn .
EU Member States must stop supporting the war .
An end to the illegal war and the occupation of Iraq is imperative .
author . - Mr President , I was one of those politicians who supported the Iraq war back in 2003 in the belief that Saddam Hussein posed a serious long-term risk to regional stability , but also because of the horrendous brutality of his Baathist regime .
I believed this would be replaced by democracy and respect for human rights and the rule of law .
But I , like many others , sadly underestimated the ferocity of the subsequent insurgency and the serious lack of peace planning , post-invasion , by our US allies , in particular their disastrous dismantling of the Iraqi army as a de-Baathification measure , which unleashed disgruntled Sunni officers to lend their expertise to the insurgency .
There was also a failure to secure the Jordanian and Syrian borders against jihadi extremists flocking in to have a bash at the allies , not to mention that Saddam opened his jails before his fall , which added organised crime to this lethal cocktail , and always with the fingers of Iran meddling on the side of the Shias in what has now become virtually a civil war .
Curiously , immediately after the invasion , there was little in the way of internally displaced persons or refugees compared to the previous exodus of Kurds in the Saddam days .
Paradoxically , the Kurdish flow has now stopped , as this is one of the few remaining peaceful areas of the country .
Sadly , in the last two years , huge numbers of Iraqis - perhaps over two million - have left , particularly the long-suffering , persecuted Christian Assyrian minorities who have been squeezed on all sides by Islamists , who accuse them of collaborating with the crusaders , and by the Kurds , who want their lands .
Canon Andrew White , who ran Iraq 's only Anglican Church , left Baghdad yesterday amid fears for his life and safety after trying to secure the release of five kidnapped Britons .
But the EU must now do more to alleviate the crisis by boosting financial aid to the surrounding Arab states , which have received the bulk of the refugees , in particular Jordan and Syria , and they have been particularly good at taking in the Assyrians .
The EU Member States must also accept , within reason , more refugees on a temporary basis .
author . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Iraqi brothers and sisters , an initial word in memory of all those who have been deprived of their most precious asset because of their ethnic or religious origin , their real or presumed convictions , or for being a symbol of democratic courage and public spirit .
Allow me to put the spotlight on my comrade , companion and friend , the Member of Parliament Mohammad Hossein Ahwad , the very embodiment of the fight against theocratic fascism , who was assassinated on 12 April in the Iraqi parliament .
In order that the blinding tears of pain do not prevent us from seeing those women who still fight to keep their children alive on the pathways of ethnic cleansing , the countless thousands of Iraqis gazing into infinity on the streets of Amman , Damascus and Cairo , profoundly affected victims of post-traumatic syndromes , the camps set up in squares or in the buttresses of ruined churches or mosques , I would like to send a message of solidarity , love , affection and hope to all .
We cannot begin to imagine , nor can these words express , the barbarity of the forces of darkness who rehearsed their plan for the entire greater Middle East on the banks of the Tigris and the Euphrates .
The common resolution which we now put forward is a vital first step towards reversing the situation .
author . - Mr President , I welcome the resolution and , like others , I am really concerned about the truly tragic situation that we see in Iraq and on its borders at the moment .
This is a people that have already suffered war , ethnic cleansing , a brutal dictatorship , an illegal invasion and communal violence , and are now seeing borders closing both externally and internally , seeing little chance of resettlement , and seeing a very mixed reception should any of them make it to the European Union .
We should not be surprised when war produces refugees - it always does - and indeed , as has already been said , some of our Member States have a very grave responsibility for that situation .
I would agree , for once , with Mr Tannock , certainly on the question of the lack of post-war planning .
I particularly welcome , in this resolution , the statement that there should be no forced return of Iraqi refugees , or of those who have had their claims turned down that are currently living in the European Union , and at present we certainly need to find a status for such people , rather than leaving them destitute in our own Member States , as is happening in some places .
I would say that there is no part of Iraq which is currently safe .
Even in Kurdistan we see Turkish troops at the moment massing on the borders there , undermining the possibility of return to destroyed villages and undermining efforts to increase economic stability in that area .
Indeed , some of those that have been returned were sent back wearing flak jackets and helmets , which , to me , says it is not exactly a safe area .
We also had a report from Human Rights Watch only last week saying that , despite the efforts of authorities in Kurdistan , partisan security forces continue the practice of kidnap and torture , so there is no real safe area in Iraq .
We know that we have to increase our support to the countries dealing with refugees on the border , and to the UNHCR , because we know what happens when you ignore the plight of refugees at the border .
We only have to look at our experience when we more or less turned our back on two million Afghan refugees on the Pakistani border and left them without adequate support - that vacuum is filled , and we do not always like the result .
I welcome the call , in the resolution , for the Commission to explain to Parliament 's Committee on Budgets in more detail exactly how we are helping in Iraq and how we are aiming to support those surrounding countries .
But , equally , I think we should be looking at our own resettlement policies to at least offer assistance to some of those who , once again , are finding their lives absolutely in turmoil .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , the humanitarian and human rights situation in Iraq is constantly deteriorating .
This is what the reports of the UN aid mission to Iraq reveal .
The statistics are horrifying .
On average , around one hundred people die every day and over two hundred are injured .
50 % of the population live on less than a dollar a day and the unemployment rate stands at 80 % .
There are insufficient water supplies and the sewage systems are inefficient , which encourages the spread of disease .
Three quarters of children do not attend school .
Criminal activity , armed attacks , kidnappings , killings of people involved in political activities or rebuilding the country are all everyday occurrences .
That is why many Iraqis flee their country and over two million people have become internally displaced .
It should also be highlighted that there are over forty thousand refugees from other countries on Iraqi soil , including fifteen thousand Palestinians .
This is what Iraq looks like today .
We therefore need immediate political and humanitarian action in order to alleviate the tragic situation faced by the refugees .
We should remember that half a million of the refugees are children .
We should ensure that internally displaced people are registered , which will give them the right to obtain food rations .
Today , they are denied this right .
We should also exert influence on neighbouring countries , so that they cease to place entry restrictions on the refugees , thus forcing many to remain on the borders .
The Union must make sure that the aid we send to Iraq , to the Iraqi people , is comprehensive , sustainable and coordinated with the actions of the United States .
The Union should , once and for all , reject anti-American prejudice .
It is the only way in which we will be able to relieve the incredibly difficult situation faced by millions of refugees and therefore avoid a large-scale humanitarian crisis .
We also call on the Iraqi Government to take immediate action to ensure the safety of displaced people and to cease to discriminate against people on the basis of their background .
The European Commission , meanwhile , should increase humanitarian aid to all displaced people in Iraq and provide support to neighbouring countries that already provide this kind of aid .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , the plight of the Iraqi refugees is still a serious one , except for one move in the right direction .
The recommendation by the UN 's main delegate for refugee affairs to give refugee status to the asylum seekers of southern and central Iraq under the 1951 Convention was a welcome solution .
As is the offer of additional forms of protection in cases where refugee status is not given .
I wish to raise two matters in particular , from within Iraq 's borders .
Firstly , the status of religious minorities is becoming ever more intolerable .
Assyrian , Armenian , Orthodox and other Christian groups , as well as Mandaeans and Jews are being glaringly discriminated against in the labour market and elsewhere .
In certain areas the authorities are totally incapable of protecting minorities from violence inflicted by Muslim soldiers .
Freedom of religion is in fact virtually non-existent .
Secondly , I find incredible the threats which the Iraqi authorities have made to freeze the supply of vital goods to Iranian refugees .
These members of the opposition have refugee status under international law and an inalienable right to protection .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , we must admit that what is happening and what has happened in Iraq is much worse than civil war - a question that is often posed .
Of course , there is not civil war .
It is worse .
There is total chaos .
Nobody has any idea or any plan as to how to unravel the mess we put Iraq in .
I use the word ' put ' because what went on was not needed , not required , nor was it wanted .
It was an invasion which has proved a terrible nightmare for those who have participated in it .
When one makes a mistake , one has to carry the responsibility for it .
It is about time that those people who participated , those countries in the coalition as well as the willing partners , show responsibility for what has happened to the Iraqi people , especially the refugees who are seeking help - even if they find any help , they find only a minimum amount .
It is about time that those people who made the initial mistake , who are responsible for the chaotic situation , show that responsibility and the first people who should be helped are the refugees .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , almost hidden amongst the constant news of violence in Iraq is the almost unheard voice of Iraq 's Christian minority .
This small population has no protection and is almost unknown to the international community .
They are experiencing intense waves of violent persecution .
Christian Iraqis are faced with the choice of exile - if they can manage to escape - conversion or persecution .
The persecution takes many forms : violence , discrimination in the workplace , confiscation of property , etc .
For a Chaldean Christian priest , Ragheed Aziz Ganni , this persecution resulted in death .
What will the European Community do to help the Chaldean , Assyrian and Orthodox Christian communities ?
The Iraqi Government states its commitment to ending violence , but the lack of security makes it impossible to enforce peace on the ground and impossible to protect vulnerable populations .
They need our help .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , it is a good thing to table a resolution on Iraq for the sake of the humanitarian situation , refugees , international aid and so on .
Who would not agree , moreover , with recital A and its finding that 100 people are killed and 200 are wounded each day , 70 % of the population is without water , 3 million people are undernourished and 2 million are refugees , including 500 000 children in Syria , Jordan , Egypt and elsewhere ?
Who has done this , though ?
Who is responsible ?
Who has spread chaos ?
Is it Saddam Hussein ? Is it the Ba 'ath Party ?
Chaos stems from war , an unjust war in the eyes of the theologians of the Middle Ages , an illegal war according to the UN Charter , a war started on the back of a lie told by two Heads of State , those of the US and the United Kingdom .
Who supported this war , here , in the European Parliament ?
Who justified , who requested , who approved the intervention that led to chaos ?
The current French foreign affairs minister , Mr Kouchner , and some of the signatories to this resolution did .
What are we supposed to say ?
That it is good to be humanitarian and to deal with the effects , but that it is better to be preventive and to avert the causes ?
This is the problem of political Europe !
In Europe we are so fond of human rights that , everywhere - in Palestine , in Iraq , in Africa , in the field of economic globalisation - we support policies that , violating as they do these human rights , enable us to reaffirm our immense love of these very human rights , which are ultimately violated with our prior support .
It is therefore good that post-trauma centres for refugees are being proposed in paragraph 16 , but provision must also be made for political prevention centres , here , for our leaders , so that they can be taught wisdom , lucidity and the courage to say ' no ' , and taught to reject naïve optimism , which destroys everything in its wake .
( LT ) I support the resolution , and I sympathise with more than four million Iraqis who have been forced to flee from their birthplaces .
That is more people than there are in my homeland , Lithuania .
The number of refugees is growing , and half of them are forced to flee abroad .
The situation in Iraq is not improving .
The refugees are condemned to vegetate in poverty , usually without employment , while their children grow up illiterate .
For these reasons , terrorist organisations are able to successfully recruit followers .
Humanitarian assistance for refugees is shamefully small compared to the amount spent on weapons by the USA and UK , the countries that launched the war on Iraq .
The 60 million US dollars contributed by donors in the USA is just a drop in the ocean .
This year about 40 000 refugees from Iraq will arrive in European Union countries - twice as many as last year - while the USA has accepted barely a several dozen Iraqis this year .
It would be good for US and UK leaders to visit Iraq and neighbouring countries and see with their own eyes the suffering of the refugees .
Maybe then they would behave differently .
Member of the Commission .

Mr President , the security deterioration in Iraq has provoked a large scale displacement : approximately two million Iraqis have fled within the borders of Iraq and approximately two million into the neighbouring countries , with 750 000 people in Jordan and 1.4 million people in Syria .
This displacement may result in a humanitarian crisis , and could present a threat to regional stability and the Commission is extremely concerned about the scale of human suffering .
We are following the situation closely on the ground and constantly reviewing any developments .
We are in close contact with other key players of the international community , such as the United Nations High Commission for Refugees .
In this regard , the Commission has actively participated at the UNHCR International Conference last April in Geneva .
In terms of existing assistance , in order to alleviate the difficulties of the displaced , the Commission , via EuropeAid , allocated EUR 10 million in 2006 to support internally displaced persons .
In February 2007 , as a rapid response to the deteriorating situation and following the UNHCR appeal in January , the Commission , via ECHO , announced an additional allocation of EUR 10.2 million , composed of EUR 4 million for the internally displaced and EUR 6.2 million for the externally displaced Iraqis .
Furthermore , the Commission is continuing its support of the delivery of basic services inside Iraq .
We understand that this support remains limited in the face of the scale of human suffering .
Nevertheless , it constitutes only a first , immediate response to the humanitarian situation .
The Commission is currently looking at various options on how to better assist the Iraqi refugees in the future .
However , delivery of assistance inside Iraq is severely constrained by the security situation .
Many of our partners , including UNHCR , have only a very minimal presence in Iraq .
Through various technical and political missions , the Commission attempts to better assess the situation and , at the same time , convey its readiness to further support the Iraqi refugees .
Commissioner Michel visited the region himself at the end of April .
Several technical missions to Jordan and Syria have also followed since then .
We remain , therefore , committed to working with the countries that are accommodating Iraqi refugees .
The Commission has already and will retain regular discussions with the Syrian and Jordan authorities about the situation .
We are looking forward particularly to participate in the Sharm El-Sheikh agreed Working Group on Refugees , which , according to the latest indication , is scheduled to meet on 22 July in Amman .
Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner has already expressed the Commission 's readiness to provide technical assistance to the working group in order to facilitate the process .
We believe that the only durable solution for the refugees is peace and reconciliation inside Iraq .
Towards this end , we will continue our support to the Iraqi refugees .
I agree with you that we have a moral duty to help .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
3 .
Human rights in Vietnam
The next item is the debate on the six draft resolutions on human rights in Vietnam .
author . - Mr President , Vietnam , a word synonymous with catastrophe , is a country that , as we all know , has had an extremely traumatic past , with long and treacherous fighting against colonialism , with a devastating civil conflict and with a calamitous war against the American forces having resulted in unprecedented suffering for the Vietnamese people .
Then came the totalitarian Communist regime which , it has to be said , has made at least some proper efforts towards healing the wounds of the past and getting the country on its feet again .
Consequently , the Socialist Republic of Vietnam was rewarded by the international community in various ways , including being allowed it to join the World Trade Organisation , but , unfortunately , there is still a long way to go to achieving an acceptable level of democracy for the Vietnamese people .
We are particularly concerned about new waves of persecution of dissidents and the suppression of the fundamental right of free speech .
We are also very concerned about the lapses in reforms relating to freedom of religion and the various set-backs in achieving judicial reform , which should be fair and democratic and which should lead to the abolition of all forms of imprisonment without proper judicial safeguards .
Hoping that the human rights dialogue between the EU and Vietnam will , albeit the recent setbacks , lead to tangible improvements for the Vietnamese people , we call upon the authorities in Vietnam to take serious note of our concerns relating to the issue of violation of human rights in their country .
At the same time , we call upon the Commission and Council to reassess the policy of cooperation with Vietnam , bearing in mind that this cooperation should be subject to respect for democratic principles and fundamental rights and reforms .
Let this motion for a resolution not be seen as a threat , but more as a caution to the Vietnamese Government .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , I was chairman of the Vietnam Friendship Society in my country in the 1980s .
I see that there has been rapid economic development in the country , in the last 10 years especially .
The new generations speak of it : those who have no personal experience of US aggression in Vietnam .
As an old friend of Vietnam , I , along with the other groups in the European Parliament , want to focus attention on the need to respect human rights and freedom of organisation , expression and religion in the spirit of the UN declarations and conventions .
Our group 's resolution calls for the release of Buddhist leaders Thich Huyen Quang and Thich Quang Don from what we consider to be groundless imprisonment .
We think that Vietnam should liberalise its policy on minorities .
The EU should also work to promote cooperation with Vietnam .
Although oil has been discovered in Vietnam , it is not a western oil and gas reserve , and so political rights and human rights may be brought to the fore , unlike , for example , when working with Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , the situation in Vietnam warrants the attention of the international community .
The EU needs to send a clear message : discrimination against religious communities , such as the United Buddhist Church of Vietnam , its Protestant congregation and dissident groups , must cease .
Members of these communities , who practise their faith peacefully , have suffered detention and home arrest .
That was an extract from a speech I made four years ago in this House on human rights in Vietnam .
It is sad to realise I can make the same speech now , as the situation with regard to freedom of religion has not improved .
This may beg the question of the importance of these discussions , but there is no alternative .
We have to continue to put the pressure on and do all we can to attract international attention .
Moreover , there is some hope , because there have been small constitutional reforms in Vietnam , at least at the level of legislation .
We have to give credit for these things , and I hope that in four years ' time we can say something more about it .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , before getting to the heart of the matter and talking about the resolution on Vietnam with which we are dealing today , I should like to make a point that I feel is important .
I am wondering how the urgent matters with which we deal here , in Parliament , are chosen .
Indeed , although I am not calling into question the urgency of the various problems posed in the countries about which we are speaking , it does seem to me that some countries are completely forgotten about when compared with others about which we have the chance to speak several times in one parliamentary term .
I shall take just one example - Colombia , with its many trade unionists who have been assassinated and its hostages who are living in increasingly difficult circumstances .
According to my research , although Colombia has been the subject of specific resolutions , not once since 2002 has it been an urgent matter ; I find this extraordinary .
However , I have taken the floor today to speak about the situation in Vietnam .
Although it seems that 2006 was a year of political openness , one that made flexibility possible , it appears that freedom of worship is among the problems being reported to us by the NGOs .
It is important that Vietnam accommodates all the religions practised on its territory and permits its entire population to choose its form of worship .
Freedom of thought and freedom of speech must not under any circumstances be flouted , and the people of Vietnam , whoever they may be , must be able to express themselves by any means at their disposal , including wide circulation methods such as the Internet .
Despite the situation , I should also like to point out - perhaps going against what my fellow Member , Mrs Korhola , just said - that efforts have , all the same , been made in Vietnam .
This country has already made certain efforts , of which we have taken note , not least when we went there in 2006 with the ASEAN delegation .
It is important that we continue to support this country so that the rights of all its citizens may be respected in full .
Let us hope that this resolution helps to achieve this .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , this is another debate on religious persecution and human rights abuses in countries such as Vietnam , Cambodia or Laos .
Vietnam plays a particularly important role in this region .
It enjoys dynamic growth and is overcoming the social and economic abyss that followed the communist period .
Unfortunately , increasing wealth does not go hand in hand with respect for human rights , freedom of speech and expression or religious freedoms .
Hitherto , in our speeches in the European Parliament , we have all - including myself - focused on the persecution of Buddhists , as this is the largest religious community in Vietnam .
Now , however , we are hearing that Catholics , such as the Catholic priest Nguyen Van Ly , are being persecuted .
Although I already spoke about this matter in Parliament a year and a half ago , as did Mrs Korhola some eighteen months later , I sadly find myself having to utter virtually the same words .
We should expect countries who are members of Asian international organisations , such as ASEAN or ASEM , but also the UN and the High Commissioner for Human Rights to decisively appeal to the government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam to respect human rights and religious freedoms in that country .
Once , when Vietnam was communist and poor , it infringed human rights and suppressed freedom of religion .
Now it is doing the same , albeit perhaps on a smaller scale , although it is richer and is supposedly moving away from communist ideology .
We cannot remain silent !
of behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , in March of this year , fifteen Vietnamese dissidents were sentenced to long terms in prison and house arrest .
This event , which has passed without comment in the global media , confirms the poor human rights situation in this country .
Basic civil rights , such as freedom of religion , the press and association , are infringed in Vietnam .
The right to a fair and proper trial is not respected .
Dissidents are placed in psychiatric units in the same way as they used to be in the former Soviet Union .
Ethnic minorities are persecuted , priests are oppressed , as are representatives of various faiths .
The European Union cannot , and must not , tolerate these infringements any longer .
More importantly , we are Vietnam 's most important trading partner .
Vietnam benefits from the European Union 's preferential tariff system .
We have the resources to make the government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam more likely to guarantee the basic civil rights of its citizens .
It is our duty to do so .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , after Vietnam 's temporary suspension in 2006 of its policy of repression and restriction of political and civil rights , we are once again witnessing a wave of arrests involving citizens who are considered ' inconvenient ' by the authorities .
The USA recently recognised Vietnam as a partner for stable , normal trade relations .
It has also joined the World Trade Organisation .
Although the country has opened up economically , it has not relinquished its monopoly on power in favour of a democratic system .
We have to put an end to all forms of repression affecting the members of the United Buddhist Church of Vietnam and its existence needs to be officially recognised .
We should call for the release of Vietnamese political prisoners who have been imprisoned because they have legally and peacefully exercised their freedom of opinion , press and religion .
The Vietnamese authorities have to comply with the recommendations of the UN Human Rights Council concerning the development of a legal system in the country and respect for basic rights .
In view of the fact that the European Union is Vietnam 's biggest trading partner , and the aid we offer to this country will amount to 304 million euros between 2007 and 2013 , we should consider revising the cooperation treaty which we have already signed , as only economic sanctions can force Vietnam to implement political and institutional reforms which will lead to democracy and a state based on the rule of law .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , today 's debate concerns Vietnam , one of the last remaining Communist countries , where human rights abuses have been taking place for years .
In Vietnam , defenders of human rights and democracy are imprisoned , religious leaders are accused of alleged espionage and propaganda against the socialist republic or are viewed as a threat to national security .
Following a period of reduced repression , which was linked to Vietnam 's application for WTO membership , opposition parties have been banned , as have independent media and trade unions .
Vietnam enforces preventive censorship , and all media are under party control .
Many people who are viewed as political dissidents are placed under house arrest and surveillance .
Children and young people are brutally and ruthlessly indoctrinated .
Unfortunately , the efforts of international organisations and human rights defenders , as well as the resolutions that have been drawn up , have not led to any change in the situation .
We support the resolution and appeal to the Vietnamese authorities to respect human rights , release prisoners and carry out reforms .
However , it seems that more radical action will be necessary .
Commission .
Mr President , the Commission shares the European Parliament 's concern about the violation of human rights in Vietnam .
This affects , in particular , the exercise of freedom of expression , of association and of religion .
However , we must view this in its full context .
Vietnam has made considerable progress in terms of economic and social rights .
Over the past decade , it has succeeded in lifting a significant part of its population out of absolute poverty and set the country firmly on a course of economic growth , whilst limiting the emergence of socioeconomic disparities within the population .
This has been accompanied by some improvements in recent years in the situation as regards civil and political rights .
For instance , new legislation relating to religious freedom , which has been adopted in the last three years , has softened some , but not all , of the tools used by the state to control religious organisations and thus allows non-organised groups to seek official recognition .
This has already had a positive impact on the ground .
Among other things , some Protestant denominations , such as Baptists and Mennonites , which had not been recognised in the past , have been able to register grassroots-level congregations .
That said , the implementation of the new legislation remains uneven , and progress in the Northern Uplands in particular has been markedly slower than in parts of the Central Highlands and in lowland areas .
Moreover , some denominations seen as dissident by the regime , such as the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam , and some Hoa Hao and Cao Dai groups , remain illegal and face continued harassment .
The climate has also improved for political dissidents in the past two years .
A considerable number of high-profile activists were released in 2005 and 2006 .
Last year also saw the emergence of some new parties and other groupings of activists within the country , which was unprecedented both in terms of the number of groups and of that of their adherents .
The official reaction to this development was , initially , relatively low-key .
However , this changed in early 2007 , and in particular since mid-February .
Harassment of dissidents seems to have intensified , and scores of activists were arrested .
A number of them have since been tried and sentenced to lengthy jail terms . This includes some well-known persons such as Father Nguyen Van Ly , and lawyers Nguyen Van Dai and Le Thi Cong Nhan .
We do not know whether this is a temporary reflex or something more deep-seated , but it is of grave concern to the Commission .
The EU 's relations with Vietnam have developed dynamically in recent years , and the Commission has taken every opportunity to press for continued improvement in the human rights situation , especially as regards prisoners of concern .
The Commission and EU Member States ' representatives in Hanoi have in particular followed the recent arrests and trials of activists with particular attention .
EU diplomats were present at some of the trials as observers , and the EU reacted strongly to their sentencing .
In its declaration of 15 May , it reiterated its plea to the Government of Vietnam to release all non-violent political activists exercising their rights to freedom of expression and association .
The EU missions in Hanoi have also requested that the Vietnamese Government allow them to visit dissidents in prison , in order to ascertain the conditions of their detention .
The recent trials were also raised forcefully by Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner in her bilateral meeting with Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister Khiem on 28 May 2007 , on the margins of the ASEM ministerial meeting in Hamburg .
Apart from high-level political contacts , the EU and Vietnam have agreed on mechanisms to conduct a dialogue and exchange of views on human rights issues .
A key instrument in this regard is the regular human rights dialogue between the EU missions in Hanoi and the Government of Vietnam .
The Sub-Group on Cooperation in the Areas of Institution Building , Administrative Reform , Governance and Human Rights provides another opportunity for the Commission to raise these issues .
On all possible occasions , we have expressed our view that the arrest of non-violent political activists is incompatible with Vietnam 's obligations under the international human rights instruments to which it has acceded .
Please rest assured that the Commission will continue to use all instruments at its disposal to press the case in question , as well as , more generally , to encourage and support progress on human rights and religious freedom in Vietnam .
We also rely very much on the European Parliament to continue to press for the improvement of human rights in Vietnam .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .

Mr President , on a point of order , over the last three years of attending these afternoon debates on breaches of human rights , the Commission has always been represented , most usually with a Commissioner , although it is a difficult time .
We are very grateful for that .
At the same time , I would like it to be noted that , on the Council side , I have never seen a representative .
I wonder whether it is because the Council is not invited , or is it because it does not think it is important to be here ?
Perhaps you could find out and let us know .
( Applause )
I promise that I will clarify this matter .

( DE ) Mr President , I only wish to point out that the honourable Member is correct but that , during the German Presidency of the Council , the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights , Günter Nooke , was here twice on Thursday afternoons .
That is a precedent which future Presidents of the Council should follow .
( Applause )
I would like to inform you that I have received a proposal from the ALDE Group to appoint Bill Newton Dunn to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
There seems to be no opposition to this proposal .
The proposal is approved .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
1 .
The humanitarian situation of Iraqi refugees ( vote )
Joint resolution .
- Before the vote on the draft resolution :

Mr President , on a point of order , before you put the motion for a resolution to the vote , in the interests of fairness I think the ALDE Group should recognise that but for the PPE-DE Group 's presence here this afternoon , its amendments would not have been passed .
I think there should be consistency in our criticism about presence in this Chamber .
3 .
Human rights in Vietnam ( vote )
Joint resolution
The voting is over .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to make an unequivocal statement concerning the report we voted on this morning .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
I am sorry but explanations of vote are not permitted at the moment .
Voting time
The next item on the agenda is the vote .
( Results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Approval by the Council of Parliament 's positions adopted at first reading ( Rule 66 ) : see Minutes
Decisions concer