Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 13 February 2003 .
Mr President , since submitting that request to you I now speak not just on behalf of the 36 Members but on behalf of my group .
I wish to draw the House 's attention to reports which have appeared in the Belgian , German and UK newspapers this weekend which relate to quite serious allegations that the European Parliament and also Members of the Commission may have been misled in relation to elements of the evidence in the Andreasen affair .
This arises in the context of a report apparently commissioned by Commissioner Kinnock prior to suspending the Commission accountant .
Both the press and Commission sources have extensively quoted from this report .
It is essential that the report is published in full forthwith so that the House has the full facts concerning this matter .
It is important not just in the context of the whole Andreasen affair but also in the context of the budget discharge procedure which is to be undertaken during the next few weeks .
The Commission cannot choose to engage in selective briefing of extracts from Commission papers and then claim general confidentiality in relation to those same documents in the context of the framework agreement .
For that reason , I propose to the House that tomorrow at 5 p.m. , when the Commission attends , the Commission should explain its position in relation to this document , which is allegedly a report from the head of internal audit making these serious allegations .
That document should be published and this House should be in a position to form a view in relation to it .
I therefore ask for the House 's agreement to my proposal that the Commission is requested to come to this House at 5 p.m. tomorrow in order to deal with these serious allegations .
Mr President , I thought the Loch Ness Monster appeared in summer , but it now seems , on this issue , that it appears throughout the year .
This is the fifth or sixth occasion on which Parliament has not followed its Rules of Procedure .
Mr Evans has quite rightly said that these issues must be dealt with within the discharge procedure and must be debated in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Therefore , my group believes that , when dealing with these issues , rather than taking advantage of certain leaks which have appeared on one weekend in the press of certain countries , of which I believe the majority of this House have no knowledge , and while I have every respect for the principle of freedom of expression , we must abide by our procedures and adhere to our Rules of Procedure , as well as respecting the Treaties and the specific institution of the Commission .
Therefore , Mr President , we are opposed to this absolutely untimely proposal and we believe that Parliament should continue its work in accordance with the established procedures .
Mr President , it is important that we , as a House , are not rushed into precipitate action by the activities of a few journalists .
As I understand it , this supposed story relates to a memo dated 21 May 2002 .
The reform process has come a long way since then , under the watchful eye of our Committee on Budgetary Control , which Mr Kinnock will no doubt address on this issue .
It seems to us that , taking into consideration the Casaca report which has dealt with many of these issues and the contributions to it , the matter is in fact being dealt with .
I understand that the author of the memo referred to , Mr Muis , is due to attend the Committee on Budgetary Control meeting this week and I suggest that members of that committee ask him whether he would write the same kind of memo today as he wrote in May of last year .
It would seem that the process has come a long way forward and this is probably a storm in a teacup .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we should be extremely careful .
If the letter we have received today , or the memorandum , call it what you will , is correct , there are some genuine problems , some very serious problems .
First of all , then , the competent committee will have to discuss these problems , and depending on what it then decides , Parliament will need to submit a proposal for a report , particularly since we are to hold a debate on the discharge procedure at the next Brussels part-session .
I cannot see why we should debate an issue without first having discussed it within the competent committee and I really have had enough of dancing to the tune of journalists ' so-called discoveries .
Parliament is not at the beck and call of the media and Parliament must have its own rhythm of working , or we will end up putting any old thing on the agenda .
Mr President , the fact is that it was only at the weekend that a note reached me ; it dates back to last year and I am utterly astonished by it .
The reason for my astonishment is that this note had not previously come to light following the many questions we had put to the Commission , particularly concerning the book-keeping and accounts , and because it is obviously not through the Commission that it has found its way to me .
I do not know whether other Members have had a copy , and have not , as yet , had the chance to seek further information about this .
For now , though , that is of secondary importance .
What is important , though , is the fact - which I note with amazement - that the Director-General of internal audit is due to join us for the meeting scheduled for 7 p.m. today .
I know nothing about this , though , and he has not even been invited .
I have tried to reach him by phone in order to get some information about this note , but have not , for the moment , been able to do so , as he was in a meeting .

Discharge will not , of course , be under discussion at this mini-conference - that will be dealt with in plenary in April - but this is , of course , vitally important right now .
In eight days ' time , the committee will have to vote on what we are going to do about giving discharge , and on what proposals we are going to put to plenary .
This really does make it a matter of urgency that we should have information about this .
I really do not know any more when I am meant to do this if we are to be able to deal with this properly in committee .
Although we will , self-evidently , be discussing it this evening , it is already my view that we should know what is going on when such a thing lands on the table , and that we should discuss it among ourselves .
Mr President , the situation is , in fact , very simple .
Either the Security Council votes on Tuesday evening , or it votes on Wednesday , or it votes on Thursday .
In other words , it either votes before us or after us .
If it votes after us , I believe it is important for a vote to be held within the European Parliament asking the States represented on the Security Council to vote against the resolution proposed by the United Kingdom , Spain and the United States .
In other words , I believe it is important for the representatives of public opinion and the European peoples to adopt a motion calling upon the States concerned to use their Security Council vote to reject the idea of war .
( Speaking to Mr Panella who was trying to interrupt him : Oh , Mr Panella , really !
At least , you were alive in 1938 whereas I was not .
That is the only difference and I shall put this way of thinking down to your age , because , otherwise , what you have just said is not very clever at all .
Not very clever at all ! )
If , however , the Security Council votes before we do , I think the European Parliament should adopt a position on this vote .
In any case , therefore , as an expression of the European peoples , we should adopt a position on Wednesday on what is to be decided or what has been decided .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , whilst I always admire the commitment that the esteemed Mr Cohn-Bendit brings to what he has to say here , I have to ask that we stick to logic and bear in mind the way this issue has historically developed in this House .
After all , Wednesday 's debate , which will be a thorough one , will not be the first we have had on the terrible way the Iraq crisis is developing , and our group has always taken a stand in favour of action within the bounds set by the international community . I say this so that this may not be in doubt .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , though , knows as well as any other Member of this House that we voted on this in December .
There is now no occasion for us to have a new vote every time we meet here in order to introduce new emphases ; on the contrary , Parliament 's position is unambiguous , as is that of our Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats , and I believe that the other groups - most of them , at any rate - want this House 's position , once decided upon , to be binding , and for us not to have to make much ado about exchanging views every time .
On Wednesday , everyone will have the opportunity to give an opinion , and I recommend that we do so with the gravity and seriousness of purpose that this crisis merits .
That is why we oppose a new resolution .
Mr President , we are in a particularly delicate situation because a minute can last forever and events are taking place which allow us to remain hopeful that the resolution approved by a majority of Parliament in January - not December - will remain valid .
I am not going to speculate about what may happen in the Security Council .
We have a debate with the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Papandreou , on Wednesday morning and I believe that , in these circumstances , Parliament is perfectly able to reconsider the issue of the resolution at this time .
We still have time and this seems much more reasonable than adopting a closed position at the moment .
Mr President , on behalf of the committee , I have asked that the vote on the resolution be postponed until the second part-session of March in Brussels .
Since this is a complex and delicate issue , we are going to hold a debate in committee this afternoon , in an extraordinary meeting , and on Wednesday we will hold another , as a result of the Commission 's statement .
I believe , since we are dealing with an issue which , as I have said , is delicate and on which we have to act prudently , it is better to transfer the vote on the resolution to this month 's part-session in Brussels , with the presentation , of course , of the corresponding amendments by the political groups .
Mr President , I am sorry to rise to speak against my successor on an issue like this , but it seems to me that , just as we rightly ask the Committee on Budgetary Control to look at the allegations about the reform process that have been raised in some newspapers over the weekend , we should also ask the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs to look urgently at this matter .
What is at stake here is the possibility of the Americans coming back to us with a request for access to databases on European airline passengers which would ride roughshod over our own data protection legislation and indeed could form a major intrusion into the civil liberties of European citizens .
It seems to me that , if the House does not take a position this week , then we are impotent .
We ought to be stressing very strongly our opposition to what the Americans are requesting and our opposition to any potential agreement by the Commission to such a request .
Thank you , Mr President . In fact I would just like clarification on something .
I am very pleased that we will be voting on this issue this week , because it is clear that information is already being passed on to the United States .
We therefore urgently need this week to call a halt to this .
I am not clear as to who is responsible here , however .
Is it true that the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs is getting down to it this evening ?
I would welcome that very much , but in that case we would need to draw up a resolution this evening that would have to be put to the vote on Wednesday .
I would definitely welcome that .
The most important thing is to arrive at a resolution this week , and the second most important thing is to leave it in the hands of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
If we are unable to do so this evening , I would like to have an urgent additional meeting tomorrow to ensure that the specialist committee retains control of this matter .
My understanding on the question of substance is that it was the preference of the groups that the committee should prepare the resolution .
Unless there is an indication to the contrary , that remains so .
The only issue concerns when it should be voted .
The clear decision of the House is that it should be voted on Thursday of this week , as foreseen in the draft agenda .
( The order of business was thus established )
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
Mr President , I should like to convey to you a message I received when I was in New York last week .
I met a group called ' September 11 Families for Peaceful Tomorrows ' .
They are relatives of some of the victims of the 11 September atrocity and they asked me to convey to you and this House that they do not seek revenge .
They do not want a war against Iraq in their name .
They want a peaceful future for their children , the children of Iraq and the children of the world .
They are looking to Europe for support and in view of that I would ask you to contact President Bush and the leaders of all the Member States that are members of the Security Council , to convey the very clear decision made by this Parliament some weeks ago that there is no basis for a unilateral or pre-emptive war and that the inspectors should be given adequate time to complete the peaceful disarmament of Iraq .
I am happy to convey the views of the House to the American authorities , as I did to the Council some weeks ago .
Mr President , I would like , on behalf of my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , to strongly criticise the disgraceful treatment of the dock workers earlier today in front of this building .
We consider their protest to be legitimate and we support them .
It should be pointed out that the aim of the proposal for a directive they are criticising is none other than to reduce salaries and , therefore , to authorise the recruitment of staff from outside the docks to do the work instead of them .
This means the destruction of their status , their trade and their jobs , and we expect them to come to the European institutions bearing flowers !
I find this police control unacceptable !
We should listen to them , we should hear what they have to say and review the proposal for a directive accordingly .
Mr President , I too have a complaint about police repression outside the building , but it relates to Members of this House and not to dock workers .
I arrived from Basle in the bus , with a number of colleagues from various countries , to find the gates barred .
There was no immediate security problem , there were no demonstrators in sight , but the French police refused us admittance to the building .
When I sought to exert my right as a parliamentarian to enter the building , I was physically prevented from doing so and a rather unedifying shoving and shouting match took place .
It is my understanding that for police from a Member State to obstruct parliamentarians in the course of carrying out their duties is contrary to the Treaties .
It is certainly an affront to the dignity of this House .
I should be grateful , therefore , if you would contact the appropriate authorities and make sure , firstly , that nothing like this ever happens again and , secondly , that the French police concerned are given appropriate retraining in the rights and responsibilities of parliamentarians .
You will understand that I am not at all opposed to the liberalisation of port services , but I too would like to lodge my objection to the paranoid way in which the French army insists on protecting our parliament building against possible demonstrators at the moment .
This is , after all , not a barracks or a military academy , this is a house of representatives , and parliamentarians are being refused access to their own Parliament in a particularly arrogant , insolent way by real machos .
First they make you get out of the taxi or the car or the bus in the wrong place , and then when the taxi has gone , they tell you that you have to walk another 400 metres .
There was not a single demonstrator to be seen anywhere nearby , only soldiers protecting a building and not the Members of Parliament .
This is the umpteenth time the city of Strasbourg and the French Government have made it impossible to enjoy working here in Strasbourg .
Either our flights are being cancelled or our cars are being taken away , and now we are even being denied access to our own Parliament .
I think that you must do something about this .
Mr President , I would simply like to tell my fellow Members that I am somewhat surprised .
On the one hand , they complain that there is no security in Brussels and that they are sometimes exposed to abuse .
Here , where every measure is taken to guarantee your safety , you are not satisfied .
You could at least be consistent !
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , I should like to raise once more the case of the plane-spotters in Greece .
You will remember that they were arrested on 8 November 2001 .
At their trial on 26 April 2002 many of them were sentenced to terms of imprisonment , but at their appeal on 6 November 2002 those present were acquitted of all charges .
That , eventually , was the good news .
The bad news is that , over four months after their acquittal , their bail money has still not been returned .
At GBP 9 000 each , this is a considerable amount of money and I request that you draw this matter to the attention of the Greek presidency and ask it to take urgent action to redress this regrettable state of affairs , which is causing hardship to the plane-spotters and to their families .
We will follow that up for you .
As you know , that is a long-standing position of Parliament . I am happy to correspond on that matter since you have raised it again , in the light of your visit .
I take note of that . I will try to follow it up , as requested .
Mr President , I would like to take advantage of the presence of the Commissioner , Mrs Reding , to ask her a specific question .
I refer to what must certainly have been a rather embarrassing decision on the part of the Commission to abolish budget heading B3-1026 relating to the field of sport , which supported the programme entitled ' Sport : preparatory measures for a Community policy in the field of sport ' , on the basis of notice No 33 published in 2002 by the DG for Culture and Sport .
This programme covered two themes : sport as a tool for educating young people and combating the scourge of doping .
Without warning , the Commission said that there was no longer enough money because the funds had been absorbed by enlargement , an explanation which is decidedly inappropriate , particularly given that many projects had already been carried out and also in view of the fact that next year - as you are aware , Mr President - will be the Year of Educating Young People through Sport .
This was to be a programme to prepare for the Year of Sport and it has been abolished . I would like to know why .
Rather than replying now , perhaps the Commissioner could take note of that and communicate the Commission 's view to the Member later .
Mr President , I have taken the floor to ask for information on the participation of the European Parliament in the ministerial segment of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs , which is to take place in Vienna on 16 and 17 April 2003 , to take stock , after the first five disastrous years , of the progress made in the UN ten-year plan to combat drugs , which , in theory , should have wiped drugs off the face of the earth by 2008 but which is only bringing a resurgence of repression and suppression of individual rights and freedoms in the field .
I have just returned from a trip to South America , specifically Peru , where the battle to eliminate cultivation of the coca bush is destabilising the region and furthering the ends of terrorism .
There is therefore another war that needs to be stopped .
The April meeting is our chance to do so .
I hope that Parliament will take part according to the proper procedures and that the Members will also make representations to the governments of their countries and call upon them to present formal demands for the revision and evaluation of the international conventions and policies on drugs .
We have a delegation participating in that .
Perhaps Mr Cappato could be informed and then make direct contact with the colleagues who will represent us .
Mr President , I was deeply disappointed that the initiative to launch a parliamentary committee of inquiry into the allegations of misuse of EU funds by the Palestinian Authority was not even discussed at the meeting of the Conference of Presidents last Thursday .
Over one quarter of the Members of this House signed a petition to this effect and this controversial issue , which generated a lot of press attention and outside interest by our constituents , deserves better than to be swept under the carpet with no democratic debate being allowed .
Surely the intention of Rule 151 is not to give the political groups the right to decide that the matter should not even be discussed in plenary when across the House so many Members regard this as a very serious matter .
I would appreciate your ruling on the correct procedures under Rule 151 ( 3 ) , as in my view the very democratic credibility of this House is now at stake .
The issue was discussed at some length in the Conference of Presidents in Strasbourg , two meetings ago .
The issue has been handled correctly , in line with the Rules of Procedure .
If colleagues have problems with the Rules , that is a separate issue .
I will send you a note outlining the procedure that was followed and the interpretation of the relevant Rules .
I need to take some advice on this , but under Rule 8 ( 4 ) , incompatibilities , as you have remarked , should ordinarily be notified to the President of the House by the authorities of the Member State in question .
I can only confirm that so far , neither the services of the House nor I have received any such notification in respect of the individual named .
Mr President , on the point made by my friend Mr Tannock , concerning the failure to have a proper debate on the proposed resolution on the Palestinian Authority 's spending of EU funds , this is not a question of legality .
I am sure the Rules were complied with .
I have no quarrel with that .
What does concern me is the political aspect .
170 Members of this House simply asked for a debate and a small group of people decided , in a closed session , that there would be no debate .
If we are democrats and believe this Parliament has meaning , then we should allow debate to flourish .
That was a mistake and it is a bad signal to send , not just to Members but to the wider public , who now know that , despite the force for that resolution , a small group of people denied them the right to be heard .
That was an error of judgement , and not of legality .
I take note of your point .
I will send a response to you as well as to Mr Tannock .
The request by 170 Members was for the establishment of a committee of inquiry .
It was not a request to hold a debate .
The Rules , as they stand , vest the Conference of Presidents with the authority to decide whether or not a committee of inquiry is set up .
That procedure was followed in this case .
I will nevertheless correspond with you concerning the details and interpretations .
We can return to it if colleagues remain dissatisfied with the matter .
Mr President , Commissioners , I am particularly glad that you are here .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights , approved by this Parliament , prohibits any discrimination on the grounds of language or of belonging to a national minority and enshrines the principle of freedom of expression and information without the interference of public authorities .
Well , Mr President , Commissioner , the Basque people have suffered further abuse and discrimination from the Spanish institutions .
For preventive reasons - the same argument used by Mr Aznar to justify the war against Iraq - the newspaper Egunkaria has been closed down - and I have a copy in my hand - the only daily entirely published in Basque , the language not just of the Basques , but - according to the most prestigious experts - the primitive language of the Europeans .
And , in order to try to justify the unjustifiable , the Interior Minister of Mr Aznar 's government has issued a joint communication with the judge of the National High Court .
This unusual fact calls into question the existence in Spain of the democratic principle of separation of public powers .
This newspaper has been closed for preventive reasons , putting all of its workers out of work , without even complying with the provisions of Article 129 of the Spanish Penal Code , on which their decision is based , since they have not allowed the required prior hearing of the company 's legal representatives .
This means there has been no defence , and furthermore means that this judgment is illegal .
Not a single piece of incriminating evidence has been produced on the content of the newspaper , since it is a pluralist , objective and democratic publication .
They have closed it simply because it defends the right of Basques to their own identity and to use their own language .
Furthermore , the director of the newspaper was imprisoned and later freed .
But he has accused the Civil Guard of torture , which takes us even further back , if that is possible , to the times ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
I am sorry to interrupt .
We are running over the allotted time .
Your point was well made but I would ask you to respect our time constraints .
Mr President , the judge of the National High Court issued a cautionary order which explains that the companies Egunkaria Sortzen and Egunkaria , as well as the newspaper which the latter edits , fall within the framework of ETA and , following this cautionary closure , that same judge interviewed the directors of the company and committed five of the ten people arrested to unconditional prison , accused of belonging to a terrorist organisation .
Mr President , this should not come as a surprise to anybody because in 1992 the former Interior Minister for the Basque Government , and now President of the Basque Parliament , said that Egunkaria was part of ETA and in 1993 the spokesman of the Basque Nationalist Party stated publicly that ETA participated in the appointment of the management of the newspaper .
We are not talking about an issue of language , but of the manipulation some people wish to carry out in order to achieve radical votes on 25 May and that , Mr President , is simply repugnant .
I apologise to colleagues who wished to speak but we have overrun our time .
( Protests from Mrs Laguiller , who maintained that the President had ignored the left of the House )
We have rules and I am doing my best to observe them .
The next item is the Commission statement on the General Agreement on Trade in Services ( GATS ) within the WTO , including cultural diversity .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing the European Commission 's offers on GATS , and these are very important offers , because we must remember that the service sector in the European Union is a key sector for our economy .
The Commissioner rightly points out that this is the most dynamic sector .
The European Union is also one of the biggest exporters of services in the world , so it is also an important matter of self-interest .
We must provide access to the services markets . Not only in our own interest but also in the interest of developing countries .
After all , the development agenda is what the Doha WTO round is about .
I think that we must see the practical results in the light of the economies of the developing countries , so I am very pleased that 50 % of the requests have come from developing countries .
Our experience in the EU also tells us that the liberalisation of services , both in the energy and telecom sector and in the financial services sector , should normally deliver a better quality and more efficient services market with a broader range of products and better prices , as long as it goes hand in hand with properly established rules and guarantees for citizens .
I therefore think that the Commission is setting a great deal of store by the concept of general services , and I would like to call on it to take a closer look at the so-called universal service obligations that can also be delivered by private service providers instead of solely by the public sector .
My group can support the Commission 's offer to exclude the health sector , the social sector and the education sector from an offer , but I would also like clarification on the situation with regard to universities .
The Commissioner has mentioned the Erasmus project , but does this mean that only individual Member States can make an offer on this point and that nothing is happening at all with regard to universities throughout the whole of the EU ?
Commissioner Reding provided a very convincing argument for not making a new proposal for the audio-visual sector .
I do not have to go into that in any more detail .
I would , however , like to say something about computer-related services .
On the one hand , we must naturally ensure that we do not cause a massive brain drain towards the West from countries like India .
We must also provide our own training .
On the other hand , we must also avoid a situation in which people work under other conditions in the European Union , because this could result in social dumping .
I therefore think that it is important to create a good balance , and since September 11 we have naturally also had to look at security aspects .
It is of course a good thing that we are doing more to include the environment in this .
Sustainability is not just a matter for the West , it is a matter for the whole world .
I therefore think that it should also benefit developing countries .
Excluding water treatment and distribution for the time being seems to me to be a wise policy .
GATS directly affects the interests of many EU citizens , and I appreciate Commissioner Lamy 's efforts to broaden communication and provide more information .
This is still a matter involving ambassadors , closed doors and a lack of transparency , and I am of the opinion that there should be much stronger parliamentary representation in this regard .
Bearing Cancun in mind , I therefore also hope that the Commissioner will put forward new proposals to make this process even more transparent .
We cannot turn our backs on current events , however , and Iraq is of course putting us into a situation in which the world community is split right down the middle .
How can we now prevent the Iraq question from resulting in serious trade conflicts between the European Union and the United States which may obstruct the results of Cancun ?
I would like to ask the Commissioner what initiatives she has taken in this area and what results they have produced .
In this context , there are of course two essential problems with the United States that have not yet been resolved .
On the one hand , the so-called FSC arrangement , the favourable tax legislation for American exporters which must now be reviewed thanks to the WTO statement , and on the other hand , the alarming reports that American draft legislation is being prepared that will limit the tax benefits of subsidiaries of non-US companies .
I should like to ask the Commissioner what the situation is in this regard .
Can we expect something like this from the Americans ?
Then there is the pressure we are under to agree to the American proposals regarding genetically modified food .
I think that it is very important to set this issue right and to hear what is happening about it .
In an interview with The Wall Street Journal , Commissioner Lamy speaks about the fact that 2003 will be the year in which the WTO must deliver .
What does he mean by this , and what can we expect in this regard ?
Commissioner , since your appointment you have adopted a very good habit of consulting and informing the European Parliament , for which we are grateful .
We are also grateful for your support for the changes to the Treaty necessary to give us the powers we need in the trade area .
Just as you are responsive to us , we have to be responsive to those who elect us .
You know as well as we do that there are genuine and widespread worries about GATS .
You have mentioned some of them : transparency , the feeling that a lot of unsavoury things are being done secretly ; threats to EU jobs , which have prompted , I suppose , the dock workers ' demonstration we saw today ; threats to public services , with particularly acute dangers to developing countries ; threats to the ability of Member States to regulate , and particular fears in the culture area , on which others will speak .
At the same time , the European public is well aware - since 60 % of them or more work in service industries - that there are possibilities for EU firms in widespread trade in services .
So they face the dual interest which you have delineated .
Developing countries have not rejected GATS completely .
However , the fears about public services , regulation and extension and the fact that the developing countries do not have the capacity for the administration that an opening-up of service markets will require all mean that the implications of opening up trade in services need to be very fully assessed .
I would put more emphasis on that than on anything else in our resolution .
Before we go any further we want to know - not in a perfunctory exercise but in a detailed and comprehensive assessment - what this means .
Mr President , the curious thing about the EU position on GATS is that it has become a very defensive position .
It is not defensive to anyone outside Europe , but within an internal debate in which the Commission , and perhaps the EU generally , the position is defensive vis-à-vis campaign groups within the European Union which have decided , for some good reasons but also a lot of bad reasons , to criticise both the GATS agreement and the EU stance .
My group would like to focus on that point .
If , in the future , we want to prevent European Union trade policy being shaped - and sometimes arbitrarily shaped - by both the press and specific campaign groups , we must reassert parliamentary prerogatives in this field to open up the debate to proper , accountable public scrutiny .
That is why we urge colleagues in other groups not only to support greater transparency in the way in which these negotiations are conducted , but also , as Mrs McNally has already said , to give strong support to filling the current vacuum in the Convention and making sure that the European Parliament more generally gains the right of assent over all future GATS and WTO agreements .
Mr President , I will try not to read any sinister political motivation into that .
Commissioner Lamy , you say that plenary debates like this are to fully inform Parliament about the progress of GATS negotiations but , in the absence of the document that would tell us precisely what is being demanded of whom , this exchange is almost entirely academic .
If , in order to find that information , the majority of parliamentarians have to resort to leaks on NGO websites , then really we are a very long way from exercising parliamentary scrutiny .
So , while I am grateful to you for speaking to us tonight , I would like to make clear that this does not constitute any kind of political scrutiny .
You have made it clear that you believe that you have gone as far as you can , as Commissioner , to make GATS texts available to us .
You tell us that you are trying to be open but that you have limited room for manoeuvre .
Well , as parliamentarians we are doing what we can to increase that room , but can I ask you specifically what you are doing to increase that room for manoeuvre ?
In your letter last October to the Chair of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , you accused Parliamentarians of making false claims about what you called the alleged intransparency of the EU decision-making process .
You went on to say , and I quote , ' the current rules of access allow the European Parliament to fully exercise its task of political control ' .
Can I ask you whether you still genuinely believe that the current rules are sufficient ?
Secondly , the mandate .
Since the level of public awareness about the implications and complexities of the GATS process has grown enormously over the past few years , can you tell us why you believe it is still appropriate to negotiate within the WTO on the basis of a Council mandate granted back in 1999 ?
Would it not be more appropriate to adopt a new mandate and in it make explicit the rights of public authorities and institutions at all levels to regulate public services in order to maintain social and environmental standards free from challenge under GATS ?
Finally , development .
DG Trade 's press release announcing the EU-GATS offers says they are all about helping developing countries .
Let us look at the figures .
The EU made 109 requests and received just 27 requests back .
Only half of those were from developing countries and just one was from a least developed country .
Let us not fool ourselves with the rhetoric that this is favouring the poorest .
The figures show that it clearly is not .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have heard it said that international trade does not create wealth .
Two great Europeans , Adam Smith and David Ricardo , have explained to us that the wealth of nations benefits greatly precisely from international trade , and that is how Europe 's wealth has increased .
As Commissioner Lamy has had occasion to point out on a number of occasions , further liberalisation of international trade in services is vital for the European economy , which , it is essential to note , both depends on services and can export them .
That is why I feel that we should condemn the fact that the European Union , as Mr Clegg said just now , is in a defensive position with its back against the wall , not just as regards agriculture but where international negotiations on services are concerned too .
In saying that the European Union 's objective is to defend and promote the European social model more effectively , the Commission is almost apologising for giving consumers more choice .
You , Commissioner , said that your aim is to establish negotiations in which the collective preferences and values of our society are respected .
I believe that the best way to respect the preferences of the European citizens is to open up international trade in the audiovisual sector too .
The European citizens must be the ones to decide whether cinema or other audiovisual products are better in Europe , whether they want those produced in Europe or those produced elsewhere , not to mention the fact that the large-scale distribution of music and films over the Internet is in danger of raising a question which is already longstanding , the question of protection of alleged cultural diversity in the field of audiovisual services .
We must let the citizens choose , as in the case of education .
I will end , Mr President , by saying that , as regards public utilities , as regards water and other services , too little is being done .
Europe has shown that liberalisation is not incompatible with regulating and guaranteeing the quality of the services provided to the citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner Reding , Commissioner Lamy , on behalf of my group and , I am sure , of the whole of this House 's Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , I welcome the Commission 's decision not to make any offer to deregulate educational , cultural and audiovisual services in this GATS round .
Although we emphatically want borders to be opened up to international trade , there is a fundamental distinction to be drawn between cultural services and others , such as those in telecommunications , transport , or , indeed , finance .
This makes it necessary to anchor this special role played by cultural and audiovisual services in the social and political cohesion of peoples in the relevant laws on contract .
Culture must not be made subject to the rules of the market or to commercial law ; instead , we need regulation that takes into consideration what is appropriate to each area , and so we have to find a global solution to enable Article 151 ( 4 ) of our European Treaties to be the means whereby Europe 's , and the world 's , cultural diversity is secured and supported in the long term and in a sustainable way .
It is for this reason that we need a two-phase process in the future .
The Commission is to be thanked for setting out the first phase in today 's proposal that GATS should not cover the provision of cultural and audiovisual services .
The second stage goes beyond that , and I want to say how grateful I am to Commissioner Reding , who , with this in mind , is representing the Commission 's and Parliament 's views - and , I hope , the Council 's - in the international discussions and working parties on the subject .
There is a need for us to devise our own international convention , an international instrument of our own , if the future of cultural diversity is to be secured .
Excellent work has already been done in this area by the Council of Europe , Unesco and , especially , the Francophone Conference .
I am quite sure that , by strengthening cultural diversity across the world in this way , we could effectively allay people 's fears of globalisation , whilst at the same time enhancing and advancing worldwide intercultural dialogue - the need for which we are , in these times , more aware than ever .
The European Union must indeed take the lead in the WTO negotiations about the liberalisation of trade in services and the achievement of a general GATS agreement .
These negotiations are certainly more than crucial for Europe .
First of all , the fact is that services are forming an ever more significant part of world trade , 24 % of which , as we know , is accounted for by the European Union .
Furthermore , the European Union is currently the biggest importer and the biggest exporter of services in the world .
Another reason to take these GATS negotiations in hand is naturally - or unfortunately , I should say - the continuing slowdown of economic growth .
We must therefore concentrate more than ever before on the trade in services , and this once again applies in particular to the European Union where services represent more than two-thirds of the total gross domestic product .
We must not , however , negotiate solely on the basis of our own interests but also on the basis of the interests of other countries and other parts of the world .
Liberalisation means we must also open our borders more to services from third countries and thus contribute to their further development .
Mr President , we feel that this debate on the opening of WTO negotiations to liberalise trade in services is extremely patchy .
Not all the cards are on the table and the initial contacts have , for the most part , not been transparent .
The Commission prides itself on a negotiating mandate dating from 1999 , before Seattle , which is now completely obsolete .
The national parliaments have not debated the matter transparently and the European Parliament is being called upon to endorse everything on the basis of a brief statement from the Commission .
We are not against all liberalisation in principle , but it must at all times be controlled by the peoples concerned .
The people must never be in a position where their hands are tied .
If we follow the Commission in this matter , we will find ourselves caught up in ill-defined negotiations which could have a serious effect on the people 's control over their public services and all the rules safeguarding their societies .
Of course , the Commission assures us that no liberalisation offer will be made by the Union in the fields of health or education or the audiovisual sector and that it will negotiate to preserve cultural diversity , but these declarations are not enough for us .
Why these fields and not others ?
We have too much experience not to be familiar with the wheels within wheels and traps hidden in this kind of agreement , which only come to light after the event , when we have already signed on the dotted line .
Commissioner , on Thursday , in this hemicycle , we are going to debate the closure of major firms due to relocation and the resulting human tragedies .
If we want to avoid further human tragedies in the future , we must address problems earlier on in the process .
We must start by refraining now from signing agreements such as the GATS agreement which would tie our hands in the future .
That is why we call for these negotiations to be postponed until a genuinely public , democratic debate has taken place , until we have clearly assessed all the implications of GATS .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the service sector is far and away the most important sector in the European economy .
The European Union is the biggest exporter of commercial services in the world , accounting for 26 % of worldwide trade in services , as opposed to 22 % in the United States and 7 % in Japan .
The trade in services in the European Union therefore accounts for more than two-thirds of our gross foreign product and jobs .
So trade in services far exceeds trade in goods .
Further liberalisation also benefits developing countries , because trade in services promotes the infrastructure , such as telecommunications , and also the financial infrastructure for the trade in goods .
Thus GATS also contributes to the Doha round .
In my view we must therefore stand four-square behind liberalisation and in particular avoid focusing too much on the exceptions that some of the Member States want to implement .
The most important sectors are the transport , tourism , financial and telecommunications service sectors .
Audio-visual services form a relatively small part of the offer .
It is therefore ridiculous that Member States who do not want this are denying this Parliament any say because they are afraid of changes to the audio-visual sector .
I therefore support my colleague Mr Nicholas Clegg 's plea for change during the Convention .
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , concern is growing in every quarter at the wave of opening up and privatisation of services that the negotiations under the General Agreement on Trade and Services might unleash , however much the Commissioner insists that this will not happen .
The right of EU and third-country citizens , including those of developing countries , of access to essential goods and services including water , education , health , culture , energy , transport and telecommunications , is in danger of being undermined .
We are all familiar with disastrous examples of the privatisation of services in many countries , including transport in the United Kingdom , electricity in the United States and in Portugal , and water distribution and healthcare services in many developing countries .
We are therefore concerned to learn of the Commission 's proposals , which overlook the importance of public services in areas such as energy , transport , postal services and telecommunications , in terms of social cohesion , the public 's well-being and social inclusion . The proposals also fail to take due account of the way in which social movements have been mobilised on a major scale to protect high-quality public services .
A moratorium must therefore be declared on the liberalisation of services and the Commission must draw up a detailed report on the foreseeable economic , social and environmental consequences of the policies of liberalisation emanating from the World Trade Organization , both in the European Union and in the developing countries .
The essential role of public services in every country 's development and social cohesion must also be respected , with no proposals put forward that provide for further liberalisations in third countries or for European Union bids in the field of public services . The Commission must also call for cultural diversity not only to be preserved , but also promoted , as has already been stressed here on more than one occasion .
Furthermore , deepening democracy , exerting greater control over the multinationals and protecting the development of the least developed countries and regions and the citizens ' interests requires a democratic debate , requires national parliaments and the European Parliament to be consulted and the rule of unanimity to be upheld in negotiations in all of these areas .
The role of the World Trade Organization must also be reduced and the United Nations General Assembly must be given a more active role in this field .
Madam President , Mr van Velzen 's statement deals judiciously with issues related to culture and cultural services , especially where they concern the flexibility of the positions to be taken by each Member State .
It is precisely because this set of problems leads to another - the problem of what is known as ' cultural exception ' , that it must be made clear that the Commission cannot allow itself to blunder into the issue of cultural exception . This is an extremely controversial issue , primarily due to its own assumptions .
In an open world in which we are increasingly committed to the free interaction of cultures , cultural diversity must clearly be protected , preserved and valued , but not at the expense of hindering the free movement of values of exactly the same nature .
It is increasingly senseless , treating some cultural products as if they were industrial products , to establish forms of protection that limit their access to certain locations , such as cinemas .
With television , video , DVD and other new technologies of the digital , online and Internet age , any spectator , any consumer who wishes to do so , can choose to view whatever they wish without any real barriers being able to hinder this consumption .
I do not believe - or rather I must at least express my scepticism - that 50 Ministers for Culture can resolve this matter beyond the only point that will then be accepted , which is that every Member State can do whatever it feels is most appropriate to protect its interests and its own specific cultural diversity .
Having made these observations , Madam President , I shall simply add that items 7 , 8 and 9 of the report to which I have referred address the problem in a very sensible way in terms of prudence and balance and they deserve our support .
Commissioner Reding , Commissioner Lamy , I am of the opinion that the publication of both the European institutions ' offer and their questions on market liberalisation via GATSwatch have made it clear that we in the European Parliament have good reason to be worried .
I would like to make two comments in this regard : firstly , Commissioner Lamy , you say that health , education , media and culture are not being liberalised .
That is correct , but there are other sectors that fall under services of general interest .
You do not rule out the liberalisation of energy and water , and the postal , port and pilotage sectors are already ready for liberalisation .
My group therefore wants clear guarantees that Member States can now regulate their services of general interest in their own way and that these services will not be subject to the GATS .
Naturally we do not need a WHO list for this ; subsidiarity will apply as usual .
Secondly , Commissioner Lamy , I find it shocking that there is such an imbalance between the questions from the northern and southern Member States regarding market liberalisation .
In exchange for a limited number of questions , particularly concerning the mobility of labour from southern Member States , Europe wants to liberalise a number of sectors including some that we do not want to liberalise .
Commissioner Lamy , I am of the opinion that liberalising water is not the right way to achieve the millennium targets and to halve the number of people who have no access to water .
To do this we need relief funds and development cooperation .
Anyway , I am convinced that this has nothing to do with genuine concern for the southern Member States but everything to do with the interests of the water industry .
My group therefore requests that we do not adopt the liberalisation of sectors that we do not want to liberalise .
Madam President , we should take the position that we do not expect of developing countries what we are not prepared to do ourselves .
We should ensure that where we are protecting services or markets we do not oblige other countries which are less able to do battle in the open market to start up services that will simply sink or become private monopolies owned outside their own state .
It seems to me as well that there is an urgent need for this Parliament to be treated as a parliament and for the secrecy in relation to these negotiations to end .
If we are trying to create a multinational organisation at European level , which will have public support and legitimacy , then we cannot continue to proceed in ways which exclude the democratically elected representatives from important areas of policy .
Finally , the bottom line in terms of protectionism is that we have to protect the rights of citizens , whether they are inside or outside the European Union .
I would thank the Commission for these contributions .
In connection with this debate , I have accepted six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure

Madam President , firstly , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Parliament for the work it has done to date with regard to this extremely important directive and I would like in particular to thank the rapporteur , Mr Jarzembowski , for the work he has done in relation to this issue , which is extremely important in terms of providing the European Union with a competitive transport system .
We often complain that Europe could use sea transport as an alternative to road transport and land transport in general .
However , we are now sometimes being faced with a situation in which those same people who say that we must promote maritime transport create more difficulties when it comes to creating a sea transport system which is more competitive and more suited to the new circumstances .
We clearly need to improve the efficiency of port services , and that is what this initiative intends to do .
We need to improve the efficiency of these services , put an end to situations of monopoly , which sometimes mean that the same services cost three or four times more in one European Union port than in another , indicating that something is not working , and - I insist - we must guarantee , by excluding or imposing restrictions and guarantees , so that marine safety aspects are maintained at the highest possible levels .
We in the Commission believe that the Council 's Common Position to a large extent takes account of the amendments approved by this Parliament at first reading which represent a balanced solution for achieving these objectives and I believe it would be a real mistake not to maintain this balance and to change the broad balance established within the Council .
In this regard , ladies and gentlemen , I will explain to you the Commission 's position on the proposed amendments .
Some of them clearly improve the Council 's Common Position and the Commission therefore accepts them in their entirety , in principle or in part .
In other words , the Commission is once again making an effort to ensure that the codecision system works as well as possible .
In this field , I would firstly like to refer to the amendments which highlight the provisions of the Commission 's directive on transparency with regard to the ports to which the directive we are dealing with apply .
This achieves the objective we have all shared from the outset and in this regard I regret the fact that the rapporteur , Mr Jarzembowski , believes that what is proposed here is insufficient .
In any event , I will refer later , in particular , to some of the amendments which deal with these aspects .
Secondly , we can accept Amendment No 11 - which relates to a lesser frequency for the review of the list of ports of a high seasonal character - and Amendments Nos 5 and 27 - which provide examples of expensive moveable assets which could be considered equivalent to immovable assets when considering repayments or residual costs .
Furthermore , we can support all those amendments which , without going into detail , we believe make appropriate contributions to the common position or those which provide additional clarification , in one way or another , of the final text .
I would once again like to congratulate both Mr Jarzembowski and the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism in general for the work they have done .
Certain amendments , however , appear to attempt to slow down , and even to paralyse , the efforts made to promote this stimulation of European ports , aimed at improving , as I said earlier , the potential of long-distance maritime transport , aiding our exports to other parts of the world , but also short-distance maritime transport , providing an alternative to land transport .
We therefore clearly cannot support Amendments Nos 36 and 66 which call for the Council 's Common Position to be rejected .
Having said this , I would like to make a few brief comments on other issues which Mr Jarzembowski has mentioned .
Firstly , the question of competition between ports .
I know this is an issue of great concern to the rapporteur and other Members and furthermore I believe that progress must be made on it .
That is why I intend to accept those amendments which propose the inclusion of ports in the Commission 's Directive on transparency .
The Commission understands the current concern here .
In fact , our recent document on this issue demonstrates our will to resolve the problem while respecting , however , the provisions of the Treaty , Mr Jarzembowski .
That is to say , State subsidies have a framework , which is the one we have proposed , but they cannot just simply be regulated , since the Treaty itself lays down the regulatory framework .
We must clarify this in order , as I said , to prevent legal doubts or uncertainties .
And therefore , Mr Jarzembowski , I must say that Amendment No 15 goes further than such provisions and we cannot accept it .
We are , however , prepared to try to seek , together with this Parliament , an approach which is acceptable to everybody .
In this regard , Amendment No 10 , duly modified , with certain important alterations in accordance with the solution we may find , could help us to find that compromise formula .
I would ask you that we may work as hard as possible to find it as soon as possible .
With regard to Amendment No 16 , I must remind you that the Commission , within the context of the so-called ' range of port measures ' , has already carried out a study such as the one requested and unfortunately there was little cooperation on the part of the ports .
Secondly : Mr Jarzembowski has talked about the practice of self-handling .
This practice should be allowed in all modern ports where possible , with regard to both operations on board and those on land .
The Common Position reflects this desire to send a message of progress and looking forward rather than rigidity .
A message of progress but with every guarantee .
In this regard , it is made clear that this type of action must comply with the social , environmental and safety standards required in each port and that this demand is essential in order to be able to carry out this self-handling .
Those amendments which seriously restrict this approach - since , in various ways , they hinder self-handling operations - restricting them exclusively to seafaring people , cannot be accepted .
Amongst other things - we are talking about ships from third countries and from European Union countries - because these crews are not subject to the same requirements as the professionals who work in our ports and what we are proposing in the Council 's Common Position is that , in order to carry out these actions , they must be carried out within the framework of social and safety standards in accordance with the rules of each port .
Because the additional limitation relating to ships flying the Union flag will bring the Union into confrontation with its partners in the world and that must also be avoided .
Finally - briefly - we have always believed that pilotage is a commercial service .
Therefore , access to such a service should be regulated by the Treaty and by this directive .
For this reason , we support the consensus reached on the common position that authorisations should be conditional upon compliance with certain particularly strict criteria with regard to public service and maritime safety obligations - and again we return to the reality of each port .
But this approach can be adapted by means of specific solutions for each port , which allow self-handling , within the field of pilotage , in the form of exemption certificates , under certain conditions .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow 's vote will have great repercussions on the legislative process .
The Commission has always shown itself prepared to seek constructive solutions with the European Parliament .
I would like to remind you once again that our general objective is to guarantee that the port services industry , which is expanding greatly , is ready to confront the challenges facing us .
Furthermore , the future European transport system will only succeed with efficient and forward-looking ports .
I would therefore like once again to ask you to support this Commission proposal and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Jarzembowski , and the whole team which has worked on this text , and all the Members of Parliament for your attention .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have reached our second reading , a milestone on the long , hard road towards liberalising port services , and I think that we should all start by thanking and congratulating our rapporteur , Mr Jarzembowski , on a job well done .
Having said which , I realise that as soon as I sit down , a number of my honourable friends will no doubt stand up to oppose liberalisation or at least make comments intended to severely restrict the liberalisation of port services .
What I have to say to all these honourable Members , whose opinion I do of course respect , is that I fail to understand how we can be in favour of liberalising the railways , in favour of liberalising air transport , in favour of liberalising telecommunications , and against liberalising port services .
We cannot have one sauce for the goose and one for the gander .
I , for one , find it incomprehensible .
Secondly , I should like to say to everyone - and to the port workers protesting today - that , in my personal opinion , they stand to benefit from the liberalisation of port services in the medium to long term , because it will create new jobs .
We have nothing against these people .
On the contrary , we recognise that their work helps foster economic growth ; but they should not hamper further liberalisation and , by extension , further growth in the European economy .
The European Parliament , at least the majority in committee , has so far stood by a number of firm principles , one of these firm principles being our espousal of the liberalisation of services , not as an end in itself , but as a means to economic growth .
And because we stand by this principle , Commissioner , we adopted an amendment , which the rapporteur referred to and which is designed to prevent discriminatory treatment by port authorities , so that the ports of the European Union can compete with each other .
In doing so , we did of course listen very carefully to what the industry and interested parties had to say . That is why we stand by our position on pilotage , where idiosyncrasies , different approaches and safety factors have to be taken into account .
It is why we take a different view from the Council , a more amicable view if you like , of workers ' demands and the question of self-handlers .
Our focus is on proper staff training , which is why I think that port workers ' current demands on the question of self-handling are somewhat exaggerated .
This being our position , and in the light of the position taken by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism when it voted for the report , I think this is the right approach if we and the Council are to push through legislation which is acceptable to all sides as quickly as possible .
Thank you , Mr President .
Commissioner , access to port services must be as open as possible , and a port must be able to operate as well as possible .
This directive is one contribution , but we also need guidelines for government aid and a directive on transparent financial relationships between the port sector and the government .
We are also rightly making rules that create a framework for the free circulation of services and we are rightly including specific aspects of ports .
The trade unions are also right to point out to us the risks of ports of convenience , ports where all the social rules go overboard , just as there are flags of convenience , cheap flags , for ships .
That is why we must impose requirements - social requirements too - on anyone wanting to offer services in a port .
That is also why we propose introducing compulsory licensing for the provision of services in ports .
That will enable aspects such as safety and the environment to be taken into account , as well as social rules and employment .
The Prestige accident , an accident that once more focused our attention on the training and quality of ships ' crews , which we are also talking about here , had fortunately not yet happened at the time of the first reading .
Since then we have also had a proposal from the International Maritime Organisation about safety on ships and in ports - in fact you are currently working on legislation on that .
We must therefore know who is working in our ports and under what conditions .
With a good licensing policy the competent authorities should be able to ensure that a port is not a place where you take risks with safety or with the environment , that a port is certainly not a place where you allow social dumping , but that a port is in fact a vital link in an efficient and sustainable European transport policy .
That is something we urgently need .
Mr President , Commissioner , when , a while ago in this House we considered the Green Paper on ports and maritime infra-structures , Parliament clearly identified the area in which we feel the Commission should be working .
Firstly , the list covering the funding and the system of tariffs for ports , clear rules on state aid to ports and , finally , the adoption of measures guaranteeing access to the port services market through legislative instruments established at the Commission 's initiative and within its powers .
The Commission , however , decided , contrary to what was requested of it , to propose a directive on port services and to omit what Parliament had charged it to provide , which were clear rules on state aid .
This is perhaps one of the reasons why the directive , despite the changes it has already undergone , has been contested so intensely at various levels , including here in Parliament , where a considerable number of amendments have been tabled at second reading .
In fact , the directive has not produced any measures that will benefit the operability and effectiveness of national ports where Portugal is concerned , and instead generates unnecessary bureaucracy and constitutes a potentially destabilising threat to the social harmony that has marked relations between the social partners in all Portuguese ports .
We must not forget the fact that , especially in Portugal , some companies have recently taken on obligations arising from legislative requirements , such as having to absorb all workers employed in any capacity in ports and whose interests must now be safeguarded .
We cannot , therefore , accept the fact that this directive will allow any port user , who may or may not be accredited , to engage in cargo-handling activity , in contravention of national legislation on labour or on the operation of ports , which is binding on all port operators , under conditions other than those laid down , specifically for the use of operators ' own equipment and workers , and possibly on docks for which a public service concession has been granted .
As I stated , the obligation on current port operators to absorb the labour force contracted to ports on salaries around three times higher than the average in sectors with identical operational requirements means that the directive will not be able to allow a port user to engage in cargo-handling activity without having to be accredited , thereby using workers in more favourable conditions than those binding current port operators under the law and under collective bargaining agreements .
In this regard , we clearly maintain that self-handling must be confined to the work of a ship 's own crew , as the term ' self-handling ' itself suggests , and used as a complement to and in conjunction with the port operator .
Self-handling is the most controversial aspect of the directive and the aspect that will have the most implications for economic agents , especially in my country , especially for Portuguese economic agents , in the event that the wording that has just been approved does not safeguard the principles identified previously .
Mr President , it goes without saying that I am emphatically opposed to the directive in front of us , and particularly the file on self-handling .
I wish to emphatically express my complete solidarity with the workers who have come to Strasbourg to demonstrate today .
After all , from practical experience in my own country , Flanders , we know that the pool system with recognised dock workers ensures that we have qualified and motivated people working in our ports who can be regarded as some of the most highly skilled workers in the world .
It is their dedication and their professional knowledge that make our ports fast , competitive and in particular safe handling organisations .
I would like to know why something that is in fact perfect has to be changed or dismantled .
Dismantling this pool system and the dock workers ' monopoly will not only result in the umpteenth social graveyard , but it will also undermine the safety of our ports , unsettle the social peace that we have , cripple the strength of our ports and even reinforce anti-European sentiment .
After all , the man in the street should realise that strong European files or files with a strong European dimension that have to be deblocked in order to secure our prosperity will in fact get us nowhere .
Take the IJzeren Rijn rail link , for example ; there has been no progress there , but Europe appears to regard measures that we know will only result in social breakdown and more unemployment as a priority .
Europe is giving the impression that it gives greater priority to the interests of certain shipping lines - shipping lines that in many cases are practising a form of modern-day slavery - than to the survival of their own best port workers .
Only a clear ' no ' or ' never ' will do in the face of so much blind European arrogance .
Today we must make it all the more clear to the Flemish port workers : working for your own people first is a guarantee of safety and quality .
Mr President , it is not for a procedural motion , it is for a personal fact .
What we have just experienced from Mr Vanhecke is a personal affront , not only a personal affront to me but an affront to all Flemish Members of Parliament who have worked for months in tandem with the port managers and trade unions to make this directive into something good .
Then Mr Vanhecke comes along here and bangs his drum .
He has not taken a single initiative himself ; in the first reading he even abstained on the matter of self-handling , and he now comes along and tries to score points .
This is unacceptable ; it is unacceptable to all the members who have worked so hard : Mrs Smet , Mr Sterckx , Mrs Maes , Mrs Van Brempt , Mr Dhaene and myself .
I oppose it .
Mr President , free access to port services is very important for guaranteeing honest competition in ports .
Competition between ports is also important , so the Commission must ensure greater transparency in government investments that benefit the ports .
The present directive got off to a messy start , but we now finally have a good document on the table .
I would like to say something about two matters .
Firstly , self-handling .
Today and last week , there were dock workers demonstrating outside the Parliament buildings .
They have every right to do so , but if ever there was a directive that took account of all the rights and interests of the dock workers , then it is this directive .
Their position and social standing is extremely well protected by various articles in the directive , right up to their training and professional qualifications .
Even if the port employers wanted to , it will not be possible to work with poorly trained , unqualified workers who could be a threat to the safety of the ports .
What we do want to set straight , however - and everyone is always talking about workers ' rights , Mr Bouwman - is that employers have rights too , even if nobody ever stands up for them .
The employer 's right to know whom he will be working with is , I think , the employer 's right .
I therefore do not support Amendment No 13 in which self-handling is again toned down - in a definition , would you believe .
In order to guarantee that every Member State has regulations in which everything is guaranteed , I have tabled Amendment No 28 , as we had promised in consultation with the FNV .
The second point of interest is pilotage services .
I wholeheartedly endorse the Council 's viewpoint on this matter .
In the formulation of the Council , Member States may liberalise their pilotage services if they want to , but they must do so under the directive . In other words , with all the protection and professional qualifications that this entails .
I am not in favour of removing pilots from the directive .
Anyway , what else is this directive about ?
The common position forms a balanced text which we should not tinker with too much .
Important points such as the provisions on transparency , the duration of licences , new ports and arrangements concerning the compensation that service providers have to pay when buying themselves out of a contract period , are in my opinion plain and clear .
The compensation arrangement can , in my opinion , best be arranged between the market parties concerned without outside interference .
The text of the common position does far more justice to the great diversity of situations and regulations on this point than the amendments tabled .
Mr President , with all the commotion outside , the port directive is perhaps more controversial in the second reading than it was during the first debate .
We have not finished yet if we are really voting out pilotage services tomorrow .
Mediation with the Council is therefore on the horizon .
As a Liberal I am far from happy with the scope .
I had wanted more leeway , especially on the point of self-handling .
I have a couple of amendments that make it possible for self-handlers to unload cargo both on the ship and on the quay .
I think that the unions ' fear about social dumping is nonsense .
Sufficient guarantees can be built in .
In particular , I find it regrettable that the people at the top are communicating so badly with the rank and file .
There is no threat , there are just opportunities .
Opportunities to show that they have the most experience , that they can work smoothly and efficiently and that they can therefore offer a keen price .
Ultimately , what we are talking about is better quality and more services , but a monopoly must not be allowed to develop .
Closing ranks and holding back modernisation will ultimately be at the expense of the working conditions of the dock workers themselves .
Mr President , today it has once again become clear how far decision-making in the European Union is from the reality of the people it concerns .
In this case , the people are the workers in the ports .
Once upon a time there were a lot of them ; their work was dirty and dangerous and poorly paid then .
By organising themselves they have been able to improve these things and protect themselves against poorly paid , unskilled labour being hired in from outside by illegal contractors .
Years ago the European Parliament called for rules governing competition between ports , particularly between ports serving the same hinterland , such as the North Sea .
A lot of government money has been squandered on excessively low tariffs and excessively generous facilities to please the shipping companies .
The European Commission has now picked up on this , but not with a view to restricting competition between ports but rather to promote it within the ports .
This competition is trampling all over the dock workers . That means a return to the old situation .
The main aim is to cut labour costs even further .
A lot of the work has already been mechanised , and the cost of port labour forms only a negligible part of the cost of goods these days , but they even want to cut back on this .
It is true that the amendment limits opportunities for extremely low paid crew from developing countries to take over loading and unloading on quays from registered local dock workers , but this is difficult to monitor .
We can expect a large number of disputes about rules being flouted and competition being distorted in years to come .
That was not sufficiently clear to the trade unions at the first reading in November 2001 .
They have since agreed on their complete rejection on a European level , but many of the elements relevant to them have now been declared out of order for the second reading , and demonstrators have been kept far away from this building .
Strikes against this unreasonableness are the only weapon the people have left .
In order to avoid this , the entire proposal must be dropped , as was advocated by more than 40 % of the Members at the vote in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the International Labour Organisation has found it necessary to behave in a regulatory way in respect of port labour , precisely because port labour has so much to do with safety and because this is an area where social dumping has occurred .
Many countries have signed these conventions , and you will naturally say : ' We are not opposed to it either , and we also allow these countries to organise themselves further . '
My country also wants to be able to retain its ' Major Law ' , but that is naturally not what it is about .
What the dock workers are afraid of , and this is an area in which I share their anxiety , is the fact that safety in the ports will go out of the window in favour of cheap prices .
The Prestige accident has already been mentioned by many people .
Are we going to see serious accidents like this in the future when goods are loaded and unloaded ?
The other great risk is that of social dumping on account of self-handling .
Commissioner , is that really what you are aiming for , competition through social dumping ?
I do not think that we should go down that route .
We must ensure that compulsory licensing is introduced .
I therefore really do not agree with what you are advocating , as I am sure that anyone subject to strict licensing laws will also experience distortion of competition .
They will be priced out of the market , and cowboy ports will develop , just as we already see ships sailing under a flag of convenience that are the terror of the seas .
Mr President , today dockworkers have demonstrated against this measure outside this Parliament .
I had to fight my way through teargas to gain access to the building .
As a new Member I thought this was possibly normal practice .
There has already been a protest in Brussels and there will , no doubt , be many more .
However , this directive offends not only against workers ' expectations but also against the dock companies , which have invested heavily in facilities and infrastructure .
These proposed rules are throwing their businesses into turmoil .
For this reason we voted against the measure at first reading .
Now we see a series of amendments , which typifies the approach of this Parliament : seeking to make slightly better something that is inherently flawed .
If this Parliament truly represented the wishes of the people , it would throw this directive out , but it will not .
That itself demonstrates what we already know : this Parliament has nothing to do with representing the wishes of the people ; it has its own agenda , which has nothing to do with democracy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do not agree with the view that Parliament has betrayed the voters in working on this directive .
I endorse the proposal for a directive and the balance reached , thanks , not least , to Parliament 's work .
I believe that opening up to the market could be positive , not least as regards access to port services , but only under the conditions specified and introduced by Parliament 's amendments : only provided that safety , professional qualifications , contractual and social rules and environmental protection are rigorously safeguarded where all the companies and all the kinds of services connected with aspects of the different port services are concerned .
The same must apply to self-handling .
I am not against self-handling in principle , but it must not become an excuse for promoting forms of social dumping and ways of economising on professional qualification or safety .
This is transparent competition .
This applies to new ports too , in order to ensure the availability of private investments .
Direct control over services and providers must be possible - and is highly desirable - but with due regard for those conditions : professional qualification , contractual and social rules , environmental protection and safety .
Unless these conditions are observed , we will be lumping together things which are so very different that they neither properly serve the interests we represent nor further progress towards the objectives we want to achieve with this directive .
I hope that the balance achieved by Parliament can be preserved .
Thank you , Mr President . Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , this afternoon we have seen that our directives do have some effect on the people of Europe .
We have , in particular , seen that the dock workers are angry , very angry , and also desperate .
Why ?
Most likely because they are heard too infrequently in this Parliament .
More likely , however , because they are coming up against a cold , liberal Europe that subordinates safety , safety at work and health , social matters and jobs to blind liberalisation dogma .
They are also angry about the proposal you launched in February 2001 , Commissioner , in which you pulled their social charter out from under their feet with one stroke of the pen .
It will come as no surprise to you that you are not very popular in Belgium , and I still regret that you did not have the courage to have a direct debate with the dock workers in Antwerp , for example .
That could have been enlightening .
In Parliament we should have discarded the proposal immediately after the first reading , we should not have amended it .
Various colleagues have already told me that it is not what we wanted .
So why did we not vote it out ?
I will continue to fight against this directive , I will vote against it tomorrow and I will continue to do so .
Because I still do not understand what its added value is , not even in its amended form , although I do admit that it is much improved .
I will tell you why the dock workers are striking , Mr Jarzembowski .
They are , of course , striking because if you permit self-handling in another country , you must also permit self-handling in your own country straight away because of the sacred competition rules , and that is the reason why I continue to oppose it .
I hope that we will be able to vote the proposal out , but I fear that we will not be able to do so .
I am therefore hoping for strong amendments : self-handling out and compulsory licensing in .
I found out today that we are better at defending this Parliament with a police force than we are at maintaining the social system in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . I also welcome onto the platform some representatives of the dock workers who have got in .
Today I feel a bit like I am in the Middle Ages , in a fortified castle .
What can I add in a minute ?
So much has been said already , but this afternoon I had another meeting with some of the people from the dock workers ' unions , and I was impressed by their message .
This directive brings ports of convenience closer .
This directive organises social competition between the European ports which will result in social dumping and also , in time , the destruction of the dock workers ' charter as we know it in Belgium .
Nobody is asking for this .
Europe is apparently the crowbar used to tackle problems in some countries .
Allowing self-handling without a prior compulsory licence has other negative consequences , as has already been mentioned here : a lack of safety and problems with environmental disasters at sea .
That is all we need .
My group and I are therefore voting against self-handling and in favour of the social protection of dock workers , and I hope that some socially aware fellow members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will follow suit .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank you for all your points of view and comments , including those which reject the Commission 's proposal .
I believe it is important that we can hold a debate and that you can present your arguments .
But there are certain issues I would like to clarify because , having heard some things which have been said here , it appears that we are talking about different texts .
Firstly , the general issue of whether or not we want a competitive maritime transport system which can be incorporated into an intermodal network and which can provide an alternative to road transport .
Yes or no ?
Secondly , we have an entirely ideological question .
Some of you believe that monopoly is the ideal situation .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe in principle that the option of healthy competition is much better than a situation of monopoly .
This is essentially an ideological question .
Having said all this , the facts appear to point more to one side than the other .
It is true that there are elements , areas , market segments , which , due to a lack of size , do not allow for several operators .
But when there is competition things work better .
There is a higher quality of service , better prices and better costs , and more competitiveness .
Ladies and gentlemen , our air sector , as was said a moment ago , does not appear to have suffered as a result of introducing competition .
This Parliament wishes to introduce competition into the rail sector and has voted for that by a majority .
Here we are talking about also introducing competition into port services in large ports .
Ladies and gentlemen , you say that this puts an end to safety and you link it to the Prestige .
What does this have to do with the Prestige ?
Absolutely nothing , ladies and gentlemen .
It bears no relation .
I am sorry , but they are different issues .
Furthermore , nobody is asking for a reduction in the safety elements .
This is why in the fields of pilotage and mooring services , in all these fields , specific and special precautions are being put in place , including in loading .
It is said that the port authorities , which have the best knowledge , can regulate conditions in their own cases - which may consist of a certificate or of proven knowledge .
We are allowing the port authorities to develop this aspect in accordance with their better knowledge of the situation in each European port .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that this is a proposal in favour of transport in general and also in favour of creating more work in our ports and having more competitive ports , which have more activity and which can cooperate in the economic development of the European Union .
That is what I am in fact doing in transport , in the ports , in the other sectors of transport and in energy .
That is quite simply what lies behind the Lisbon spirit .
In fact , what we are talking about here is a fundamental proposal and what we are proposing is the European model .
I will now discuss the second point that has been discussed , which is social dumping .
Nobody wants social dumping , ladies and gentlemen .
Nobody .
We want more work for more activity in ports and furthermore with adequate social guarantees and conditions .
Because , according to the European model , competition is introduced while maintaining social standards and guarantees .
That is the European model , which is regulated liberalisation and which is not genuine liberalisation .
Because liberalisation and regulation in principle appear to be contradictory , but , nevertheless , in Europe we are capable of combining the two elements : the advantages of the market with the guarantees of a system of solidarity .
And that is what we are doing , ladies and gentlemen .
I would read two things to the honourable Members .
One , what does self-handling mean ?
Article 9 states that self-handling is the situation in which port services can be provided for an undertaking or by an undertaking for itself using regular personnel , not temporary personnel or personnel employed for a specific task , but ' regular land-based personnel and / or seafaring crew ' .
The key is that we are talking about regular personnel .
But , as well as regular personnel , I would point out that Article 13 ( 2 ) states that the national employment and social rules will be obligatory and that social dumping cannot take place .
Ladies and gentlemen , please read the way this text has ended up because I believe it is crystal-clear .
I believe we have to consider what we are doing .
We do not intend to reduce safety levels , to carry out social dumping , or anything of the kind .
If we were to abide by your fears in relation to liberalisations , Ryanair or Virgin would not be operating , for example , and we would all be living with State monopolies , and I believe that more than one of you makes use of Ryanair and Virgin .
So do I. Let us see if we can come to an agreement .
And we have not as a result reduced safety in European air transport .
Let us tell the truth , please .
I understand that there has been a protest outside this Parliament .
You are politicians , ladies and gentlemen .
So am I. We must listen to everybody , but let us tell the truth .
Nobody is proposing social dumping .
On the contrary , we are talking about guaranteeing social standards and requirements relating to employment , and of regular personnel , not temporary personnel .
If we restrict it to just seafaring personnel , we would then , on the contrary , be taking the wrong approach .
I believe we also have to consider land-based regular personnel equally .
The third element which you have insisted on once again is that of competition between ports .
Of course we are dealing here with competition between ports .
What we have to ensure is that that competition is not unfair .
And in this regard I agree with the honourable Members and the rapporteur , Mr Jarzembowski , in particular .
With regard to Amendment No 10 , let us find a solution which can clarify it further , within the limits and margins laid down in the Treaty , which we clearly cannot change by means of this text .
Finally , the issue of timeliness , mentioned by Mr Savary .
He said that we should do everything apart from this .
Mr Savary , the problems of the maritime sector , maritime safety ... this House has done a lot of work , as have the Commission and the Council , to improve maritime safety and we know , and the honourable Members are perfectly aware , that if the rule we proposed had been in force , we could quite possibly have prevented the last accident .
Still more can be done and we are going to do it .
But let us not say that we have begun with the ports because that is not true .
On the contrary : we are practically ending with the ports .
We have a very serious transport problem in Europe and we must seek solutions which are alternatives to road and rail transport , in other words , land-based transport .
In an enlarged Europe , in which distances are increased , the maritime sector has many more possibilities and it makes much more sense to create European cabotage .
But in order to create European cabotage and for it to genuinely compete with other transport systems , that is land transport , we need efficient port services .
And that is what we intend , once again : to introduce competition into the large ports - I would insist - in a regulated manner , providing social and safety guarantees .
That is simply the European model .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the promotion of the use of biofuels for transport [ 12695 / 1 / 2002 - C5-0585 / 2002 - 2001 / 0265 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mrs Ayuso González ) .
Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Ayuso González on the efforts she has made to achieve this successful outcome of a compromise .
Even if she is not wholly satisfied with it , I think she has done a splendid job .
It is just as well that we do not have mandatory requirements but I think that , given goodwill on all sides , we will see some progress in the application of biofuels .
With the European Union already importing 50 % of its energy needs and this rising to 70 % by 2030 , it is important that we exploit all possible indigenous resources of energy as well as promoting greater diversity of energy sources .
By developing biofuels and other renewable energies we are contributing to increased security of supply .
In my constituency in Scotland , we have the materials and the know-how to be able to develop this industry and are eager to put these proposals into action .
We are also hoping to improve our environment with better air quality and a reduction in greenhouse gases .
In the blending of biofuels into conventional transport fuel we can introduce these changes in a simple way that will not require vehicles or filling stations to be adapted .
Biofuels also promise to create new jobs in rural communities through crop production and in the construction and operation of processing plants .
This will provide a well-needed boost to the flagging rural economies .
But biofuels remain uncompetitive without significant government tax breaks .
A 50 % reduction in tax to match conventional fuel prices will mean subtracting a hefty chunk from Member State exchequers .
How many of our governments are prepared to lose this revenue ?
We are also concerned that the proposals as they stand will not necessarily result in any major real environmental benefits : production methods for most biofuels use substantial amounts of energy and create high carbon dioxide emissions .
We may also see higher inputs of chemical fertilisers and pesticides .
Member States must decide to promote biofuels that give an overall cost-effective benefit to the environment .
Most importantly we must also invest in research to improve the cost effectiveness and environmental benefits of biofuel crops in the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Ayuso González , for tabling a really good report and for the excellent cooperation .
I think that here too , on the issue of biofuels , Parliament is continuing to honour its cross-party commitment to promote renewable energies .
It is good to know that in our efforts to do so we can usually count on the Commission 's support .
I have serious doubts , however - and that is putting it mildly - as to whether the Council feels the same commitment as does Parliament to our joint target of doubling the proportion of renewable energies in the total energy consumed by 2010 .
At the first reading , Parliament came out in favour of binding targets for increasing the use of biofuels .
As with the directive on promoting electricity generation from renewable energy sources , this did not stand a chance in the Council .
We have therefore agreed , as we did for the electricity directive , to indirect targets , with the option of moving to mandatory targets at a later stage if the actual rate of increase falls significantly short of the target set .
The Council 's intention to give the Member States a whole series of opportunities for setting their national targets at levels which diverge from the prescribed 5.75 % by 2010 is unacceptable .
I very much hope that the Commission will scrutinise the reasons for departing from the indicative targets , which the Member States will have to provide , in a really very critical light .
Despite this critical assessment of the Council position , I can say on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists that we will grit our teeth and vote in favour of the compromises contained in the Council position .
Why ?
We want a shift towards renewable energies to be promoted in the fuel sector too so as to make a positive contribution to the necessary minimising of CO2 emissions , to reduce our dependence on oil and to give a boost to development in rural areas .
To achieve this it is not only targets that we need ; it is also crucial that the Member States should be able to give tax breaks to biofuels .
At the moment - and I will be quite open about this - this is our only possible course of action because the Council actually has our backs up against a wall .
If the promotion directive does not go through the codecision procedure in the form that the Council wishes , then the tax directive - this has been made clear to us - will not be adopted .
I very much hope that the new European constitution will make such a situation impossible in the future .
Despite the shortcomings that I have identified , I hope and indeed I am confident that this directive , together with the tax breaks , really will give a further boost to increasing the use of biofuels .
Mr President , I support the action plan of the European Commission , which seeks to promote the greater use of alternative fuels in Europe between now and 2010 .
Firstly , biofuels help to reduce over-dependence on oil-based fuels , which is a cause for concern as regards both the environment and security of supply .
Secondly , biofuels are environmentally friendly and they emit between 40 and 80 % fewer greenhouse gases than fossil fuels .
We all know the target we must reach to comply with the provisions of the Kyoto Accord and reduce the excessive use of greenhouse gases , which only result in a depletion of the ozone layer .
Biofuels are in many cases manufactured from organic waste .
This makes it possible to use waste materials , which would normally be thrown away , in order to produce energy .
Biofuels offer new sources of income for European industries .
We must take advantage of the job opportunities which could be created in research and technological activity .
There is clearly a divergence of opinion between the Council and the European Parliament as to whether mandatory targets should be set for the use of biofuels in Europe .
We must do all in our power to bring about the greater use of biofuels .
The economic and environment benefits are obvious .
Biofuels must be introduced , targets met and the work of Member States ' governments strictly monitored and evaluated .
European governments should radically change tax systems to encourage European industries to invest more in the biofuel industry .
It is not only the present generation which will benefit from these new changes , but also future generations .
I wish to compliment Mrs Ayuso González on her excellent report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank Mrs Ayuso González for her hard work as rapporteur for this directive .
A directive on increasing the use of biofuels is something that I can only welcome , but I do regret the fact that the current situation falls well short of my expectations .
It is precisely by increasing the use of biomass that we can contribute both to securing farmers ' income and creating new jobs in the current and enlarged Europe as well as to enhancing the multifunctional role of the countryside . In addition , such an initiative meets the requirement of sustainability , which is so important from the point of view of protecting the environment .
In the light of all this , the compromise proposals on the table are rather disappointing and reflect a definite dilution of the original demands , because all that is left of the original obligation to blend - as we might have expected - are reference values .
It would actually have been very pleasing if the Austrian model , which makes it mandatory for more biomass to be used , could have served as a model for Europe as a whole .
Finally , I have to note that unfortunately the final paper contains too few incentives for a more efficient use of biofuels .
Once again the discrepancies between the interests of the fossil fuel industry and farming are clear for all to see .
Given the finite nature of oil deposits and bearing in mind the Kyoto targets , we can only hope for the future that this is not a closed book , that further efforts will be made to push up the use of biofuels and that this really is just the first step in the right direction , if all of us really do feel a credible and serious responsibility for providing future generations with a secure foundation on which to live .
Mr President , the directive now before us forms part of a whole area of legislation to promote the use of renewable energy sources in different sectors , and therefore represents some of the several and various measures to implement the Community strategy for sustainable development adopted at the Gothenburg European Council in June 2001 .
The directive is especially important because developments in this very area of transport up till now have been absolutely pitiful .
My colleague , Mrs Ayuso González , has really done an excellent job .
Transport accounts for more than 30 % of the end use of energy in the Community and that figure is growing all the time .
This trend will become stronger still and there will therefore be an increase in carbon dioxide emissions .
This increase will be still greater in the candidate countries , relatively speaking .
According to the Commission 's White Paper , carbon dioxide emissions associated with transport are estimated to increase by 50 % over the period 1990-2010 , and the main source of emissions is road traffic , which accounts for 84 % of carbon dioxide emissions connected with transport .
This is why the White Paper is calling for less dependence on oil by the transport sector , for ecological reasons .
This is currently at a rate of 98 % and would be reduced by using alternative biofuel-like fuels .
Promoting the use of biofuels in keeping with sustainable farming and forestry practices will create new opportunities for sustainable rural development .
This could play a part in the creation of new jobs in rural areas .
Moreover , it will be possible to obtain by-products , which , owing to their vegetable protein-rich content , could be used as animal feed .
Growing plants for biofuel production would have to be combined with current programmes for cultivation , adhering to the principle of crop rotation .
To guarantee the existence of sustainable cultivation practices we should nevertheless draw up a set of clear environmental criteria so that , for example , using the same cultivated area later on for food production does not pose a risk .
The timetable approved by the Council only contains two targets with binding dates .
These must not be forgotten .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to echo the numerous words of thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Ayuso González .
She has negotiated really very energetically and with great skill in this field .
I should also like to thank the Commissioner once more for tabling an ambitious proposal .
We all regret the fact that the proposal as tabled by the Commission and with the improvements made by Parliament at first reading was not adopted , but we are already making progress .
The advantages of extending the use of renewable raw materials to the transport sector have already been mentioned many times .
They include cutting emissions , reducing our dependence on oil and above all creating more jobs in farming and rural areas .
I regret the fact - and I must say this quite openly here - that no one from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has taken the floor , because the Greens have after all expressed rather critical views in the debate and I had thought that we might perhaps discuss this again here today .
I think it is right that we need to take into account the environmental impact of biofuels , but we must not be one-sided .
I might simply remind you of the tanker disasters that we have had in recent years .
If these tankers had been carrying biofuels then the damage would , God knows , not have been as devastating , and biofuels do not need to be transported across the oceans either .
We want to promote innovation in this sector .
That is why Mr Purvis was right to say that efficient and environmentally friendly fuels must be given particular support .
I would add that the first step is to start promoting them at all .
I fully endorse the criticism of the Council , as expressed by Mrs Rothe among others .
I think it is regrettable that we cannot go further , and I will say quite explicitly something that perhaps Mrs Rothe cannot say in so many words : I am also particularly disappointed by the German Government .
The Germans were not the only ones who put the brakes on , but they also had every reason to adopt a rather more constructive attitude towards the Commission proposal and our position from the first reading .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
The next item is the oral question ( O-0003 / 2003 - B5-0084 / 2003 ) to the Commission , by Mr Stevenson , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the socio-economic crisis in the white fish sector .
( In the absence of the author of the question , the President gave the floor to the Commission first )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a pity that Mr Stevenson is not here .
As you know , stocks of cod in several areas are in a quite disastrous state .
Since the year 2000 , the situation has dramatically worsened and the stocks are threatened with collapse .
ISIS , the international scientific body , has advised closing cod , whiting and haddock fisheries for the duration of this year .
This , it is thought , would be the safest way to rescue our cod stocks .
However , such a drastic measure does not take account of the massive economic and social consequences that this would have on the entire sector .
That is why a sustainable plan needs to incorporate all three dimensions of sustainability and that includes above all the economic and social consequences .
We therefore tabled an improved recovery plan to our technical and scientific committee as an alternative to a moratorium .
It issued a favourable opinion .
We then tabled this improved plan to the Council .
In December 2002 , however , the Council was only able to agree on a transitional recovery plan .
I should like to stress , however , that this transitional plan is very positive because it already contains substantially reduced quotas , low fishing effort and improved monitoring mechanisms .
At the same time it was agreed that the Commission would make two new proposals for the long-term recovery of cod and hake in the spring .
We will be tabling these proposals in April , and this week a hearing is taking place with the fishing sector and scientists from all of the Member States .
I myself opened this hearing just this morning .
Obviously the long-term plan to rescue cod will be designed in such a way as to also make an appropriate contribution to stock recovery .
I am aware that this plan will have severe consequences for fishermen in the short term .
However , we can also intervene here with the help of the fisheries structural fund and cofinance social measures , such as for example compensation payments for the temporary cessation of activity or retraining measures .
I can only urgently call on the Member States to take their responsibilities seriously and provide more funds in their programmes for measures of this kind .
So far the following funds have been programmed for such compensation payments under the Structural Funds : Belgium has set aside EUR 800 000 , Denmark EUR 1.6 million , the Netherlands EUR 1.3 million and France EUR 3.5 million .
On the other hand , the United Kingdom , Ireland and Germany have not programmed any measures of this kind at all .
As regards the additional EUR 150 million of compensation to alleviate the socio-economic consequences in the regions concerned , I should like to make it quite clear that it is not the Commission that makes this decision , but the budgetary authority .
Unfortunately , however , the Commission has not yet received any positive signal , either from the Council or Parliament , that the budgetary authority would accept such a proposal .
Turning now to your demand for the creation of regional advisory fora , I fully agree with this proposal .
I would explicitly call on the Member States to take the initiative here so that regional bodies of this kind can be set up as soon as possible .
These fora would moreover provide a place where scientists , fishermen and all of the other stakeholders , including the regional authorities , could do precisely what you call for in your motion , namely hold regular consultations .
As regards the call for extended powers of codecision , you know what the Commission 's position is : the Commission fully supports this request .
. Mr President , last December , as the Commissioner has just outlined , following a five-day meeting of the Council of Ministers , a new transitional cod recovery plan was agreed which has had a devastating impact on much of the EU whitefish sector .
Under these new regulations , which came into effect on 1 February this year , savage quota cuts have been linked to draconian limits on fishing effort .
Whitefish vessels can now only fish for 15 days a month , including steaming time to the fishing grounds , and the 15 days will be reduced to 12 days unless a further 20 % of the fleet is decommissioned .
We are literally asking our fishermen to burn their boats .
Scotland , where there are only 162 dedicated boats left in what used to be Europe 's biggest whitefish fleet , will bear the brunt of these cuts .
If we scrap another 20 % , the fleet will fall below the critical mass needed to sustain jobs in our harbours , ports and processing factories .
The industry will go into free fall .
In addition , the majority of the remaining vessels will be ones that , because they are under 10 years old , are not eligible for decommissioning subsidy .
These are the vessels on which the future of our whitefish fleet relies .
These are the vessels on which we rely to catch cod , haddock , plaice and other whitefish once the stocks have recovered and the total allowable catch limits have been increased .
Sadly , however , these are also the vessels with the biggest outstanding debts to the banks .
It would not surprise me if many of them were forced into bankruptcy .
The skippers and crews , who have often mortgaged their homes to raise the cash to build these boats , will lose not only their jobs and boats but also their homes .
But Scotland is not the only country affected by these draconian measures .
Ireland , Denmark , Belgium , the Netherlands and France have all suffered cuts .
This is why the Committee on Fisheries voted unanimously - at least with only one abstention - to support this emergency resolution , the crux of which calls upon the Commission to adopt less drastic measures for the long-term recovery of cod which would secure the maximum number of jobs in the EU whitefish sector .
The resolution also calls for the allocation of an additional EUR 150 million to compensate fishers , processors and ancillary workers affected by these conservation measures .
I would suggest that EUR 48 million should be used for transitional funding to compensate fishermen and ancillary workers affected by the 15-days-at-sea fishing limits .
I would hope that this aid could be found from the flexibility instrument .
The balance of EUR 102 million should be reprogrammed out of the FIFG for the 2004 budget and should be targeted towards golden handshakes to induce fishers and ancillary workers to leave the industry , early retirement grants and retraining aid , as mentioned by Commissioner Fischler .
One day last week in Scotland the entire whitefish fleet agreed to switch off its satellite tracking systems for 24 hours in silent protest at the catastrophe that has engulfed the communities involved .
In the main fisheries inspection centre there is a large screen on which dozens of tiny lights indicate the position of each fishing boat in the North Sea and around the Scottish coast .
These lights represent information beamed from the satellite-tracking systems .
One by one the lights went out , signifying in a dramatic way the fate that awaits Scotland 's whitefish vessels .
I hope the House will agree to provide this urgent and desperately needed support .
Our fishing communities are crying out for help .
Please heed their call .
Mr President , in December 2002 the Fisheries Council agreed a compromise which effectively halved catches for the Scottish and UK whitefish fleets and stopped vessels going to sea for more than 15 days a month .
These are drastic measures but far short of the all-out moratorium recommended to the Commission by its scientific advisors on fish stocks , ISIS .
United Kingdom and Scottish ministers have been attacked for agreeing to the hard-fought compromise .
At the time one of the fishing leaders commented that he doubted that the Archangel Gabriel could have got a better deal in the circumstances .
Inevitably such actions have a socio-economic impact on the communities that depend on fishing for whitefish - especially cod .
We must acknowledge this .
I give my personal support to the resolution before us this evening .
I also welcome the GBP 50 million compensation package approved by the Scottish Parliament last week and the related compensation packages in England , Wales and Northern Ireland .
It is significant that we are discussing this issue as vital talks take place today and tomorrow in Brussels .
Scottish and UK fishermen have joined fellow fishermen and civil servants from other EU countries at the European Commission 's Fisheries Advisory Committee .
Talks will focus on a long-term cod recovery plan .
I am delighted that the Fisheries Commissioner , Mr Fischler , will bring forward amendments to the current restrictions which have proved to be ' too rigid ' .
However , the negotiations on the long-term recovery plan will be tough .
We really have to think carefully about the right road to take .
I want us to examine all possible options on effort control .
Saying ' sod the cod ' , allowing fishing to continue and hoping for the best is hardly an option , nor is renationalising the CFP .
This ducks the difficult issues posed by the need for stock recovery .
We really need to rationalise the CFP and cod recovery .
We must work in a cooperative manner with industry , ministers and other organisations to seek a common solution .
We must also create regional committees , allowing decisions to be taken as close to those affected as possible .
Doing nothing in the light of declining cod stocks is not an option .
The difficult task of arriving at a quota figure that is sustainable , yet scientifically credible , remains .
Mr President , in supporting this motion I speak particularly of the need to give financial assistance , both to cushion the socio-economic effects of the measures that have been taken and to help the industry to survive until the stocks have recovered .
For colleagues whose constituencies are landlocked I offer the following analogy : supposing for good environmental reasons , such as a drastic cut in CO2 omissions , road haulage operators were told by the EU that they could only use their lorries for two weeks out of every four , and then only on condition that a significant proportion of the vehicles were taken off the road altogether .
Imagine the fiscal consequences for the businesses concerned , then imagine that these businesses are the mainstay of towns and villages with fragile economies , and think what the outcome would be for local shops , schools and other services .
Sadly , we who represent fishing communities around the North Sea - certainly those of us from Scotland - do not need to use our imaginations .
We can already feel the effects .
Of course assistance with restructuring can be given from within Member States .
As Mrs Stihler has already said , the Scottish Executive has managed to find GBP 50 million from its already restricted budget . That is a measure of the seriousness of the situation .
But I believe that the EU too must shoulder some of the financial responsibility .
This is in part because past shortcomings of the CFP have contributed to the crisis . To a larger extent , it is because any democracy must adhere to the moral principle that where the direct effect of legislation is the destruction of people 's honest livelihoods , they are at least compensated accordingly .
I hope that the EU counts itself as such a democracy and that this principle will be fully expressed in the forthcoming vote .
Mr President , just this once I shall resist the temptation to lambast the Commission and the Council for their contributions to the crisis facing the whitefish sector in Scotland .
I can assure fellow Members that there certainly is a major crisis of confidence in the European Union 's ability to manage fisheries at all .
However , I will concentrate my remarks tonight on the main and most important purpose of the resolution which accompanies this question , that is , the social and economic consequences arising from the decisions made at the December Fisheries Council .
Businesses are already feeling the pain from the interim cod recovery measures : not just the fish-catching sector , but whole communities .
It is predicted that the long-term recovery plan will continue to inflict real economic and social hardship .
I hope , therefore , that this House will unite in support of this resolution , calling for up to EUR 150 million of additional EU funding - and ' additional ' is the important word here .
This amount would be in addition to Member States ' commitments , constituting a fund to help offset the widest possible range of economic and social consequences that the European Union fisheries management decision will inflict .
My preference would be to aim for the use of the flexibility instrument for this .
Not so long ago , as has been pointed out , the political will of this House and the Council , and the loss of fishing rights in Moroccan waters , brought about a similar , highly-concentrated downturn in activity .
There will have to be detailed discussion of plans and priorities for the use of such a fund , but I certainly hope that this week we will take the first step towards setting it up .
I call upon the UK Government to abandon its previous resistance to taking part in such a process .
Mr President , it is very sad that we are having this debate tonight and that we need to give GBP 150 million in funding to help the fishing industry .
It is because of the failure of the common fisheries policy that we are having to provide this money .
We should also look at industrial fishing - and I know there are mixed views about this - in which sand eels are extracted from the sea bed .
Sand eels are part of the food chain of the cod and these things are all linked .
The process of having quotas for fish and throwing healthy fish overboard over the years has also contributed greatly to the position we are in .
But we must now face up to the reality that cod stocks are low and that the families and communities involved in the fishing industry who need support should receive it .
I strongly support the resolution to provide GBP 150 million of additional funding .
I would urge the UK Government to take this up and use it in a very efficient way .
One of the problems with funding of this type , as was found when it was used in Spanish waters , is that it is very difficult for the fishing boats , those tied up for the processing industry and others , to claim these funds .
I would urge Commissioner Fischler to look at the way this money can be spent .
If we offer people money and they cannot then obtain it , they will only end up more frustrated than they were before .
I urge everybody to support this .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am able to say straight away that I support the resolution .
The resolution deals with those aspects we are discussing in Parliament and , in general , with what gives rise to the problems in the regions when we implement such dramatic decisions concerning certain fish stocks - in this case , cod in particular .
There can be no doubt that there must be a balance in the marine environment .
There must be a balance in the stocks .
Clearly , such dramatic decisions can , however , be damaging to the regions and to those communities that depend upon fisheries and the industry surrounding fisheries . The EU must therefore intervene and raise some of these problems .
In that connection , I should also like to draw attention to the fact that fisheries-based industry and gutting and canning firms must have raw materials , and it is therefore now time for us to review the tariff barriers that prevent the raw materials from reaching our companies in the EU .
Price mechanisms and tariff barriers mean that the prices for these raw materials are very much higher than the prices for the same raw materials on the world market .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , may I first say as an aside that , with all due respect , you cannot blame the weather for everything .
In the end , we too have had our part to play in the fact that cod stocks are now at this catastrophic minimum level of one third , that is 50 000 tonnes .
Let us not forget it !
My main comment , however , is as follows : I have taken over - foolishly , I am almost tempted to add - as the Committee on Fisheries ' rapporteur for the 2004 Budget .
The basis for this work is of course the current budget for 2003 , a prominent feature of which is the reform of the CFP and its requirements .
No provision is made in the individual budget lines for disasters , however , which means that we are not prepared for them , either in the Member States or in the European Parliament .
Generous interpretation of the rules on flexibility and the reserve , as was still possible in the case of Morocco , is no longer an option .
It is primarily the Member States that are having to pick up the bill for the consequences of the Prestige disaster off the coast of Galicia and the 45 % reduction in the catch quota for cod .
Their policy - the policy of the Member States - is also in need of reform .
However we here in Parliament need to help the fishermen today .
It is still a fact that it is not pity or greed that motivates our actions here in Parliament , but the knowledge of the hardship being suffered by our coastal communities , which in addition have to earn their daily bread under the most difficult of conditions .
We all know that in the peripheral areas of our prosperous EU there is usually no alternative work available .
We , the EU , are a community based on solidarity and we have to help .
But how ?
At times like this a great deal of good will and assertiveness is needed in this House , particularly in the Committee on Budgets , but also in the Commission and crucially - as I have said - in the Member States .
Please take note !
Mr President , the fisheries industry in crisis - we have heard it all before .
But this time it is extremely serious .
Where I come from in Northern Ireland fishermen have already suffered severe setbacks and quotas and have cooperated in six-week closures during the spawning season , for the last three to four years .
That was done in a cooperative way . No doubt they will cooperate again in the future , if such closures happen .
But what is the future to be ?
It certainly looks very bleak at present for those fishing communities .
That is why I believe that this proposal - which I support - gives hope to the people who live in these remote communities , where no other hope exists for them and no one seems to want to help .
By that commitment to those areas we would begin to show that we are giving them a lifeline for some kind of a future and that they have not been forgotten .
As to that future , I have no doubt that the industry must be involved in the decision-making process .
This has been one of the weaknesses down the years , for as long as I can remember .
The scientists blame the fishermen , the fishermen blame the scientists and we try to find a way through .
High-wire negotiations only lead to mistrust .
I was in Brussels , along with Mr Stevenson , when the negotiations took place last December .
The way they were conducted was no way for us to conduct such important negotiations .
I hope you will bear that in mind and make sure it does not happen again .
I appeal for the stakeholders in the industry to be consulted in a meaningful way , not with platitudes .
Their views should not be overlooked in any way .
We are discussing people 's livelihoods , their way of life , indeed their very existence .
I call on the Commission and the United Kingdom Government - because in the past they have not shown themselves to be prepared to put up the matching funding - this time to put their money where their mouth is and make sure they give support to these communities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following this debate I should first like to make a few corrections and clarifications : Mr Stevenson said that the problem was that after 20 % of the UK fleet had been decommissioned , days at sea were being reduced to 12 .
It is precisely the reverse .
We anticipated the 20 % decommissioning - before it had actually happened - and did our calculations as if it had already taken place .
On that basis we stipulated 15 days at sea , and so no further cuts are now going to be made .
Secondly , it is news to me that the majority of the fishing fleet in the United Kingdom now consists of vessels that are under ten years old .
I do not therefore agree that under this decommissioning exercise - which by the way was not something that we prescribed but was something that the United Kingdom decided to do on its own - vessels are having to be scrapped that are not eligible for decommissioning subsidy .
Thirdly , as I see it we have to draw a distinction .
On the one hand , there are measures that need to be taken to rescue cod and the recovery plan has to be based on these .
There is no way round this .
On the other hand , we have to show sympathy for the social consequences that this is going to have over a particular period , for an interim period .
There too we have to show understanding and help the fishermen .
If we are only half-hearted in both respects then it will be completely counter-productive .
If we only take half measures then we will not be able to bring about stock recovery and this will do huge damage to our fishermen in the long term .
Considerably more fishermen will be faced with having to scrap their vessels because they will not be able to fish any more .
On the other hand , however , it is of course also fair that we should offer help to alleviate the impact of the measures that we are having to take under the recovery plan .
I should also like to point out that the Commission is monitoring the sand eel or industrial fishing issue with very great care .
In the past we have asked ISIS to investigate this matter in detail .
So far , in any case , we do not have any indication that industrial fishing - if it is carried out lawfully - has an adverse impact on cod stocks .
I think it is only right to set the record straight with regard to Mrs Stihler 's comments too .
She is quite right to say that Scotland , or the United Kingdom , has made GBP 50 million available - that is pounds not euros - to ensure adequate funding for social measures .
This money is however coming entirely from national sources and has been declared as a national subsidy .
This means that no Community money is being claimed for this , which also presents a certain advantage to the other Member States because there will be more Community funds left for them .
Once again : if you demand more money here then this decision has to be made first and foremost , if not in full , by the budgetary authority .
The recovery plan is not a Commission decision either ; it is the Council that decides , and the Fisheries Council will also be addressing this matter once again at its next meeting .
Mr President , I would like to ask a question . Mr Fischler , in the light of all of these disasters - and I am sure that this will not be the last - should we not consider introducing something along the lines of a disaster fund - I cannot think what else to call it - of around a cent for every fish fin , so that we can actually offer help in those cases when it is really necessary ?
You see , we also have to be able to give help spontaneously .
Recently the idea was floated of distributing the funds over several years , if we do not get the money now , but of course that would not help the fishermen either .
Is this something that the Commission might also consider ?
Mr President , Mrs Langenhagen , I am quite happy to reflect on these matters in more detail with the Committee on Fisheries .
Even at this stage I should just like to point out though that we are going to have to give this very careful thought because , as you yourself know , the funds available under the fisheries structural fund are very limited . If we are now to create a reserve for emergencies from the outset then obviously that money is not going to be available for the normal programme , which could ultimately mean that we leave money unutilised , because we can hopefully assume that in the future we will no longer have to deal with a series of disasters , but on the contrary that with the help of these recovery plans we will have things under control .
We will be addressing this issue in great detail during the course of this year : proposals will also be made to Parliament for additional recovery plans .
But as I have said , this is certainly something that it will be worth discussing in more detail and I am happy to do so .
Perhaps we might also have an informal debate on this in the Committee on Fisheries , say on the basis of a non-paper of some kind .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for this additional answer .
At the end of this debate , I have received a proposal for a resolution on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries .
The vote on this resolution will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
I declare the 2002-2003 annual session closed . I would remind you that , pursuant to the provisions of the Treaty , the European Parliament will meet tomorrow , Tuesday 11 March 2003 , at 9 a.m.

( The sitting was closed at 10.29 p.m. )
Opening of the session
I declare open the 2003-2004 session of the European Parliament .
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am one of several Basque Members of this House . I am also fully committed to the defence of all human rights , especially the most basic right of all , namely the right to life .
As some honourable Members will be aware , Domingo Durán , an officer in the Spanish national police force died last Friday at the age of 51 . Eight years ago he was guarding a Bilbao office processing national identity cards and lost the use of all four limbs as a result of an attack by ETA .
Mr Cox , I believe it would be appropriate for you to issue a condemnation of violence of any kind in your capacity as President of the European Parliament .
In particular , I call on you to condemn terrorist violence in pursuit of political aims , and to convey the condolences of the House to the family of this victim of terrorism .
As an expression of our solidarity with the people of Spain and especially the Basques I would also like to call on all those present in the House today to join in a minute 's silence in defence of freedom , political coexistence and respect for the rule of law .
I thank you for raising that very serious point this morning .
On behalf of Parliament I convey our condolences to the family and colleagues of the deceased and also our outrage at this act .
Mr President , further to your reference to Guantanamo Bay , I should like to inform the House that a group of Christian Liberation Movement activists has been rounded up , harassed and attacked in Santiago , the capital of Cuba .
I expect you are aware that the president of this movement is none other than Oswaldo Payá , the winner of the 2002 Sakharov prize . Mr Payá has issued a statement detailing the events and calling on all governments and institutions to bring pressure to bear to ensure that these peaceful activists who belong to his movement survive unharmed .
I would therefore urge you to take up the case of these people , Mr President .
We will do that .
The debate on the state of the Union is an established item on our agenda .
It gives us the chance to look at progress in the year just ended and our objectives for the current year .
This year , the debate falls at a particularly sensitive time in terms of both international affairs and the life of the Union .
The Iraq crisis , enlargement and the Convention weigh so heavily on our minds and hearts that there is no need for me to mention them .
I shall only stress that today 's debate gives us all the duty to weigh up the opportunities and challenges connected with the unification of our continent and to reflect on the lessons to be drawn from the Iraq crisis at a time when we are drafting the new constitutional charter of our Union .
Let me start with enlargement today .
Last December , we wound up accession negotiations with ten countries .
Ten countries we should now call ' acceding ' , not ' candidate ' countries .
Meanwhile , negotiations are going ahead with Bulgaria and Romania so that they can join shortly afterwards and , with the necessary adjustments , joint work is continuing with Turkey .
In this regard , before you all , I want to express my thanks to the Commission staff and Commissioner Verheugen for their dedication and their hard work .
The Union 's task , however , in the area of enlargement does not end with the decision taken at Copenhagen .
Indeed , Croatia 's recent application shows that another region of Europe is knocking at our door .
Here I refer to the western Balkans .
I want to make it quite clear that the unification of Europe cannot be regarded as complete until the Balkan countries are members of the Union too .
This prospect of membership must be clearly offered , while it must also be stressed that the criteria followed in the first round of enlargement will be applied just as strictly .
After years of uncertainty , democratic debate in both the old and the new Member countries of the Union will now be on firm ground .
The very positive outcome of the referendum in Malta is an auspicious sign and an incentive to even greater efforts .
Important though it is , the accession of the new Member countries is only one stage in the process , and it must not obscure the fact that there is still much to do .
The first job is to complete economic integration .
The current 15 Member States can and must do much more to promote growth and employment and to reduce disparities .
It is the future Members , however , those that are to join next year and those that will join a little later , which warrant the greatest attention .
Our shared goal must be to foster sustained growth , strengthen cohesion , step up environmental protection , reduce disparities and , ultimately , encourage all to adopt the euro .
Broadly speaking , those are the main points of our economic integration project .
While this is our first priority , the second task is to advance the political debate , and that is equally important .
It is time we had an in-depth , honest , completely transparent debate on the type of Europe we want to build together .
The very success of our integration has already made it unavoidable .
The Iraq crisis and the state of international relations mean we can put it off no longer .
The possibility of war in Iraq deeply stirs the feelings of Europeans because reconciliation and peace lie at the very foundations of the European Union .
It affects us Europeans all the more here and now because chance would have it that four of our Member Sates and one candidate country are currently members of the UN Security Council .
In this situation , we have to guard against two temptations .
One temptation would be to build a Europe that is in opposition to the United States .
This crisis is marked by widely diverging views on the instruments to be used .
These differences are important because they mark the line between war and peace , but they do not affect the ultimate objective of our policies or the solidity of our alliance or cast doubt on the whole web of transatlantic relations , our shared history and the extent of our bonds .
The second temptation we must guard against is focusing solely on the dissension within the Union .
Differing views have clearly emerged among both the 15 Member States and the future Members in recent weeks .
However , as the extraordinary meeting of the European Council of 17 February rightly pointed out , we are all agreed on a large number of fundamental points .
We all want the UN to remain the cornerstone of world order .
We all support the Security Council in carrying out its duties .
We all believe that war is not inevitable but , at the same time , we think that Iraq must be made to face up to its responsibilities .
That said , we must confront our weaknesses head on .
Indeed , we Europeans not only have a political obligation to reach a common position : after Maastricht , we are obliged by the Treaties to show loyalty and mutual solidarity .
The Member States on the Security Council have a particular duty to coordinate their actions and keep others informed of what is happening , while the permanent members should defend the positions and interests of the Union .
The mechanisms for this are clearly inadequate , but does this mean we have to wring our hands and conclude that the objective of joint action is unachievable ?
Absolutely not .
Failure to put in place effective procedures and instruments that facilitate the emergence of shared positions will make it hard to forge a common Union foreign policy and will certainly delay it .
Our imagination and our determination must be equal to the challenge .
Giving in is absolutely out of the question .
The questions before us , which we have to answer , are both difficult and crucial .
What kind of Europe do we want ?
What guideline are we following ?
I personally cannot be content with a ' supermarket ' , or some sort of large Single Market .
Do we not want to build a genuine political area that allows us to affirm and defend our principles and our values throughout the world ?
Then we cannot continue indefinitely in this state of ' European schizophrenia ' in which we expect the Union and the integration process to provide prosperity and development while relying on the United States to guarantee our security .
European public opinion is remarkably clear about what it wants .
The regular Eurobarometer surveys carried out by the Commission reveal that our citizens , in particular , want the Union to ensure their security , both at home and abroad .
This afternoon , to step up our commitment in the defence sector , the College will adopt a Communication strengthening the European defence industry .
On the question of war and peace - and we have had a spectacular and unprecedented demonstration of the public 's views in the streets and squares of our cities - the shared views of the public know no barriers in Europe .
This is a sign that the peoples of Europe are moving closer together , a sign which prefigures and anticipates the reform of the European institutions and procedures .
This shared sentiment , this spontaneous sharing of values in no way reduces the importance of an in-depth , open political debate : it only emphasises the need for it even more .
It was no accident that the Commission 's first contribution to the Convention on 22 May 2002 proposed a project for Europe that highlighted , amongst other things , the need for a Union that can ' exercise the responsibilities of a world power . '
One of the few benefits of the tragic Iraq crisis is that it is actually forcing us to talk honestly about the very nature of our way of coexisting and doing things .
We must not be afraid of an open debate , for it is only through dialogue that possible solutions can emerge .
This brings me to the Convention .
I have always believed that our mission was to bring about enlargement and reform of the institutions in parallel .
As they stand , the institutions and procedures , conceived and designed for a community of six largely homogenous States , no longer meet the requirements of a larger , more diverse Union .
That is why I feel it is positive that the candidate countries have been full members of the Convention right from the beginning and that they are making an active contribution to it .
Indeed , I would like to stress that one of the most encouraging aspects of the Convention 's work is precisely the way delegates meet and work in a variety of mixed configurations that make any distinction between the representatives of the present and the future Member States essentially impossible .
This is not the time or the place to go into the progress made by the Convention , but I would like to say that the wide consensus on issues such as the constitutional nature of the text to be produced , the streamlining of instruments and procedures , the full inclusion of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the legal personality of the Union is grounds for optimism regarding its conclusion .
As I have said , this is not the place to go into details , but there is one point I regard as essential , in the light of both the international crisis and the role the Union is called to play on the international stage ; I am referring to the use of majority voting across the board .
The requirement of unanimity actually causes paralysis , as we have seen in recent days .
This is already the case now and will be even more of a problem in the enlarged Union we have decided to build .
This is another reason why we need an open political debate on the new enlarged Europe .
Only if we have devised a common project will we be ready to fully accept the basic rule of every democratic institution , which is majority voting .
Only when we feel that we agree on all the basic elements that unite us will we be able to accept being in a minority whenever necessary while still feeling fully represented .
Ladies and gentlemen , today 's annual policy strategy debate will define the political horizons and resource framework for 2004 .
It kicks off a process that will end with the adoption of the budget and the presentation of the legislative work programme for next year .
Throughout this process , we shall be engaged in an intense detailed debate with Parliament and the Council in order to define the fundamental political options .
I would stress that the work of the Parliamentary committees will be of crucial importance here , in particular .
A new element in the strategy for next year is the 2004 - 2006 multiannual programme that is to be approved by the European Council , a completely new departure .
I am confident that our interinstitutional cooperation will generate a work programme that matches our ambitions , and we have very high ambitions , as is quite clear from the political priorities we have set ourselves for 2004 .
Indeed , next year , our efforts will focus on enlargement , growth and internal and external security .
Without going into the details of the individual aspects of this programme , I would like to draw your attention to the issue of our relations with countries that are already our neighbours or will be neighbours of the enlarged Union .
I am referring to the band of countries stretching from Russia and Ukraine to Morocco .
With this ring of friendly countries we propose to step up cooperation to start a process that may in time lead us to share ' everything except institutions ' with all of them .
A common market , a reinvigorated political dialogue based on shared principles and values and the harnessing of the full external potential of our common policies : these are the pillars of the new strategic concept for the Union that we are setting out in a communication on a ' Wider Europe ' .
Only in a wider area of stability and prosperity can Europe deal safely with the sometimes disturbing developments on the world stage and fully exploit the opportunities offered by globalisation .
Like all Europe 's policies for the coming years , this medium- to long-term strategy for relations with neighbouring countries calls for the preparation of a political project for the Union , and its financial implications will need to be determined .
The medium-term political programme preparing the forthcoming Financial Perspective will play a key role here .
The Financial Perspective must not only be in line with the constitutional Treaty that will emerge from the Convention and the subsequent intergovernmental conference but also lay the necessary foundations for an enlarged Union that strives to achieve three major political objectives : peace , freedom and solidarity .
In this regard , by the end of the year or , at the latest , in early 2004 , we shall put forward our overall political project for the enlarged Europe and outline the broad guidelines for the financial proposals it calls for .
Then , we will prepare the relevant legislative proposals so that they are ready for adoption towards the middle of next year .
We have completed the enlargement negotiations . Now we must define the political project for the enlarged Union .
This means we must say what can be done at Union level to foster and safeguard civil liberties , how the Union can complement Member States ' laws in fundamental areas such as health , security and the area of freedom and justice , what policies at Union level can best contribute to sustainable prosperity in Europe , what objectives the Union should set itself to further regional and social cohesion in an enlarged Europe that will have much greater economic disparities than the Union of Fifteen , what changes will be needed in research policy and the Structural Funds to achieve those objectives , whether expenditure on cohesion should rise , fall or remain unaltered if economic inequalities are to be reduced both between Union countries and within the individual Members , and , lastly , what policies are needed to project the European model externally , particularly in countries that are close to us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as we have seen today , the Union is a Union on a journey .
A Union that must draw on present experience to grow stronger , so that it can assert its identity and its role in the world more decisively .
The current crisis must serve as an incentive for us to speed up the reform process which is underway . This process is necessary irrespective of enlargement , but enlargement and the present international context make it even more imperative and urgent .
Today , we have a chance to reinvigorate our unity .
Our fellow citizens are calling for this and events leave us no choice .
The Convention is a potential turning point in the life of our Community : let us all strive to make it a success .
Together , we can succeed .
Together , we can and must lay the political and financial foundations to complement the institutional basis and open this new chapter .
The work we accomplish together this year and next year will , to a large extent , dictate the nature and role of the Union in the world , the Union we will leave to future generations .
Mr President , first of all , the PPE-DE Group appreciates the documents which the Commission has put in front of us this morning .
It is an historic and unique occasion .
This is the first time in our history where we have had the opportunity to debate budget guidelines with policy documents at the same time .
So now we can see how we begin to fit the priorities to the resources available .
It is a pity that the Council is not with us because it too could have been part of this debate .
I shall start with the broad document which has been produced by the Commission this morning .
It sets out the outline of Union finances post-2006 , rightly asking which project we want in terms , for example , of the competences that the Union will have , the limits to the geographical size of the Union , and a whole range of matters which set our budget debate in the right perspective .
First I shall deal with the substance .
It is right that we should have a range of ideas , with working groups set up by the Commission dealing with peace and prosperity and with questions of sustainable development .
But in terms of the external side , the working group does not cover what the external dimension of the Union should be .
As the President said about the current context , it would seem to be relevant that we should be thinking about substantive issues such as what the transatlantic partnership is going to be like in five years ' time .
We have asked for a report .
It has not been produced .
Indeed , we included in the budget for this year - 2003 - a request to have a document drawn up .
When one asks the question , ' what should be the strategic priorities for the Union in the external field to 2007 ? ' a deathly silence descends .
Next , in terms of procedure , we should be a little careful that this Commission , although very active in looking forward to the next financial perspective , could bring us in theory to 2013 , which not only covers the next Commission but also the Commission after that .
To find ourselves in 2003 already discussing 2013 all seems rather far away .
In this context there is one specific question I would like to ask the President of the Commission .
The last phrase of this interesting document says that the duration of the next financial perspective could be brought into line with the five-year mandate of the Commission and of the European Parliament .
Does that mean that the financial perspective would be to 2010 instead of 2013 ?
The PPE-DE Group is in favour of the financial perspective covering a five-year period .
I would like some clarity on that point .
While talking about the Commission , Mr President , you mentioned the Convention .
When we envisage a post-2006 Union with 500 million people or more , how will it be possible to run a Union with fewer Commissioners than we have today ?
There seems to be this refrain across the House at the moment that we should have 10 to 12 Commissioners .
I do not see how we can run a Commission with only 10 to 12 Commissioners when most governments have at least 30 to 35 ministers to run their own countries .
We are dealing here with the Union , a much bigger enterprise , so why not have 30 or 35 Commissioners ?
It seems to me quite normal that we should do so in the context of the Union of tomorrow .
Secondly , the priorities of the budget for 2004 are well set out in the annual policy strategy document in terms of the three points that are made .
Concerning sustainable growth , it makes sense to have better integration of environmental concerns .
In addition , the PPE-DE Group is interested in the document concerning a better relationship with our neighbours in terms of security and stability .
Above all , we are interested in the enlargement process and in making sure that we can fulfil our obligations and that Member States are fully integrated into the Union after 1 May 2004 .
We also share the view that the procedure for dealing with these policy strategies as they go through the committees and then through the budget process will be very important in order for us to be able to see that they are properly brought together .
The questions we will be asking concern the significant rise of 780 in staffing numbers and , in particular , whether we need so many civil servants in the interpretation and translation departments .
Finally , I come to my group 's priorities during the budgetary process .
We remain faithful to what has guided us in the last few budgets in terms of three particular elements which are important to us .
Firstly , the completion of the reform of the institutions .
This is where the Commission started out .
We would like to ensure that this reform is completed by the end of our mandate .
We still find irritations here .
Yesterday mention was made of a document which was quoted partially in the press about the ongoing affair of the chief accountant who has been suspended .
We would like to see that document .
It is not so secret - most Members , including myself , have a copy .
Why is there this fear , this wish to keep secret a document that is already half-known ?
We would like to see that document as soon as possible .
Secondly , there is the question of the A-30 subsidy lines - a specific , but very sensitive point for Parliament .
We would like to be clear on what the Commission will be proposing in terms of these subsidies for particular institutions .
We have differing views across Parliament as to what should and should not be benchmarked and we need a common approach on that .
My last comment pertains to a letter I have from the Secretary-General about follow-up to parliamentary acts .
Here we find that at least 25 % or 30 % of reports that we ask for in this House are never produced .
It states with regard to Parliament resolutions on COS documents that , of the 490 requests we made last year , the Commission has decided not to follow up 104 cases .
We would like clarification as to why the Commission is not doing what Parliament requests and we certainly feel that there should be some reflection in the budgetary process if the Commission does not wish to do what Parliament has requested .
I conclude by saying that this is a key moment in this budgetary process .
The Commission has set out some useful lines of discussion and debate looking ahead post-2004 .
I hope that at the end of the process our Parliament will be able to reach the right conclusions in the interests of our citizens .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , we are presented here today with a highly technocratic document and a speech by you , Mr Prodi .
I would not want to deny that the speech , being political , is more to my taste .
What I would like to do is to try and bridge the gulf between the two elements .
You are indeed right , President Prodi , to say that the framework conditions are far from favourable , and they will probably not be anything like favourable in 2004 either .
The threat of war in Iraq has opened new fault lines within the European Union and also within the candidate countries .
Today , unless there is radical change , our foreign and security policy lies in tatters , and economic developments - particularly where jobs are concerned - have not been as favourable as we expected .
This means that we have to take a rather more critical approach to things .
Let me start with what enlargement is intended to achieve .
It is indeed the case that we have to see to it that enlargement ends up being a success .
To all those who - perhaps with the events of the last few months in mind - have given it as their opinion today that we have to delay enlargement , I would like to put the counter-argument that this would divide and weaken Europe still further .
I concede , though , that many of us are disappointed at how little evidence there is among many of our neighbours - and , admittedly , among some of our members - of any emotional and intellectual attachment to the European project .
They are right to say that the European Union is not a supermarket , and that it is not a bank either , one from which one just collects money for a few projects .
Nor is it an artefact that exists only to be used as a justification when unpleasant but necessary reform measures have to be taken .
Mr President , I believe that we have probably all failed - and not only in relation to the Iraq issue - to highlight the objectives and actual raison d 'être of the EU as a peace project .
President Prodi mentioned the International Criminal Court .
Here too , we have neglected to convince the new members of the immense importance to us of , for example , the International Criminal Court , and also of the United Nations , and of how dear these multilateral institutions are to us .
That was a mistake and a failure .
Perhaps we are paying the price for what was sometimes a too legalistic and narrow view of the acquis communautaire .

The Commission is now proposing that we should establish a circle of friends around the enlarged EU , but , President Prodi , we have , over the past few years , not even managed to gain enough friends among the governments of the candidate countries , and we have to concede that the Americans have sometimes had more success in alienating at least the governments of certain countries even before their accession , using lobbyists ' money , a closely-woven network of institutions and foundations , some of them funded by the diaspora , and , where necessary , pressure and threats as well .
The Commission also has the task of considering how we can counteract that , and how , above all at the level of culture and society , we can put the European idea across to more of the public , in addition to the united voice of the European Union .
Let me now deal with stability in and around Europe .
Here too , I believe , we have to take a rather broader and deeper view of the individual regions and shape relationships along appropriate lines .
The objectives involved are too imprecise and undifferentiated , as Russia needs to be handled in a different way from the Mediterranean , which in turn calls for an approach different from that taken to the Balkan countries , which , by the way , have been potential candidates ever since the Zagreb Summit even though this paper states that they have yet to acquire that status .
We must concede , though , that our visa policy as regards these countries - to which I travel very frequently - is lousy .
Business people , scientists , journalists , students - all those who could help to foster friendship with these countries - are often deterred by a visa policy that is highly restrictive , mindlessly unmoveable and bureaucratic , irksome to these people and , above all , to the most important opinion leaders in the countries from which they come .
We must of course have a restrictive visa policy , but these social groups could receive flexible treatment under it .
Now for the third objective - sustainable growth .
I admit that this is a very vague concept , but it is one that already means a number of things to me .
I simply ask myself whether we really do have a coherent policy for growth .
We invest too little - not only in research and development , but also in infrastructure .
Think of public transport , which could also do more for the environment .
Too little is being done to make educational establishments more efficient while maintaining access to them for the broad mass of the population .
We often accuse people - our own citizens - of lacking the willingness and courage to take risks .
If , though , the gaps in the social networks in our own countries become ever wider and let more people fall through , it is not surprising if people are often afraid - of risks as much as of anything else .
Likewise , the progressive undermining of services of general interest - an area in which we are still awaiting a coherent policy from the European Union , and especially from the Commission - often has the unfortunate effect of leading some people to blindly oppose globalisation , or , at any rate , to be suspicious of the common market .
Here , too , I want to underline what you said . The European Union is indeed not a supermarket .
We should be perfectly capable of combining the objectives of sustainable development with social market economic policies .
My group does not see the desire for greater individuality , more flexibility , more mobility , more - to use a new expression - employability , as an antiquated concept .
We will have succeeded when people throughout Europe have an appropriate social security network available to them .
My group is firmly convinced that - even if only to avoid unfair competition - this network must also embrace those who have migrated here .
We must therefore affirm our commitment to a European model of capitalism , one that , in the long term , is more efficient , more social , and more humane .
Let me conclude by reiterating my warm welcome , and that of my group , for this paper .
It is my belief , though , President Prodi , that , as you said in your speech , we need more conviction in matters of policy , as well as strategies that come to terms with the popular mindset , both in our own countries and among our neighbours .
Do something , Mr President , to ensure that the Commission 's documents clearly express the nature of the European project - that it is neither technocratic nor administrative , but political .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to extend my warmest thanks to both of the rapporteurs , and the Commission too , of course , for all their work .
I share the disappointment of my fellow Member Mr Elles with regard to the absence of the Council .
Today we are discussing the budget guidelines and the Commission policy strategy at the same time , as we hoped that a kind of synergy would arise between the two .
That is very difficult , however , when those policy intentions are tabled so late : too late to discuss them at length in the groups and also too late to compare them with the guidelines drawn up by the European Parliament .
Therefore , my group believes that it is important to choose another moment this year for the Commission to clearly set out its specific priorities for the coming year ; not a laundry list of good intentions , therefore , but political choices combined with a time schedule .
Indeed , we have little time left in this legislative period .
I take as an example the agreements concerning chemicals .
These are supposed to be implemented in 2004 , but there is a danger that a number of changes which have been agreed upon will be presented too late , which may mean that the procedure for these additional changes cannot be finalised before the end of this term .
In that case , of course , there is no way we can make that 2004 implementation date , and my group is concerned about this .
In a different context , too , the motto of my group in recent months has always been ' make law not war ' .
In our view , legal instruments and abiding by agreements are essential ; especially in matters of human rights and democracy .
We should like , therefore , to make further agreements on the clauses included in the treaties with third countries .
Parliament must play a role in monitoring those agreements , and conclusions must also be drawn .
How else is it possible to prevent those important clauses - to which the European Union also makes constant reference in order to indicate its support for human rights and democracy - becoming just empty words ?
The equal treatment of men and women also touches the heart of the Union 's values .
Last Saturday was 8 March - International Women 's Day - and so I thought it fitting to say something about that here , too .
The directives have been very influential in the emancipation of women and it is vital that they are complied with , including in the candidate countries .
This is a part of the acquis communautaire that has to be adopted without transitional periods .
I expect the Commission to indicate whether , in its opinion , it has sufficient financial and administrative means for this .
If not , this is another part that must be included in the budgetary procedure .
I should now like to turn to a point of an entirely different order .
The report by Mrs Gill states - against her wishes , incidentally - that political parties have to be paid out of Parliament 's budget .
This really leaves me dumbfounded .
Have we not learnt anything from the report by the Court of Auditors , which said that there must be no interconnection between the groups and the political parties ?
In addition , this would make the line between donating money and buying votes a very fine one .
Could it be that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats finds it convenient that the Council has no control over these funds , because in that case the Council , in accordance with the gentlemen 's agreement , will also not have any say as regards the funds for the political parties ?
In the view of my group , that is unacceptable .
If , against our hopes , the amendment by the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , advocating the inclusion of those funds in the general Commission budget , is not adopted , we shall unfortunately feel compelled to vote against the report .
Mr President , the 2004 financial year will be an unusual one for several reasons .
Firstly , our Budget will have to take into account the fact that , on 1 May of that year , ten new Member States will probably be joining us .
For this to be possible , the financial perspective will have to be changed .
Negotiations are still taking place on this subject , but , as far as Parliament is concerned , adoption of the acts of accession , and the figures they contain , should not automatically signify approval of the financial perspective .
Further discussions will be needed on this subject .
Parliament has a very strong preference for a budget to be adopted in December of this year for 25 Member States .
That means that we shall have to work on the basis of 15 Member States for the first part of 2004 and then , as of 1 May 2004 , for the ten new Member States on top .
The budgets will therefore have to contain certain remarks to make this possible .
Another new element of the 2004 budget to which I hope Members will become accustomed is a new system called ' activity-based budgeting ' .
As I have said , everyone will have to become accustomed to this .
What are the priorities of the 2004 budget ?
First of all - and Mr Prodi has already said this - we have to see to it that the economies of the new Member States are integrated into those of the present Member States .
We must promote economic activity and , to that end , we must first of all create better investment opportunities in those countries , and we must look into all the means to make that possible .
The second priority of the budget is improving administrative capacity in those countries .
How will they be able to cope with the enormous sums of money they receive and how can they see to it that good projects are submitted ?
I now wish to say something about the various budget headings ; starting with heading 1 , agriculture .
Everything will depend on the results of Commissioner Fischler 's mid-term review , but irrespective of this , we should like attention to be paid to a number of matters .
First among these is the question as to the precise nature of the relationship between the payment of agricultural subsidies and European environmental guidelines .
We shall have to determine this more precisely .
The second point concerns the question as to whether it will be possible to develop insurance schemes in the future for animal diseases .
We are currently seeing avian influenza in the Netherlands , and we have seen foot-and-mouth disease and swine fever .
We shall have to look into this .
Furthermore , is it possible to take further action to promote the sale of agricultural products , especially high-quality agricultural products ?
Regarding heading 2 , structural funds , the main thing is that we have to do what we have promised .
We have to see to it that the countries who have been told they may receive structural funds do actually receive these and that the administrative restrictions are not too restrictive .
We shall have to investigate the consequences of the n + 2 rule and the consequences of the 4 % performance reserve .
As regards heading 3 , internal policy actions , a number of items under this heading have already been laid down .
For the rest , we shall have to devote attention to what Europe can do in the field of combating terrorism - which is very topical at this time .
What can be done better at European level than in the individual Member States ?
What can we do towards the establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice , towards better protection of the external borders and a better asylum policy ?
What can we do to improve nuclear safety in the new Member States ?
Lastly , I should like to raise another point : what can we do about the proliferation of agencies ?
It seems that every year yet more agencies are added .
Is that not excessive ?
I should also like to raise a final point : what can we do about the ageing population of Europe ?
As always , heading 4 requires special attention , particularly at this time .
What will be the consequences of any crisis in Iraq or a crisis in the Middle East ?
We shall be confronted by many more points , and we shall therefore have to keep a close eye on those .
Concerning heading 5 , administrative expenditure , we shall have to look carefully at the results of the Commission reform .
We shall also have to see what the results of the extra allocation of officials have been which we have carried out in the past , et cetera .
Regarding the last point , heading 7 , a decision was taken in Copenhagen to categorise aid to Turkey under heading 7 , and the Commission agrees .
The Council , however , has also said that we shall have to wait until 2004 to look at whether negotiations with Turkey can begin .
We shall have to look at whether this heading will have to be renamed and whether we shall have to divide it up into different sub-headings , et cetera .
My final point - I can hear your hammer , Mr President - is that I am anticipating constructive cooperation with everyone in this Parliament , and especially with the many committees .
Lastly , I shall also be paying special attention to the point raised by Mr Elles .
Mr President , the 2004 other institutions budget , as Mr Mulder has said , will be the first one for the European Union composed of 25 Member States .
Consequently , it is likely to be more complex than any other and I would therefore like to thank everyone at the outset for their cooperation .
For me it is imperative that the European institutions are provided with the necessary means to complete their preparations , because enlargement must be visibly successful to the European citizen .
Within this context , there are three main themes in my resolution .
Firstly , to achieve greater accountability through improved presentation and transparency of the budget .
I want to improve the quality of the spending , not just achieve the spending .
There is a need for further development of the information on most important cost factors , to achieve greater effectiveness and sound financial management .
Real transparency will only really be evident externally to European citizens if we have it in the first instance internally .
Our current system does not always lend itself readily to achieving this goal .
Decision-making is too centralised and there is not enough devolution and delegation in management structures .
Whilst we are on transparency , one of the major new areas under consideration is funding for political parties .
I am very disappointed that those on the other side of this House , who claim to be champions of transparency , are pushing for funding within Parliament 's budget instead of the Commission 's .
Surely this will leave us open to allegations that we are looking after our own political interest .
This budget line should remain with the Commission , which has the mechanisms for managing it objectively .
The Commission is wrong to take a very short-term view and propose otherwise .
My second main concern is that we connect and communicate more coherently with the people of Europe .
We need to be more innovative and ambitious in almost every area of our operation , never more so than in our information and communication policies .
When it comes to informatics , our website has to be seen more as a communication tool than just an information port .
Parliament has to play an even greater role in the interinstitutional communication strategy executed by the Commission .
Furthermore , we need greater endeavours by everyone to ensure active citizenship and civic participation .
It is therefore crucial that European citizens are better informed about the activities of Parliament and how European legislation can influence their daily lives .
To achieve this we need to consider creating a European public media space .
My third theme is to create a flexible framework for the future operations of Parliament and other institutions .
This is probably one of the greatest challenges for all the institutions and I welcome the ' raising the game ' proposals put forward by Parliament 's Secretary-General to improve the focus of our secretariat 's activities and give greater legislative assistance to Members .
It has to be said , though , that this is a fairly tame set of proposals .
Within these proposals there is one for establishing a tabling office , which is definitely a step in the right direction .
I know there are those who have reservations about this , but if we are honest with ourselves the number of mind-bogglingly trivial amendments that we have to deal with is astonishing .
I would have welcomed greater ambition and innovation from the Secretary-General , but I recognise the limited appetite our institution has for reform and change .
In conclusion , I have been a rapporteur for only the last couple of months .
However , I have discovered the process to be extremely instructive .
I have found nooks and crannies in this House that I never knew existed .
If I may beg your indulgence , I would like to share some of my initial impressions with you .
I have come across some amazingly talented , committed and hard-working people , but for every one of them there are two who just appear to float .
It is remarkable that this House achieves what it does and continues to evolve , given the resistance in almost every structure .
The culture I have come across throughout the institution seems to be extremely hostile to even a small amount of change and no sooner has an opinion been expressed than there are letters flying around objecting to it .
There are few who have truly appreciated the full implications of enlargement .
There is a belief that we can carry on doing things as we have up to now , but just do them ten times more .
The people of the new Member States have had to show extreme flexibility in moving from the old system to the new system .
We in the institutions need to start showing similar flexibility if we are to enhance the credibility of our institutions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the annual policy strategy gives a framework to the 2004 Budget , which will be special in that it will be the first Budget for people in twenty-five Member States and , officially speaking , the first Budget in the new form in which greater emphasis is laid on European Union policies .
Enlargement will become a reality in 2004 , and we in the institutions must do everything possible to ensure that it is a success from the very outset .
The new Member States will participate from the day they join in all the programmes funded by the European Budget - programmes in agricultural policy , structural policy , environmental policy , the research programmes , and , to take another example , the programmes to promote trans-European networks .
Whilst the financial framework for the new Member States was negotiated in Copenhagen , the adjustment of the Financial Perspective has to be a decision taken jointly by the Council , Parliament and the Commission . That being so , it necessarily follows that Parliament has , as agreed , the right to examine the appropriateness of the proposal to the financial adjustment of the framework .
I do hope , though , that we will be able to come to a joint resolution on the adjustment of the financial framework before the treaties are formally signed on the Agora in Athens .
Speaking for the Commission , I can reiterate that we will of course give you every assistance in examining every option when it comes to framing a joint resolution on this .
In 2004 there will be new programmes for the new Member States , for example the Schengen facility , which will be , for the first time , a sort of cofinancing arrangement , whereby the European Budget will fund the performance of tasks in fulfilment of the Schengen criteria .
For the first time , too , there will be financial aid , for example for the decommissioning of atomic power stations .
As the new Member States will also , however , have to transpose legislation on competition and the environment from day one , the Commission will also be asking the budgetary authority , as soon as this year , to authorise additional posts , and , as we will have to cope with a new linguistic diversity , half the posts required in 2004 will be reserved to the language services .
Among the other priorities for 2004 are the maintenance of political stability , and , as the President of the Commission was just saying , this has both an external and an internal dimension .
As regards the external effects , this priority will find expression in the Budget by our proposal for an increase in funds for the Balkan region and also for the MEDA programme .
The Commission also proposes that pre-accession aid for Bulgaria and Romania - as promised to both those countries - should be increased in order to give both these countries more help towards achieving their goal of becoming Member States of the European Union in 2007 .
The Commission also proposes that funds for Turkey should be substantially increased in order to support processes of reform and its preparations for accession to the European Union .
The Commission will , in addition , be putting forward a new proposal for dealing with migration issues within the various policy areas .
We will be proposing a new multiannual programme for this .
Another priority is sustainable growth , which means that , for example , one of our proposals that needs to be improved is that on ways of combating marine pollution arising from tanker accidents , and we also need to build up resources for the fight against communicable diseases .
When I compare this list with what Mr Mulder said in his speech and with your report , on which I congratulate you , many of the priorities set for the 2004 Budget by Parliament and the Commission appear to be very similar .
In so far as that is the case , I also hope that we will be able to bring the Budget procedure to a satisfactory conclusion .
I also want to congratulate Mrs Gill on her report .
I would like to use the time remaining to me to deal briefly with two questions that have been put .
The first question has to do with the proposal for an instrument for the Budget lines in Chapter A-30 .
We will be putting such a proposal to Parliament at the end of April .
As regards the second , on the funding of parties , what is crucial in the first place is that we at last achieve the breakthrough and enact a legal basis enabling this chapter to be concluded in such a way that there is a quite unambiguous legal base on which funds can be allocated to this from the European Budget .
As regards the question of who , in view of the separation of the powers , is most competent to administer such funds , we will certainly still have the opportunity to debate this in greater depth .
In 2004 , enlargement - an historic event - will be a reality .
The President of the Commission has described how the Commission has decided to discharge its responsibility and submit proposals for the Union 's tasks , and the financial resources they will require , in the period after 2006 .
The Commission has a very open mind as regards the arguments as to whether this proposal for the new Financial Perspective - that is to say , for the period after 2006 - should cover the period up to 2013 or 2011 .
I take the view that this is in fact a propitious time to shift to a five-year cycle .
We are fortunate in that we will have the time to debate these matters together and determine the best framework .
The proposal on the financial framework must be appropriate to the challenges that the future will bring , and , in financial terms , these will affect the issues Mr Mulder raised , of what we can do to really make Europe into an economy based on knowledge and the most competitive economy of all , of how much more we can contribute to this from the Budget , and of which programmes are required in order to do this .



The expectations to which the President of the Commission referred - that is to say , the public 's expectation that the European Union should contribute to their security - invite the question as to what , for example , that means for the European Budget .
As the task of securing our borders is a matter of common interest , should it not find its expression in some sort of joint financing ?
Enlargement will result in increased economic disparities within the European Union , and this will make particular demands on the funds we will be injecting as an expression of solidarity .
These tasks will make it necessary for us to submit proposals .
Even if , as a European Union , we want to play a greater role in foreign affairs , this will have to be set down in appropriate proposals on the Budget .
This means that our task will be to produce proposals for a Union consisting of twenty-five or twenty-seven Member States , and it stands to reason that any such proposals must represent an added value for the citizens of the European Union .
I can already promise you that we will make use of the time available to us this year to work closely with Parliament in elaborating these proposals .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Gill , Mr Mulder , this year is another in which our committee has concentrated its attention on the central issues of security on the external borders and complete freedom of movement , which are of great importance in terms of the finance allocated to the Budget areas within our committee 's remit .
It is unfortunate that , this year again , I have to observe that we have still not progressed much further as regards the complete realisation of internal freedom of movement .
It is for that reason that we urgently need the requisite funds to secure our borders and defend ourselves against the trafficking of human beings .
We continue to need unambiguous common rules for legal immigration .
The reinforcement of Europol and Eurojust , along with the fight against terrorism , continue to be among the European Union 's most urgent tasks .
Our objective remains what it always has been - the creation of a common judicial area , by which means alone we will succeed in winning the public over to enlargement and convincing them of its advantages .
It is with specific reference to enlargement that I want to draw attention today to the increasing cost of internal security in the European Union of the future .
The EU will have to spend a good deal more money on both Eurodac and Eurojust if we want , for example , to achieve an equally high standard of protection on the new borders when the EU has enlarged to include twenty-five states .
Schengen , too , will , in future , result in further increases of expenditure for the EU , which will , as I have said , have a total of 25 Member States .
What all this means is that the internal policy budget will have to be topped up if the European Union is to do justice to its objectives and tasks , and if the area of freedom , security and justice is not to have a merely theoretical existence .
It is for this reason that I appeal to my fellow Members to support the amendment we have tabled today on the guidelines for the 2004 Budget procedure and the amendments that will be brought in during the forthcoming debates on the Budget .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
( NL ) Thank you , Mr President .
To begin with , I am pleased that Mr Mulder is a rapporteur this year . Whilst being a member of the Committee on Budgets , he is very well informed on agriculture , and , as a member of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I should also like to express my confidence that we shall enjoy constructive cooperation with the Committee on Budgets and with this rapporteur .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development would like to make a couple of main points with regard to the guidelines .
To begin with , we note that a particular policy is starting to take shape with regard to animal diseases in Europe .
Regarding the keeping of animals , the European Union has different legislation from other parts of the world , and our policy makes animals more vulnerable to disease .
I note that , in the past , we have had outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease and swine fever in the European Union , and now we have another outbreak of avian influenza .
That means that we need a better policy and also need to develop better insurance systems in order to adequately combat precisely this sort of crisis , and , furthermore , must also set aside sufficient funds to enable livestock farmers and livestock farming to survive this kind of crisis .
I therefore welcome the fact that Mr Mulder 's report includes what is necessary in that regard .
The second point concerns the shift in the sector towards greater market orientation .
That means that we must do more for promotion , market orientation and the organisation of the financial policy in this field .
The third point concerns the new Member States , in regard to which this is a historic budget .
I refer to the report by Mr Xaver Mayer , in which he expressly asks that the Sapard funding be paid out in any case in the new Member States .
If this should cause problems of a legislative nature , we shall have to try to find a satisfactory solution , but in any case , these funds must also be paid out in the new Member States in future , especially for the restructuring of agriculture and horticulture .
It is also important that policy , especially with regard to food safety , the development of animal welfare , and environmental instruments in agriculture , be geared more towards the development of instruments for financial policy .
Mr President , Commissioner Schreyer , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to support the position adopted by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats with regard to Mr Mulder 's report on the 2004 budget guidelines . My remarks are also addressed to the representatives of the Council although they do not appear to be present .
Thanks are due to the rapporteur for his ideas and for the care he has taken to include most of the ideas expressed by others into the report .
My group fully endorses the report . Indeed we support it so strongly that we have not tabled a single amendment to it in the House .
We trust that only a limited number of the amendments tabled by other groups will be adopted .
Turning to a more contentious issue , as the rapporteur mentioned , the 2004 budgetary period will be unusual throughout . Initially , the budget will apply to 15 Member States .
At the close of the period it will , however , apply to 25 . This will call for an additional effort to reach understanding between the three institutions , whereas relations are currently somewhat strained .
Times are hard for Europe and even harder for the wider world .
The 2004 budget should represent a statement of faith in ourselves . We should be confident of our potential and abilities as Europeans .
Further , the 2004 budget should help to strengthen Europe 's role and influence beyond its borders . This is sorely needed as our common foreign policy , its instruments and even the individuals charged with operating them appear to have gone missing in advance of the action .
The Europe foreshadowed in the Mulder report is a united Europe . It is a Europe able to generate competitiveness and employment .
It is also a Europe to be relied on by its partners in the wider world , and a Europe better able to manage its common policies . Interinstitutional cooperation is one of the prerequisites to such a Europe .
Unfortunately it cannot currently be guaranteed . Paragraphs 2 , 3 and 5 of this very report state that enlargement financial perspectives are to be approved jointly by the Council and the European Parliament .
This does not seem to be the case at present .
Parliament must have a considerable say regarding the financing of internal and external policy , if Europe is to prove a reliable partner , and if we are to become competitive and create employment .
Global amounts for the adjustment of financial perspectives must not be set unilaterally .
Parliament must be entitled to identify the shortfall in these areas and negotiate adequate sums .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is prepared to negotiate with the Council and the Commission concerning these areas . They are key to the achievement of the objectives identified by Mr Mulder .
In the present climate of disunity and dissent , the Union 's institutions are called on to illustrate dialogue and cooperation , not to contribute to the unrest .
Mr President , as has already been mentioned on quite a few occasions , the budgeting for 2004 is particularly exciting and particularly complicated because of enlargement and the continued reforms of EU budgeting .
This is now the first year involving the activity-based budget , which will make it simpler for us all in future to interpret the political messages in the budget .
I should like to begin by thanking Mr Mulder and Mrs Gill for their constructive and well set-out discussion documents for the work on the 2004 budget .
The objective of this year 's budget has been to unify Europe , for enlargement means that there is a need for a range of new initiatives . In this context , I would especially mention the need for the Commission 's reforms to be implemented in such a way that the administration becomes genuinely efficient and is made sufficiently flexible for it to be possible , once and for all , to straighten out those problems that led to the Commission 's departure in 1999 .
If we do not get the problems solved now , matters will become so much the more difficult in an enlarged EU .
It may be argued that enlargement will provide special opportunities for sorting out a number of problems . On the other hand , the difficulties in solving them will also be exacerbated .
As Mrs Gill mentioned , that also applies , of course , in relation to our own institution , Parliament , which will no doubt have to be persuaded to tidy up its administration .
It is important for us to set aside the necessary funds for the continued development of administration , training and social dialogue in the new Member States .
That also applies to the budgets for the agencies in the spheres of training and the labour market .
The last point I wish to make is that , upon enlargement , the EU will acquire new borders in the east . In the budget , aid to the former Soviet bloc countries is to be provided through the Tacis programmes which provide money for administrative development , training and the promotion of safety in connection with nuclear power stations .
It is important for Tacis to continue to ensure that the projects are properly implemented . Nuclear safety , in particular , is a high political priority .
I am delighted that , in this budget process , we can also welcome our future fellow MEPs from the new Member States .
I think that , with their more detailed knowledge of our new neighbours , they will have some good ideas as to how , in the future , we can generally develop the Tacis programmes and also ensure that they are efficiently implemented . That is a strand of the debate and of the budget to which I am very much looking forward .
Mr President , Commissioners , I have had a poor impression in the European Convention of the direction in which the EU 's policy on languages is heading .
There the proposed amendments to the Praesidium 's draft constitution are not translated into the official languages of the EU .
The discussions held by the Convention 's working groups have only been interpreted into two or three languages .
A constitution is being drafted , however , which is at a higher level than the Member States ' national legislation .
As the Convention is called the Convention on the Future , language restrictions and the destruction of national linguistic identities would seem to be the future of the EU .
Both budget reports give attention to language , translation and interpreting .
When Mrs Gill speaks of controlled multilingualism I am not sure that that means equality for all languages .
When distance interpreting is mentioned , I am not sure that that means distance interpreting for all languages .
If not all languages in the EU are to be used equally , let us draw lots for those languages that are to be the so-called working languages .
Another linguistic outrage is the fact that the European Parliament visitor 's service no longer has a Finnish-speaking official .
Otherwise , the guidelines for the budgetary procedure are on such a general level that there are only a few general remarks to make .
Parliament 's unanimous political will would seem to be that there should be a determination to reduce the amount of unpaid payment appropriations , or RALs .
Many in our group oppose the introduction of financial support for Europarties , as the parties would then become supranational .
As regards Mr Wynn 's report , which is the next to be discussed , some amendments to it have been tabled calling for the introduction of ' Eurotaxes ' to finance the work of the EU .
These supranational taxes are unacceptable to many in our group .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , the defining of a strategy for the coming year provides us with an excellent opportunity to set priorities .
In its policy strategy for 2004 , the Commission chooses the accession of ten new Member States to the EU first of all , followed by stability , and lastly sustainable growth .
We can endorse this choice of political priorities .
The accession of ten new Member States has been an important theme throughout the term of office of this Commission , and it is right that it be given top priority in 2004 .
After all , by 1 May of next year enlargement from 15 to 25 Member States will be a reality ; provided , of course , that the populations of the candidate countries agree to this .
In the Commission 's elaboration of the theme of ' sustainable growth and solidarity ' it strikes one that , in the opinion of the Commission , the Union bears a very large number of responsibilities , namely : a ) strengthening economic and social cohesion , b ) tackling the uneven level of development between the various regions , c ) supporting sustainable economic and social development and d ) promoting balanced and sustainable development .
This optimism about one authority single-handedly bringing about social change does not square with our view of the matter .
The Commission should adopt a more modest attitude in this regard and should not take on so many tasks .
We consider that making stability a priority was the right choice .
After all , we need to take the global terrorist threat most seriously .
The elaboration of this policy area in concrete terms , however , is once again at odds with our idea of security and stability in Europe .
The most important partner in the global fight against terrorism and in maintaining international stability is missing from beside what is known as the ' new neighbours initiative ' , or ' ring of friends ' policy .
I am talking about the NATO alliance , with the United States of America as a strong ally .
Is the Commission prepared to define its position on this matter ?
It is in the European Union 's multi-annual perspective for the period 2004-2006 that it really shows its true colours : this perspective talks of the fundamental tasks not only of ' European citizenship ' and the solidarity mentioned above , but also of ' enabling the Union to exercise the responsibilities of a world power ' .
In the light of the current situation , it is Utopian to think of the deeply divided European Union playing a more active role in the maintenance of security in the world .
Congratulations are due to Mr Mulder for his commendable report on the guidelines for the 2004 budgetary procedure .
Unfortunately , I cannot talk in such positive terms about the report by Mrs Gill .
The advantages she envisages in the draft statute for European political parties completely escape us .
The Commission wants to get no less than 75 % of the budget for these European parties out of the EU budget !
Is that not completely out of proportion ?
Political parties are free associations of citizens .
Is it not logical , then , for citizens , who form the basis of every party , to give financial support to the party of their choice ?
This also respects the natural link between parties and their support base , which can only be beneficial to their involvement in politics .
National political parties that wish to associate at European level should pay for that themselves - that is to say , their members should .
European political parties are by definition much further removed from the bed of our citizens than national parties .
If , therefore , we give those European parties an enormous subsidy from Community funds , we increase the gap between citizen and politics .
We find completely incredible Mrs Gill 's analysis that a propaganda offensive would bring the parties closer to the citizen .
What visible effect have European campaigns about European citizenship or the benefits of the euro produced ?
The answer is none , so why should that succeed now ?
In the opinion of our group , it would be better to get the draft statute off the table as quickly as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank the rapporteurs . However , I would particularly like to thank President Prodi for stating in a very wide-ranging speech a political fact : these are terrible times but the Union must press ahead with its projects and ambitions .
The historical goal we are about to achieve - the enlargement of the Union - calls for total consistency in our budgetary decisions .
In this regard , too , Parliament will play its part , which is not the part of a solicitor who merely writes reports and accepts the decisions of others without having any influence .
There are four main European policies which will contribute to enlargement : cohesion policy , the common agricultural policy , the TENs policy and the policy for cooperation between small and medium-sized enterprises .
The success of enlargement and integration will depend to a large extent on the way these policies are revised and the importance given to them in the budget .
There are just two things I want to say .
Firstly , I believe that we need to reconsider the funding allocated to the TENs and the Union 's contribution , simplify the procedures and reinvigorate the North-South dimension as well as the East-West dimension .
Secondly , I believe we need to increase the internationalisation of small and medium-sized enterprises and their ability to form partnerships with the small and medium-sized enterprises of the candidate countries .
To this end , it would be beneficial to enhance the current instruments and the current pilot project on enlargement and SMEs and take the opportunity afforded by the mid-term review of Agenda 2000 to give a clear boost to the measures facilitating the internationalisation of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Mr President , firstly I want to offer my warmest congratulations to Mr Mulder and Mrs Gill for their excellent reports , and also to Commissioner Schreyer for the very constructive approach she has shown in the preparation of the budget .
My special thanks , however , go to the President of the Commission , Romano Prodi , for the important work he has done so far in building the European Union and bringing nations closer to one another in a joint project that we now call enlargement to the east .
The budget before us will be the first to be drafted for a Community of 25 Member States .
This is a very challenging undertaking technically speaking , as the budget will apply to 15 Member States for the first four months and 25 Member States for the rest of the year .
For this reason the important role of the rapporteurs in drafting this budget must be emphasised .
Fortunately , we have activity-based budgeting , which is now being implemented in earnest for the first time .
It will improve the transparency of the budget and give a better picture of the work that is done within the framework of the European Union .
Activity-based budgeting provides a straight answer to the question of what each activity actually costs .
Eastward enlargement is a challenge for everyone , and has to be taken into consideration throughout the entire budget preparation process .
That starts with administration .
We must continue to have respect for the individual languages of the Member States and hold multilingualism in esteem .
The greatest challenge , however , concerns the Structural Funds .
Enlargement to the east will be an enormous rebuilding project , the largest that Western Europe has embarked on since the Second World War .
For it to succeed , the administration of the Structural Funds must be simplified and dealt with more efficiently .
Only in this way can the results we are striving for be achieved .
Mr President , the Commission has emphasised in its communication that enlargement of the European Union will be the core challenge of 2004 .
Whilst the importance of this issue is not to be denied , I do , however , have my doubts as to whether these Budget lines will actually enable the Commission to handle these challenges .
My real concern is with the fact that , in connection with enlargement , provision has been made for expenditure of some EUR 11 billion in 2004 , which amounts to only 10 % of the total commitment appropriations .
In agricultural expenditure , the proportion is as low as 2.4 % .
These proportions are hardly likely to guarantee the Member States participation on an equal basis , even when it is borne in mind that accession will happen as late as 1 May , so what I expect of the Commission is that they should set out in detail in the preliminary draft Budget what legal entitlements the new Member States will have to participation in all programmes funded from the EU Budget .
Funds for the structural measures are very extensive - for this too , sensible advance plans were made in former years - but what is not working is the outflow of resources .
What I expect is that the Commission will not delay long in producing precise figures and an analysis of why this is so and of the obstructions involved .
There is a need here for greater confidence in the system 's fairness , for not one euro of structural support funding must be wasted .
For many citizens in the European Union 's regions , the projects that depend on such funds are often the last fragile hope for the maintenance of their jobs .
Now , today , the starting pistol has been fired , and the process of drawing up the preliminary draft of the 2004 general Budget can begin ; there are important debates before us , and important work remains to be done .
I therefore expect absolute transparency of the whole procedure , coupled with wide-ranging public relations work , which cannot fail to improve the public 's perception of the European Union .
Mr President , the President of the Commission recalled the context of the Commission 's strategy for 2004 .
Mr Prodi was bound to speak of the crisis over Iraq , enlargement and the strategic need for a political project for an enlarged Union .
He also referred to the in-depth assessment of ourselves and our role in the world currently under way in the Convention preparing for the Intergovernmental Conference .
A number of other issues were mentioned such as the entry into force of the Treaty of Nice and , more directly relevant to the budget , the entry into force of the new Financial Regulation on 1 January .
I should like to focus on foreign policy . Clearly , the Union needs an effective , transparent and visible foreign policy .
It would therefore be appropriate for the Commission to give some indication of how the policy on decentralisation has evolved .
An update on abnormal outstanding payment commitments would also be helpful . Parliament has been concerned about both these issues for some time now .
In my view , serious thought should be given to heading 4 on foreign policy . We have been making do and mending for years .
We are , however , likely to be called on to take urgent decisions on Iraq .
We need to deal with Afghanistan , the Middle East , the Balkans and Mediterranean policy too . In addition I believe it is essential for us to review our transatlantic relations .
They are bound to be affected following the conflict with Iraq . Last but not least , Commissioner , we should tackle the matter of relations with Latin America .
I urge the Commission to be consistent as it presents this year 's draft budget proposals . It must honour the undertakings given at the Madrid Summit .
Additional priorities cannot be financed out of the same resources . For instance , the Commission is adjusting the system of generalised preferences for countries such as Colombia or Costa Rica , and the Commission is not expected to suggest further budgetary cuts in the draft proposals .
Commissioner , I urge you to bear these considerations in mind .
In my view , if we wish to develop an ambitious foreign policy we must consider how to make available the necessary resources to move forward in the context of foreign policy and defence policy . If we do not do so I believe we shall continue to be excluded from negotiating tables and be reduced to bankrolling major international events .
We will never be involved in decision-making .

I congratulate Mr Prodi on the vision he has shown on opening this debate on strategic priorities . The debate should be linked to the debate on budget guidelines for 2004 .
Mr President , the war about to be waged in Iraq in the interests of American imperialism and its allies , is not just an inhumane war ; it will have a huge impact on the economy of the European Union and will palpably reduce working class incomes and the revenue of the European Union .
The accession of the new Member States , whose GDP is below the Community average and whose needs are greater , will also cause severe problems .
The European Union 2004 budget guidelines are all about cutting spending on the structural funds and the common agricultural policy and funding the repressive , aggressive common European defence and security policy , using the fight against terrorism and immigration , crisis management and conflict prevention as an excuse .
In other words , agricultural spending is to be slashed in line with the WTO approach and under pressure from the USA , and this will be compounded by mandatory restructuring and an anti-farming slant to the partial reform of the CAP .
All this does is to prove that the budget is still an anti-grass roots budget and that the sacrifices imposed on the workers in the interests of the monopolies are continuing , in the Lisbon vein now , with increased exploitation , attacks on workers ' employment and insurance rights , galloping unemployment , environmental disasters and even greater commercialisation of health , education and social services .
The workers , the poor and lower middle classes of urban and rural society , are again being called on to pick up the bill for the recession , so that big business can keep raking in the profits .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece are opposed to these budget guidelines because , instead of resolving the problems of workers , farmers and small enterprises , they will create new ones and the standard of living of people in the candidate countries will fall .
Instead of helping to maintain peace , the budget is being used to fund more militarisation and aggression on the part of the European Union and its anti-democratic , anti-grass roots philosophy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to respond to a number of remarks that have been made about these Budget lines from the point of view of foreign policy .
Traditionally , in the Member States , foreign policy is a matter for governments , but the parliaments are involved via the budget procedure , which enables them to influence foreign policy and the government 's setting of priorities .
As there is something of a lack at European level of any counterpart to this sort of democratic control , we welcome the attention given by the Convention to a wider range of options for Parliament to exert influence on fundamental issues of finance for foreign policy concerns .
Above all , we welcome the fact that it was possible , in the course of the 2003 Budget procedure , to come to an agreement with the Council on information concerning measures in the area of foreign and security policy .
For the Council to take significant steps to accede to Parliament 's wishes is a new thing , and although it did not , initially , keep to the undertaking it had given during the Budget procedure , information on our activities in Macedonia has now found its way onto the table .
The most recent consultation with the Council made it possible for this to be guaranteed , and I see this as having been a step in the right direction .
Such cooperation between the Council and Parliament is a foundation for our future endeavours .
It is for this reason that we consider particularly important the passage in the guidelines in which Parliament lays renewed emphasis on its willingness to work together with the Council on the common foreign and security policy , and on its own insistence on its involvement to the fullest possible extent in budgeting for joint actions , planning them and taking decisions concerning them .
We have had problems with this in the past , in that financial undertakings given by the Council meant that Parliament ended up being obliged to provide the funds from the Budget .
That can be changed if Parliament is informed and involved in good time .
If that happens , I think these Budget guidelines may well usher in a new stage in cooperation between Parliament and the Council .
Still on the subject of foreign policy , let me make another observation concerning the ad hoc group that we have now set up to examine direct payments to the Palestinian National Authority .
I think this ad hoc group gives us a good opportunity to cooperate with the Commission in seeing exactly what has been done with European taxpayers ' money .
We decided not to set up a committee of investigation , which would amount to laying charges at the outset , whereas we simply want to know how this direct aid worked and how we can organise it better in the future .
This working group is about to start work .
This is not so much a problem between Parliament and the Council as one between Parliament and the Commission , and we hope that , in the working group , the Commission will keep to its promise and be willing to work together with Parliament .
Madam President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my thanks to the Commission for having done as it promised to do last year and synchronised the debates on the coming year 's policy strategy and Budget ; I see today as an important occasion and one that bids us shoulder together this great shared responsibility for Europe and its inhabitants .
The questions with which we are faced are of course important ones , and , right now , I want to say one thing in very clear terms : Commissioner , it would be a very great help to us if we did not have to concern ourselves solely with questions that will become relevant after your term of office has expired , such as how we are to proceed after 2006 , and what we can expect to face then .
What we have to deal with , quite specifically , is how the Financial Perspective is to be adjusted to take account of enlargement .
I would have been glad if the Commission could have taken a line more openly sympathetic to Parliament in order to secure Parliament 's rights , and hence the public interest in the transparency and openness of this process .
We could certainly have done with more explicit statements in this area .
Let me just say now , in very clear terms , that we will have to consider whether we will be in a position , a month from now , to deal with the applications for accession in this House , or whether we perhaps ought first to resolve the institutional question of how Parliament is to be involved in dealing with this important issue .
What I actually wanted to do now was to say something to the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , who are now conspicuous by their absence and do not think it necessary to send someone to represent them in this debate - and that itself speaks volumes !
Now that we are discussing enlargement and preparing to welcome to our Parliament observers from the candidate states in only a few weeks ' time , we should certainly be giving thought to other options for cooperation - Mr Dover made that point very impressively , and I am very grateful to him for doing so - in order to grow together in a more organised way in our day-to-day work and daily life .
I think it is a pitiable thing for the Greens to table amendments aimed at deleting these passages from Mrs Gill 's report .
That is the very opposite of what we need if we want to accommodate over a hundred new Members in this House .
So now , Commissioner , here comes my request that we should now be concentrating on the matters in hand !
I have mentioned the subject of the Financial Perspective , so let me remind you of the Andreasen case .
I have here an internal memorandum from the Commission , which reaches an assessment different from that which you set out in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Now , at long last , we have to sort out the problem with the accounting systems .
One of this Commission 's great promises was that this parliamentary term would see things getting moved forward .
When we have worked through all these things properly , then we will be able to talk about the prospects for the EU finances after 2006 , but right now there are other things on the agenda , and they have to be sorted out as a matter of urgency if all the things promised since the day the Prodi Commission took office are to be finished by the time its term of office comes to an end .
If we manage that , we will have achieved much for Europe .
Madam President , I believe three basic issues arise out of the 2004 budget guidelines .
These are firstly , the potential level of expenditure , secondly , improved implementation , and thirdly , strategic options for expenditure .
As regards the level of expenditure , the Union 's budget currently represents 1.02 % of gross Community income , and is at its lowest level .
The present perspectives would allow an additional 5 000 billion .
The same level of expenditure is planned for the 2004 budget .
We are therefore operating in austerity mode , which should please the Council .
Sound implementation is crucial for the 2004 budget .
Payment take up has been well below that forecast during the last three years .
The total surplus for those three years amounts to some 23 000 billion .
Last year 's declaration on implementation profiles and the plan to do away with the abnormal RAL must therefore be followed through .
Concerning priorities , I am sure Mr Mulder 's report is on the right lines .
It takes account of two key issues , namely the concerns and expectations of the citizens on the one hand , and on the other , the conditions needed to allow the budgetary authority to reach a consensual decision .
The 2004 budget is crucial and represents a new departure for the Union . There are a number of reasons why this is so .
The citizens understand that their security , freedom and prosperity demand appropriate budgetary decisions and common instruments .
External border controls , the fight against organised crime and terrorism demand increased capacity for Europol and Eurojust .
Finally , the promotion of business activity is crucial to the success of an enlarged Union .
Many issues are still outstanding . I refer for example to the potential financial implications of agricultural reform or of the adoption of the adjustment of the financial perspectives .
I have to say that I am amazed the Council is not represented in the House today . Nonetheless , the Council must realise that there is only one way of dealing with the challenges before us , and that is by reaching agreement with Parliament .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing the Budget and the strategy for 2004 .
As has been said , 2004 will be the year of the European Union 's enlargement , but it must also be a year in which , at last , the European Union 's foreign and security policy is developed further .
So the crucial question is what democratic control there will be when we get a common defence policy .
In this area , democratic control is exercised primarily by way of the Budget procedure .
If we are to have to handle issues of war and peace in the same way as issues of foreign and security policy , such democratic control is even more important than in other areas .
It is in view of the Convention that we need to make certain demands now , demands that will be significant in 2004 .
For a start , we have to ensure that the military element of operational expenditure on peacekeeping and crisis management has a fixed place in the European Union 's regular Budget and that we in Parliament get full powers of codecision .
Secondly , President Prodi , you said that joint actions were being undertaken in the European Union in the area of research and development , and in the purchase of armaments .
We know that the Convention is talking in terms of an armaments agency , and we must do all in our power to ensure that these Budget lines do not disappear into a shadow budget somewhere , a budget over which neither the European Parliament nor the twenty-five national parliaments will have any control , but rather that these items of expenditure are reflected in the regular Budget of the European Union .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the context of this joint debate on the European Commission 's political strategy for 2004 , I am bound to recall that this is the first budget in an enlarged Europe covering the new Member States .
The European Union budget must therefore , now more than ever , contribute to achieving social and regional cohesion , both in the new States and in the current 15 Member States
I support the fact that the priorities selected for this 2004 budget are the completion of the internal market , the strategy for sustainable development , and achieving the Lisbon strategy , in the aim of making the European Union the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 .
This is , in fact , one of the major challenges facing the European Union , and which stand out because they have immediate and practical implications for every European citizen .
I also welcome the entry into force of the Treaty of Nice which , despite all the criticism it has rightly generated , has at least one virtue : it has increased the number of policies covered by the codecision procedure , thereby giving the European Parliament greater power to act .
Nevertheless , and because the situation is not entirely rosy , I should like to make some criticisms of the European Commission document that has been presented to us today .
Firstly , I agree with the rapporteur on the need to insist that the European Commission makes increasing rural development aid under the CAP its priority guideline . This is precisely the area in which the greatest disparities between Member States can be seen .
Secondly , I urge the Commission to step up the process of streamlining and improving the implementation of the budget , especially in its structural funds policy .
In this context , I support the implementation of more reliable payment provisions , and the European Parliament being better informed about the level of payments underway , by programme , in order to respond to the risks of payments being cancelled .
Specifically in the context of the cancellation of funds , it is my view that Rule N + 2 , which forces Member States to use funds within two years of their being programmed must be seen as an incentive for the rapid use of funds , without , however , compromising the quality of the expenditure undertaken .
With regard to the structural funds , I should also like to take this opportunity to draw the Commission 's attention to a problem of which it has already been made aware : the accession of the new Member States will have the statistical effect of reducing the European Union 's average GDP .
Consequently , some regions ' levels will increase , with major risks of losing structural funds because they exceed the minimum levels that would entitle them to Community aid .
I wish to emphasise that this , as in fact the Commissioner for enlargement himself , Günter Verheugen , has said , constitutes wealth on paper , but not in reality .
Statistical indicators alone cannot justify terminating a cohesion policy for the current Member States .
It is entirely in the European Union 's interest to see its current Member States enjoy high rates of growth , more employment and more opportunities .
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the public - especially in the candidate countries - often makes the erroneous assumption that the European Union 's Budget deals , in effect , only with agricultural policy .
Such an assumption is not only fatal , but also false .
It is even more important , in times of economic upheaval and renewal , for us to affirm and create social cohesion in order , among other things , to stabilise democracy and gain public acceptance in these new Member States .
Speaking on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would like , then , to highlight four points from the debate that were of particular importance to us .
In this context , the first is support for the social dialogue .
In practically all the candidate countries there is still the need to establish and reinforce structures that will make the social dialogue a reality .
The second point is the need to improve conditions in the workplace .
Our work in the Member States treats health and safety at work as a priority , and the same must be true in the candidate countries .
The third point is that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has stressed our desire to have greater support , in every case , for the social platform as part of the action programme against social exclusion and discrimination .
I would refer you to the Lisbon resolution in which we highlighted competitiveness and employment opportunities and stressed the need for them .
In the candidate countries , restructuring affects not only agriculture , but still also major , and outdated , sectors of industry .
They need our help with that , help that we can - and should - provide by means of European Union funds .
In all these areas , we rely , of course , on the knowledge of the agencies .
We therefore expect them to receive the financial appropriations that they need .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like briefly to respond to some of the questions , which are extremely interesting .
It is a pity that the majority of the Members are absent .
This should be a dialogue .
However , I am glad to see that Mr Elles is here , and so I will address my answers primarily to him , for he has asked a number of key questions .
First of all , he raised the issue of whether this perspective is just for five years or whether it is for seven years .
We are not in a position to decide , and so we have kept our options open .
I personally am in favour of a five-year perspective , both because that would synchronise it with Parliament 's work and because I feel that a seven-year perspective would be too long , that it would make control too difficult and extend beyond our powers of farsightedness .
Mr Elles also raised the issue of the number of Commissioners .
The problem is not the number of Commissioners but the authority to organise and take decisions accorded to the President .
Whatever the number of Commissioners , the question is how to organise the Commission 's work .
It can be managed well with a small number of Commissioners or it can be managed well with a large number of Commissioners .
Then , as regards the staff and the translation service , we have made veritable Herculean efforts and restricted the number of new staff to be employed to cope with enlargement to the bare minimum .
Mr Elles raised a number of other points which I feel it is important to discuss .
For instance , he pointed out possible shortcomings in the chapter on external relations , particularly as regards the transatlantic partnership .
I mentioned one of the two errors to be avoided right at the beginning of my speech , that of failing to understand the importance of the transatlantic partnership , and I did so precisely because I consider it to be crucial .
Indeed , the ' peace group ' set up by Commissioner Lamy is concerned with this too .
More specifically , there are two major dimensions of external relations - the regional dimension - ' Wider Europe ' , the project we are approving today - and the international dimension , which essentially and primarily covers transatlantic relations .
Reforming the Commission has been a priority right from the beginning and , starting in 2004 , we will have completely new Staff Regulations .
It has been a huge undertaking .
We have a qualification process which covers all the institutions , today we are discussing the annual policy strategy , we have completely transformed the Commission 's financial management and we have a new management system giving much greater powers and responsibilities - this is vitally important for our future - to our officials , we also have a new control system and we are working on precisely the new accounting system , as you are aware , Mr Elles .
Seeing as you mentioned the letter , now that I know of its existence I can assure you it will be published immediately , for these things must be made public .
In any case , however , we must realise that , should a disciplinary procedure be necessary , all the rights of those involved in the procedure must be respected .
In any case - I would stress - the letter must be made public without delay .
As far as the famous requests still outstanding are concerned , I will look into it . I will do everything possible and more , employing all available resources to look into it as quickly as possible .
I must say , however , that the fact that 400 requests - as you said , Mr Elles - have yet to be addressed , might mean that too many requests have been made .
I take the blame for the delay in producing some replies , but I believe we have a barrage of extremely important questions to deal with .
I would also like to focus on the point raised by Mr Clegg concerning better regulation , for it is related to these issues .
An agreement is imminent , but I must say that my impression is that Parliament is taking less interest in the matter today than it did some time ago .
I would like to take this opportunity to call for a last spurt so that an agreement can be achieved during the interinstitutional summit on 19 March .
I formally urge the Presidency of Parliament to make the most of this opportunity and to be prepared for a political conclusion next week .
The Commission , for its part , is genuinely ready for this .
General Morillon asked for information on the budget heading and research related to defence .
We are exploring the possibility of financing military research outside the Sixth Framework Programme for research but we do not yet have a definitive answer on this matter .
I have pointed out the need for a debate - it would be useful to discuss the issue and we will submit solutions as soon as possible .
My final points are in response to the questions raised by Mr Swoboda , in other words what he described as the imprecise debate on objectives , on the Balkans and the Mediterranean .
The Commission has presented - and it is supplementing that material today - an extremely precise plan with a clear policy which treats the Balkans as part of Europe .
They will be Members of the Union , but they will be subject to the same strict conditions which have applied to the countries of this first phase of enlargement .
There are no discounts .
The door will be open when they approach it , but they will only be allowed to come in when they are ready .
There is absolutely no leeway on this .
I agree with what Mr Swoboda said regarding the issue of the visa policy - which he described as stupid - not because we do not need to be rigorous in protecting the Union 's borders but because I genuinely feel that it is a policy which is in need of a complete overhaul .
Indeed , in many cases , criminals have no trouble at all obtaining visas whereas , for normal citizens , this is often a tedious process which is not matched by greater controls , and I am saying this precisely because I have seen how the visa policy is applied in practice . What we need is not , I would stress , to reduce the protection of our borders but , on the contrary , to increase it and make it more effective and focused .
Finally , Mr Caudron 's last point : the Commission displays unwarranted optimism in its report .
We are in an extremely difficult situation in which everything is falling apart .
I want to make it quite clear that we are fully aware of the difficulty of the situation , of the tragic events taking place , but we are also aware of the huge importance of maintaining a balanced approach which takes all the factors into account , of the need to give maximum consideration to the work of the United Nations , of the fact that the new strategy genuinely calls for stronger , universally supported international institutions , with regard to which Europe 's role is indispensable .
I believe that there may well be an extremely serious crisis in the coming weeks , but I am deeply convinced that this very crisis will reveal the indispensable role of the European institutions .
Europe alone has succeeded in uniting with peace as its top priority , introducing and implementing a new concept of national interest and relating it to the common interest , behaving towards the countries which support it with openness and displaying , I would say , a new insight into world relations and issues .
This cannot go unnoticed .
Clearly , at a time of crisis such as this , people are not paying as much heed to us as we might like , but we know that we are sowing seeds for the future .
Madam President , the Committee on Budgets decided that it would be wise to draw up a report on this subject .
As a consensus could not be reached on the person to draft it , it decided that the Chairman of the committee should also be the rapporteur and I was left with the wonderful task of putting this report together .
Because of that , I am wearing three hats at the same time - if that is possible .
I wear one hat as the rapporteur and reflect the wishes of the committee in the way it has voted and amended the original draft .
I wear another hat as the Chairman of the committee , thereby keeping an eye on the rapporteur .
I wear my third hat as a British Labour Member who is at odds with a number of amendments from his own political family , the PSE .
It has not been easy trying to put those three together .
It is fair to say that the only change I attempted to make to this report was to try to merge Paragraphs 6 and 8 to make it more coherent .
However , I failed to achieve a consensus amongst the political groups and , therefore , the report stands as it is .
If I could change those hats - which I cannot because I am wearing my hat as the rapporteur - and if I were speaking as a British Labour Member , then I would approve Mrs Buitenweg 's text as it reads well , it is simple , concise and , in particular , it does not make any big deal about own-resources !
However , I would run a mile - well perhaps I could manage half a mile - from the amendments by the PSE Group !
Let me make it absolutely clear that I am not speaking as a British Labour Member and , therefore , I cannot say those things .
I have to wear my hat as the rapporteur and speak as the rapporteur , knowing full well that the Chairman is keeping a watchful eye on what I say .
In fairness , the report is acceptable to all the political groups .
The vote was almost unanimous in committee , but there are one or two small points of disagreement on own-resources .
That is why the PSE Group has tabled two amendments .
What we are all agreed upon is that the budget procedure needs to be simplified .
That is quite clear .
The own-resources system in this age of transparency is completely opaque and no one outside the Committee on Budgets or the Budget Directorate-General understands what it is about and how it is made up .
Codecision is needed and , therefore , compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure need to be eradicated .
This is stated quite simply in the first three paragraphs of Mrs Buitenweg 's report .
We need to reform , update and simplify our procedures .
There is a need for the budgetary system to be more transparent , comprehensive and democratic , and the codecision procedure should apply to all legislation , including the Financial Regulation and the budgetary procedure .
Under those conditions , compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure would disappear .
I hope when we vote on this - I am sure the vote will be successful - that we can send this along to the members of the Convention and that our Parliament representatives on the Convention can present this as Parliament 's position for the future .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union 's Budget exists to finance its policies and its institutions .
That sentence should be printed at the head of the financial part of the constitutional treaty that will be our future constitution , for it is self-evident that this should incorporate a financial constitution in the form of a chapter devoted to finances .
That is indeed provided for in the outline of the constitutional draft on which the Convention is working .
The chapter on finance should specify the most important budgetary principles and lay down the principal instruments , principles and , above all , rules whereby decisions are to be reached , as regards both outgoings and receipts .
The financial constitution would thereby lay down Parliament 's budgetary rights .
The Convention must come to treat this as a core point .
A parliament 's budgetary rights are a yardstick indicating the degree to which a system is democratic , and it is the Commission 's opinion that the time has now come for the European Parliament to be accorded full budgetary rights .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Wynn , on the competence and extensive experience with which , as chairman of the Committee on Budgets , he has even-handedly set out the core points in his report and put forward proposals for the future constitution .
I also congratulate him on his ability , so to speak , to wear three hats at once !
In Budget matters , Parliament and the Commission cooperate so closely that it is not surprising that a very large number of Parliament 's proposals are identical with those put forward by the Commission or tend in the same direction .
Among these is the principle that the Budget 's receipts and expenditure should balance and that expenditure should not be allowed to be funded from credit .
Another is the proposal that the multiannual financial perspective should be incorporated into the constitution as an instrument ; the consequence of this would be that , in future , the multiannual financial perspective would no longer be founded on an agreement , but would become a law enacted jointly by Parliament and the Council on the Commission 's initiative .
Even when it comes to the proposal that the European Development Fund should in future be an integrated part of the Community Budget , there is complete agreement .
On the subject of the Community Budget 's outgoings , let me also address an issue that has not yet been discussed in the Convention , but is on the agenda , and that is whether or not the future constitution - like the present Treaty - should exclude the possibility of military expenditure being borne by the Community Budget .
Is there not much to be said for the idea that , where Petersberg tasks are undertaken jointly , the costs resulting from these joint operations should be borne by the Community Budget ?
That the Community Budget should be funded from own resources is a firmly-embedded principle about which there is no debate , but does the present financial structure reflect the principles of transparency ?
Are our financial arrangements sufficiently autonomous ; is it enough for Parliament to be able only to give an opinion on the own-resources resolution ?
The Commission 's view on all these questions is that , no , what we have at present is not enough , and change is urgently needed .
When taking decisions on the own resources , it follows that the sensitivities of the Council and of the national parliaments must also be taken into account .
Even so , the European Parliament should be accorded the right of codecision in this area too .
The financial structure should reflect the fact that the EU is a union of Member States and of citizens .
The Commission has therefore , in its proposal , advocated more direct involvement in financing the European Budget .
If I may turn to the Budget procedure , the Commission shares the position stated in Parliament 's report , that the Budget procedure should be simplified and resources concentrated .
The Commission should submit a draft to Parliament , and the first reading in Parliament should be followed by one reading in Council , followed by a consultation and the second reading in Parliament .
If this procedure were to be adopted , the amendment of Council resolutions would require a super-qualified majority in Parliament .
There is also full agreement between the positions of Parliament and the Commission as regards the abolition of the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure , a distinction that could not , in any case , be made clearer to the public and justified to them .
I really do hope that there will be absolute consensus in the Convention , and that this distinction and the consequent curtailment of Parliament 's budgetary rights will become a thing of the past .
The constitution 's financial chapter should describe the whole of the Budget process in simple words and with unambiguous rules .
It should therefore also refer to the implementation of the Budget and specify not only the Commission 's responsibilities but also the Member States ' obligation to cooperate .
It should give a fixed place to the discharge for the Budget , and impose on the Community and the Member States the obligation of safeguarding the Community 's finances against fraud .
It should , with this in mind , at last enshrine the possibility of instituting the office of Public Prosecutor at Community level .
The public expect Community assets to be able to be protected effectively and fraud to result in criminal prosecution .
The Convention now affords us the opportunity to establish new rules , appropriate to the Union 's development , for the European Budget , which is an important Community instrument .
This debate is being held just at the right moment , as the Convention is at this very moment working on the financial chapter ; the Convention should adopt this important report by Parliament , and the Commission , in its proposals to it , will be putting forward clear principles and provisions that will , in particular , put the case for Parliament to enjoy full budgetary rights .
Thank you for your attention .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must congratulate Mr Wynn on his work as both Chairman and rapporteur .
His is an excellent report . I am delighted it has been favourably received by all the political groups .

I should like to point out to Mr Wynn that even as disparate a group as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats only intends to table a single amendment . This is an indication of the scale of our effort to achieve consensus and support the report .
Further , my group strongly supports adjustment of the current system of distinguishing between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
This has now become a common position of Parliament . It should always be taken into account when specific types of expenditure can be guaranteed , notably in the case of agriculture .
We endorse most of the proposals put forward by the Convention 's working groups seeking to ensure the principle of a dual budgetary authority : Parliament and Council .
The Group of the European People 's Party is of the opinion that the most effective way of ensuring this comes about is to formalise a balance between both branches of the budgetary authority .
The budget would be adopted by a codecision procedure adjusted to this specific case . In the event of failure to reach agreement , the Council would have the final say on income and Parliament on expenditure .
As regards the financial perspectives , we believe it is imperative to endow them with greater flexibility . This would ensure an effective response to unexpected situations .
Unduly rigid provisions have sometimes served to safeguard expenditure . On other occasions , however , such rigidity has hindered more effective allocation of resources .
We fully endorse the proposal by the Convention 's working group to include financial perspectives in the treaty , together with provisions on discipline and budgetary cooperation .
In the interests of providing continuity regarding financial decisions , financial perspectives should cover the five-year term of Parliament and the Commission .
Finally , reform of the budgetary procedure must be based on simplification with a view to greater democratisation , legitimacy and transparency .
We therefore fully endorse the proposal to do away with first reading in the Council , as this seems to be consistent with the objective of simplification .
Further , we reject the amendments leading beyond this debate , as we wish the document presented to the Convention to enjoy the fullest possible support of the House .
The rapporteur , the chairman of our committee and my esteemed fellow-Member from the British Labour Party have really given all groups ample opportunity to contribute their ideas and to attempt to reach a compromise .
I give him my most sincere thanks for that .
Nevertheless , my group is not completely satisfied with the end result .
We have chosen not to table any amendments , because it would result in a kind of hotchpotch , but instead to table an alternative resolution .
We have opted to do that precisely because absolute clarity is necessary when it comes to establishing the form the budgetary procedure of the future should take .
For example , we also wanted to make it very clear right from the outset how competences should be divided up .
The Council and Parliament should negotiate with each other to reach common agreement both on the structure and the ceiling of the financial resources for the EU budget and on the annual or multi-annual expenditure .
Should the negotiations fail , the Council would simply have the last word on revenue and Parliament on expenditure .
In our resolution , we also keep repeating the necessity of having codecision powers in all legislation .
It is all very well to argue for an end to the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure , but if we do not also have the power or codecision over the legislation , we are often left empty-handed .
Then a situation can arise in which we do have codecision over agricultural expenditure but in which we are obliged to simply hand out money to farmers because they have a right to it under European law .
In addition , the judgment of the Court of Justice on the legal basis has taught us that we cannot take any budgetary decisions in our own right without a legal basis .
I should like to conclude that budgetary codecision is of no benefit to us as a Parliament if we do not have legislative codecision .
The two matters must go hand in hand .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , under the process of revising and simplifying the Treaties , which is currently being debated in the Convention on the Future of Europe , the European Parliament has taken the opportunity to apply itself to the reform of the European Union 's budgetary procedure .
In fact , year after year , reform after reform , the budgetary procedure has been amended on an informal basis , by means of political agreements between the various institutions involved .
These informal amendments have rendered the current text redundant and obsolete .
The next constitutional Treaty must contain articles covering the principles that govern the budget and the procedures for approving it .
As a contribution to the debate on this report that the Committee on Budgets has presented on its own initiative , I wish first of all to congratulate our Chairman and rapporteur , Terence Wynn on his commitment and on the exemplary quality of his work .
I wish to express my full and unequivocal agreement with the proposals for reform that have been tabled .
Firstly , because I believe we must seize this opportunity to review the issue of the European Union 's funding .
More Europe means , amongst other things , more money .
The contribution of the Member States must be appropriate and in proportion to the objectives that the European Union wishes to achieve .
It is entirely utopian to set objectives , such as those of the Lisbon Summit , which uphold the current financial framework .
It should be added that the European Union itself must undertake a thoroughgoing study into its own resources for funding the EU budget .
Secondly , because I can see that , in addition to these new challenges , a new reality is approaching : a European Union with 25 Member States .
In this context , the Structural Funds will reveal their fundamental importance , on the one hand , to achieving economic and social cohesion in the new States and , on the other , to continuing the progress that has been made in the current Member States .
Thirdly , because I believe that the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure and their respective procedures has become artificial .
I am therefore in favour of a complete revision of the procedures , giving the European Parliament greater power to act by means of the codecision procedure , thereby achieving an equal footing with the Council .
In this context , budgetary expenditure for the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) would then be studied by the European Parliament under the codecision procedure .
If it is adopted , this measure would represent an historical development for the European Parliament , which has been forced to remain at a distance in political terms from the CAP since its inception , despite the fact that the CAP today accounts for more than 50 % of the EU 's total budget .
Greater involvement of the European Parliament in the CAP can only be positive for farmers and for rural development .
This will provide greater control over the use of funds .
I would remind you that every year , enormous sums intended for the CAP end up being refunded to the Member States because they have not been properly used .
It is also worth adding that the CAP is becoming increasingly diffuse , incorporating new dimensions , such as rural development , conservation of the environment and food safety and quality , and consequently requires funding that corresponds to this new state of affairs , which is of the utmost importance to European citizens .
Only last week , Eurostat published data that warrants our utmost interest : European citizens , including those of the future Member States , feel that the CAP 's priorities should be food safety and support for improving rural life .
By the European Parliament having this greater ability to act , the economic , social and environmental interests of European farmers will be safeguarded .
Madam President , Commissioner , our debate is being conducted under the heading of ' reform of the budgetary procedure ' , which is a modest title for an ambitious enterprise .
It would probably be more appropriate to speak in terms of a reform of the financial constitution , for we want the Convention to produce a coherent draft for a constitution that will advance European integration .
We want the Treaty to be underpinned by democratic legitimacy , to be transparent and effective , and to give the public unambiguous answers to their questions as to what the federation of states and peoples called Europe can - and must - achieve in the interests of its citizens .
The European Union 's Budget must enjoy the very same democratic legitimacy in its function of financing European policy .


What we urgently need , then , is not just changes to the Budget procedure , but a reform of our public finances , and what this will require is plain for all to see , encapsulated in our demand for all Budget areas to be subject to the codecision procedure - even decisions on the own-resources system , the structure of which is in need of fundamental change .
Whilst it has to be admitted that the present system of finance works , it meets with criticism quite apart from its undemocratic nature .
Neither what we receive from VAT or out of gross domestic income can really be described as the European Union 's own resources .
The fact is that they are transfers from the Member States , and that is precisely the argument used by the Member States when the positions of net contributors are under discussion .
It is not immediately evident to the public which taxes go towards financing the EU 's outgoings .
The proportion of what are termed traditional own resources is decreasing all the time , and the whole system is mutating from genuine self-financing into the transfer of lump sums .
Nor does what we call the British rebate have any rationale behind it any more , Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Wynn , and , wearing only my one hat - in my capacity as rapporteur for the PSE on own resources - I can tell you that , in that area too , the British rebate makes no sense any longer , any more than does its being funded in different ways by the other Member States .
It should be abolished !
The structure of the Budget has ceased to provide any justification for it .
Changes have had to be made in the structure of the European Budget 's expenditure over the past fifteen years .
Policies already in existence , such the agriculture policy , were reformed , and other policy areas were added , such as structural policy and pre-accession aid , and this renders obsolete the imposition of an unfair burden on everyone else by preferential treatment for Great Britain .
All this leads to the logical conclusion that we should introduce a tax to replace the former own resources , and that this should be done without imposing additional burdens on European taxpayers , who would , though , be able to see , at last , how they are funding the European Union .

Let us in this Parliament , then , not demand less than the Commission has already done , but , rather , join together in taking a great step towards greater transparency and democracy .
( Applause )
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the main points of the report presented by the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Wynn , have already been described .
We can all , therefore , understand its importance .
Reforming the budgetary procedure is by no means a technical issue that can only be handled by specialists .
Quite the opposite : it is an eminently political subject : it concerns our ability to give substance to European integration and demonstrate our solidarity through action .
I personally would simply like to remind the participants in the current negotiations of their responsibilities .
That means going beyond the sterile little game of defending national privileges and territory in the short term .
That kind of attitude never leads to successful negotiations , ending instead with lame compromises which , at the end of the day , do not satisfy anyone .
It is time we looked to see where the true interests of Europeans as a whole lie .
We need to create a virtuous circle where the concessions made by the various parties ultimately benefit everyone .
If this state of mind is allowed to triumph , I think it will be possible to seize the opportunity provided by the Convention .
Let us therefore have the political courage necessary to demand a genuine reform which , I reiterate , includes , specifically , removing the distinction between mandatory and non-mandatory spending , establishing a European tax and laying down uniform rules for all the Member States .
The Convention must establish a genuine codecision procedure , within which framework Parliament and the Council can work together as equals to handle all aspects of the Community budget and the other financial instruments available to European politicians .
This method alone will make it possible to strengthen the democratic nature of the European budget decisively and to bring the citizens closer to our institutions , as we want with all our hearts .
Mr President , today 's vote on these four reports concludes the long process of adapting the comitology system which came into force in 1987 , a process which started in 1998 with the Commission proposal , continued with the adoption of the new Council decision in June 1999 and which we are , at last , concluding today by approving with these four reports the bringing of all the existing committees into line with the system which has been in force since 1999 .
This has been a mechanical and , I am sure , tedious project for the people who have dealt with the details and , on behalf of our institution , I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to them today .
It has taken four years to bring the hundreds of committees into line with the new system and to prepare for the vote which we are about to take .
This figure alone makes it clear that a great deal of work really does remain to be done if we are to give the Union a system for implementing its rules which is transparent , simple and helps to improve the as yet unsatisfactory way in which Community rules are implemented .
Parliament has worked furiously to make substantial improvements to the comitology system .
I would , therefore , on this occasion , like to pay tribute to the patient , accurate work of the rapporteur during those years , Mrs Adelaide Aglietta , who succeeded in fully involving Parliament in the comitology discussions , which was no easy matter at that time .
I am sure that the proposals on comitology presented last December by the Commission and the proposals in the recent texts submitted to the Convention are also the result of this work .
Although , in 1999 , it was not possible to achieve what Parliament has always wanted , namely parity with the Council and the option of revoking an implementing measure when it is considered to be contrary to the will of the legislator , this path now seems to be open .
At that time , the intransigence and formalism of the Commission and the Council prevented us from achieving that result and we had to be content with a modest alarm bell system .
Now , thanks , not least , to that year and a half of patient , sometimes obscure work , the Commission appears to have changed its position and the Convention looks set to overcome the bureaucratic reservations of the governments .
It is my genuine hope that the reports we are voting on today will soon be forgotten or superseded too , and that the mysteries of the comitology system will be confined to the history books .
Mr President , the committee agreed overwhelmingly on the need to restrict self-handling to ships ' crew .
Now , though , we have the problem that these expressions are used very differently in the various translations , not only the German , but also the English and French versions .
As I see it , knowing that the basis must be the German text , the most correct and tidy translation is the English one , which refers to ' regular seafaring crew ' , enabling Parliament to make it abundantly clear that we are not talking about what is done on land , but only about what can be done by the ship 's crew , using their own equipment , and nothing more .
That is why I would like this made clear by the language used in the translations .
' Seafaring crew ' and ' Schiffsbesatzung ' would have the additional advantage over the expression used in the German version , in that ' seemännische ' in German still has a very masculine ring to it , whilst ' Schiffsbesatzung ' and ' seafaring crew ' could be said to be gender-neutral , which would have an advantage in terms of gender mainstreaming .
( Loud applause )
Before I turn to the rapporteur for advice , I have been informed that Amendment no 48 , as you suggested , constitutes a linguistic amendment in several languages .
It is an important linguistic clarification , but the primary amendment in this regard is Amendment no 13 .
My suggestion , if the rapporteur agrees , would be to vote on Amendment No 13 first and then to vote on the relevant parts of Amendment No 48 and the linguistic dimensions therein .
Mr President , I , too , think it would be right to vote on Amendment No 13 first , but I do believe that , in the event of Amendment No 13 being adopted - which I hope it will be - all the others will lapse .
I do not see the need to vote on the others .
As regards the question of language , we should not be having a great debate about it right now , but should proceed as follows .
The committee wants - as , I assume does this House - to delete the words ' regular land-based personnel ' from the Council 's version .
Whatever is in the other part - ' seafaring personnel ' - we do not want to change it , and it should remain in the text the way it is in the Council version , so that questions of language do not bring us into conflict with the Council .
So what we are aiming to do is to delete the words ' regular land-based personnel ' , and we should approximate the terminology used in English , French , and so on to the Council 's Common Position , as we should not deviate from that .
Thus far , I believe that Mr Piecyk and I are of one mind without having to engage in great linguistic discussions .
Mr President , I wish to ask whether , following the vote on Amendment No 13 , Amendments Nos 56 and 57 should now lapse .
Let me explain : the purpose of Amendment No 13 was to restrict self-handling to crew members .
If I understand correctly , Amendments Nos 56 and 57 concern conditions for granting licences for port operators to undertake self-handling .
This makes no sense in my opinion , however , when we are restricting self-handling to crew members .
Mr President , my group believes that this amendment should not fall even if Amendment No 24 is adopted .
Mr President , this amendment is redundant , as sentence 2 of Amendment No 24 makes provision for the eventuality of an appeal at law .
The reference therein to Article 17 ( 3 ) of the directive is final , and so we cannot now vote on any alternative options .
There is no doubt in my mind that this amendment must lapse .
Mr President , I do not agree with the rapporteur .
I think that the amendment can indeed supplement the amendment by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism that has now been approved , and that it is a more precise statement of the content of the first amendment .
Mr President , when we , in the PPE-DE Group , tabled Amendment No 4 we added the words : ' ... expects the legislative procedure to be concluded by the end of June 2003 at the latest ' .
I suggest that Amendment No 8 , by the PSE Group and others , is split so that we have the first section from the start , ' welcomes the fact that the Commission has presented ... ' , down to the words ' ... in the Commission 's budget ' as the first split .
The second split should be the remainder of that amendment .
We would support the first part and oppose the second .
That split would then be followed by a third vote - it need not be a roll-call vote - which would take up our words which stand alone from the rest of it : ' ... expects the legislative procedure to be concluded by the end of June 2003 at the latest ' .
I ask for your permission , Mr President .
- Mr President , the proposed deletion does not make sense .
There is no reason to have the remainder of the paragraph as it has been suggested .
That is a matter for the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to deal with .
The reason we have a reference here is to try to take a decision as to whether , under the proposal from the Commission , the funding should be moved to Parliament 's budget or not .
I do not think it should be moved to Parliament 's budget , in the interests of transparency and accountability and also because it has cost implications .
It is important that we leave it in the Commission 's budget .
Therefore I suggest that we support Amendment No 8 as it stands .
Mr President , just on a point of order , Mr Dover appears to have requested a split vote , and there are rules governing that sort of procedure .
Therefore , if it can be done , that is all well and good : it will be a precedent that we should follow .
. It is now 20 years since it became compulsory in Britain for car drivers and front-seat passengers to wear seat belts .
That law has saved an average of 7 lives every day .
Yet lives are still being needlessly lost because those rules do not apply to coach passengers .
Too often the European Parliament becomes bogged down with regulations which do little to help our constituents .
This directive is our chance to make a real difference - to reduce the tragic waste of lives lost on our roads .
That is why the British Conservatives welcome this report and congratulate all of those who have helped to bring forward these long-overdue measures .
However , we are disappointed that the proposals do not go further .
It is time that the safety of children on school buses was given the consideration that it so urgently needs .
It is unacceptable that children are being taken to school on buses without seatbelts and that many children are forced to stand due to there being too few seats .
. ( PT ) Drugs are one of the issues of greatest concern to European citizens .
Combating drugs requires a European dimension that includes the immediate adoption of legal instruments against the manufacture and trafficking of drugs , cooperation with producer countries and the promotion of preventing and combating drug addiction .
Mr Pirker 's proposal responds to the steady increase in the production and trade in synthetic drugs .
It is a matter of concern that most illegally produced synthetic drugs originate in Europe - according to data compiled in 1999 by the Swiss Federal Criminal Investigation Office , the Netherlands alone accounts for more than 50 % of world production .
There is an urgent need for effective and rigorous control of the manufacture and sale of substances which , whilst also being chemical products with legitimate applications , are frequently diverted to the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances .
This does not apply to the legal trade in these substances , specifically the manufacture of medicines .
I support this proposal , which transforms the current directive into a Regulation , allowing legislation to be simplified , making it easier to implement - in a uniform and concurrent way - ( which is even more important in the context of enlargement ) .
The main aim is to monitor the trade in drug precursors in a harmonised way and prevent their misuse for illicit drugs production , through closer cooperation between the competent authorities and economic operators ( who should immediately notify the authorities of unusual orders or transactions ) , which must be extended to substances that have not to date been included on our lists .
. ( PT ) I agree with this report first of all because I am extremely concerned at the fact that Europe is described as the main source of illegally produced synthetic drugs .
As if this were not serious enough , reports from international bodies such as the International Narcotics Control Board ( INCB ) , have also revealed that the production of and trade in synthetic drugs continues to increase .
Consequently , the way effectively to combat drugs lies , primarily , in effective precursor control .
There are , however , some obstacles to this control and it cannot be undertaken simply by prohibiting the use of these substances .
Precursors are not used purely for illicit drug production , which means that ensuring effective control will entail some sacrifice on the part of medicine manufacturers , for example .
I feel that the report has achieved a reasonable balance on this point .
Lastly , I believe it is equally crucial to adopt measures on Internet sites that promote the sale of these substances and provide information on how to produce them .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of all of these four reports by Mrs Frassoni , despite some difficulties that this matter raises .
Indeed , the use of comitology must be marked by greater transparency in the work of the various committees , focusing especially on the need to provide the EP with the agendas for and summary records of committee meetings , lists of participants , draft implementing measures submitted to the committees , provisional calendars of meetings and details of the outcome of votes .
Furthermore , all committee documents , with the exception of confidential documents , of course , should be accessible to the public .
I therefore agree with the assessment made by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs stating that it is not the intention of the European Parliament to usurp implementing powers pertaining to the Commission : what it is actually seeking to do is to introduce a system that will enable it properly to exercise control and , if necessary , to contest an implementing measure with which it does not agree when this falls under the codecision procedure .
This is the only way of ensuring that the legislative process and Parliament 's powers as co-legislator are fully respected .
Mr President , it is very good to see you again , and I hope to visit you again in person in future .
I am very pleased that you are now President of Parliament , but I should just like to talk about this directive .
My group , or at least D66 , voted for this directive to provide for the possibility of fair competition in ports and to prevent social dumping .
That means that all parties , including self-handlers , must have the required high social standards and professional qualifications .
In addition , the Member States and the port authorities , in particular , must lay down conditions in the field of safety and environmental protection .
What is important is that the Council and Parliament draw up and present the directive in such a way as to rule out the possibility of social dumping , and also the possibility of rigid protection of one of the parties , and I hope , therefore , that the negotiations are productive .
Mr President , the ports of Harwich , Felixstowe and Tilbury are in my constituency .
Hundreds of dockworkers are concerned today about this directive , one I believe was never required in the first place , mistaking , as it does , competition within ports for the real aim , which should be competition between ports .
Nevertheless I am very proud that the European Parliament has passed amendments ensuring that action is taken against unfair public subsidies , that pilotage is excluded for good safety reasons , and - perhaps most important - that the new providers have to protect workers ' rights properly and work under the EU flag , not one of convenience .
Above all , with a 36-year phase-in period where there is major investment , I believe that no dockworkers currently working in Harwich , Felixstowe or Tilbury need have their jobs affected for their lifetime .
I call on those involved in the conciliation to stick resolutely by Parliament 's amendments , so that we can ensure that the safety of our docks and the jobs of our dockworkers are put first .
On the pretext of creating a single operating framework and providing better port services , the private sector is being paid to take over a sector which is still being run as a public utility .
Existing ports are being given the opportunity to start providing more services in any sector they deem profitable , in contrast to the public administration and central service provider which takes care of necessary - if unprofitable - activities .
Under the new system , terms and operating licences will be the preserve of a decision-making centre , which will be different from the past port services provider , because the same agency cannot act as both service provider and port manager .
Corporations providing port services must comply with transparency requirements in their financial dealings with the public authorities .
However , there is no evidence of any such obligation on the part of the private sector .
The directive specifically mentions staff .
Under Article 6.5 , the service provider has the right to employ personnel of his own choice , but no reference whatsoever is made to qualifications or training .
What we want are port services which operate transparently , which provide the same standard of service to everyone , as well as employment rights for workers , environmental protection and safe ports .
- ( NL ) The ports between Hamburg in Germany and Le Havre in France , and all the Dutch and Belgian ports in-between , see the most competition of all ports .
This is because together they serve largely the same extensive hinterland , including the German Ruhr district , through which flows of cargo can constantly move from one port to another .
As a result , the transhipment costs per quantity of cargo are already lower in these ports than in America or East Asia .
The effects of a ports directive , which aims to encourage competition in order to drive down the price of port activity , are the most far-reaching in precisely those ports .
They cannot operate at still lower costs , and yet they are forced to do just that .
In ports such as these , the risk of social dumping and deteriorating safety is much greater than where one port has a virtual monopoly over a smaller hinterland .
The port or port town that has the strictest requirements regarding safety , environment , quality of work and working conditions loses the competition , and the worst port is the winner .
Furthermore , the directive will force EU Member States to act contrary to obligations they have entered into within the framework of the ILO Convention .
Opting for self-handling at second reading and declaring that votes on the obligations under the ILO Convention are not in order throws up conflicts for the third reading , and , after that , legal proceedings and strikes .
. ( PT ) Following the shipwreck of the Prestige , concerns have been growing about maritime safety .
I share these concerns because my country has a long coastline , which is highly dependent on maritime resources .
For these reasons and because these problems also affect other countries in the European Union , the Jarzembowski report on port services warrants our full consideration .
With regard to the regulations on pilotage , I think that it makes sense to remove these from the scope of this decision .
Every Member State must be able , for reasons of public interest , to maintain the current system , taking account of specific local characteristics .
This report is marked by the way in which it maintains a degree of balance between liberalising port services and demonstrates ongoing concern for social legislation on worker protection , maritime safety and environmental protection in sensitive regions .
This balance has already been achieved in the liberalisation of air and rail transport .
With regard to social and labour legislation , the rights of workers in EU ports must be safeguarded .
I therefore support the opinion of the rapporteur advocating greater protection for these workers , not forgetting the need to maintain qualified personnel in ports and insisting on measures for the training of crew members .
. ( PT ) We are broadly in agreement with the Commission 's proposal for a directive on ports and infrastructures for maritime transport , which is intended to create or re-establish transparent conditions of competition for all EU ports , in the specific context of opening up the market to the various port services .
The services covered by this directive for towing , mooring , cargo-handling , including loading and unloading , do not warrant special attention .
The issue lies in whether or not to exclude pilotage activities in those covered by this directive .
Since I believe pilotage to be a job that requires considerable experience and which is extremely important to the safety of maritime traffic in ports , I agree with the majority vote achieved in this Parliament , which I supported with my vote in favour of the report .
.
( PT ) My vote is intended above all to highlight three points that I believe are crucial : firstly , what is known as ' self-handling ' , must not be surreptitiously subverted , opening the door to all types of opportunism and market distortion .
Instead , it should properly be restricted to the ship 's own crew and undertaken in conjunction with the competent port operator ; secondly , the system of pilotage in ports must be kept outside the scope of the directive and reserved for national legislation ; thirdly , it is crucial that the way is opened for clear rules on State aid in this field to be properly defined , as suggested during the debates on the Green Paper and on which , regrettably , the text of the directive still says very little .
Lastly , where the directive makes significant economic amendments to the port operating system , I believe it is also crucial to provide for transitional systems that protect the rightful interests of those operators who have nevertheless accepted ongoing obligations imposed by national legislation and whose economic balance could suffer irremediably .
. ( PT ) The rapporteur recalls the low level of payments set and accepts the trend of reducing the EU budget 's share of Community GNI / GNP .
Given this situation , with the systematic increase in priorities and with the savings policy that has been pursued - inseparable from the Stability Pact and which contains the systematic practice of cuts , freezes , call-backs , redeployment and reprogramming of budgetary expenditure - consequences that are damaging to the implementation levels of the EU 's traditional priorities are inevitable , especially in the social fields and those of cohesion and cooperation . The very credibility of the budgetary process is also undermined .
We are now seeing further problems with defining priorities , such as that given to the Lisbon strategy , or to issues of immigration and asylum .
The rapporteur also concedes on the need for changes to national budgetary policy when he accepts the current framework of financial perspectives and even the existing limitations in internal and external policies . He does so to the point of contradicting himself , where Afghanistan is concerned , stating on the one hand , that he would not reduce support for other regions but then says , on the other hand , that he intends to evaluate the possibilities of redeploying the budget and of making it more flexible .
Furthermore , priority is still not being given to Palestine ...
. ( IT ) We can only agree on the perspective presented : the priorities of the accession of ten new States and stability and sustainable growth cannot be denied or rejected .
The view of the immediate future is not as optimistic as might appear from the Commission 's document , however .
With regard to accession , considering everything that has happened in recent weeks between the President of a Member State and the candidate countries and considering the recent statements of the Chairman of the Convention regarding the danger that the Convention might not conclude its work within the timeframes laid down , our optimism is clouded by a misgiving which we hope is unfounded . Will we succeed in ensuring that the dates set for enlargement are observed ?
If they are not observed , many points of the strategy will be just wishful thinking .
The objective of stability is also a priority which must be pursued .
We know how difficult it is to create all the conditions necessary to ensure stability and we must work to ensure sustainable growth .
With the almost 5 million unemployed in the Federal Republic and with the negative rates recorded in many other countries too - both Member States and candidate countries - how can we be optimistic about these priorities ?
( Text abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
.
( PT ) The Copenhagen European Council confirmed the outcome of the accession process involving ten candidate countries and negotiations were concluded on the basis of a financial package totalling EUR 41 billion , which will enable the financial perspective to be adjusted and will form the basis of the budget for 2004 , which also increased with the entry into force of the Treaty of Nice , on 1 February 2003 .
We voted in favour of the report because , where internal policy is concerned , the text recalls that the completion of the internal market , the implementation of the Lisbon strategy and the strategy for sustainable development remain the European Union 's three main objectives and will take on particular importance in 2004 , when the new Member States start participating .
It is also to be welcomed that the emphasis is placed on measures supporting SMEs , as creators of employment and economic growth and also on the absolute need for the global war on terrorism .
This is , in short , a report that properly expresses the Union 's political guidelines with a view to including them in the 2004 budget .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it was three years ago that the European Council , meeting in Lisbon , decided on a thoroughly ambitious strategy , according to which the European Union was to become the world 's most competitive and dynamic economic area by 2010 , and was to do so on the basis of qualified knowledge .
This was intended to achieve lasting growth , along with full employment , more and better jobs , and greater social cohesion .
Were we too ambitious , too euphoric ?
Were not today 's crises foreseeable even then ?
Eurostat tells us that we currently have almost 14 million unemployed .
The primary causes of this are the failure to resolve structural problems in the Member States , such as bloated bureaucracies , the distortion of competition by the failure to remove subsidies , and extremely high unemployment among women , young people , older workers and people with disabilities .
Official figures indicate that there are 4.7 million unemployed in Germany alone , the highest level for five years , and the wave of bankruptcies among its businesses and the high level of taxes and duties , which spare neither businesses nor private citizens , are set to reach record levels .
There is no doubt that the European employment strategy has achieved successes by coordinating national , regional and local employment policies .
Although the subsidiarity principle has been adhered to , the continual expansion of the European employment strategy , from horizontal objectives to the Four Pillars , has led to constant reductions in its effectiveness .
I agree with the Council and the Commission in their assessment that the new guidelines should be tightened up for the sake of greater efficiency .
We need , above all , evidence of their having been transposed and of resultant changes in labour markets .
Whatever the orientation in the medium term - the Commission proposed three years - it is my view that we must keep checking up on an annual basis whatever happens , so that there will be healthy pressure on the Member States , some of which have problems with implementing their National Action Plans .
What we need is voluntary undertakings , of the same calibre , let me add , as the Stability and Growth Pact , and these elements must not then be altered in the way they once were when the stimulation of growth and investment are high up the agenda .
Strict adherence to the Pact is the foundation for stability , for confidence on the part of the markets and the public , and so economic dynamism and employment are essentially dependent on it .
The one is inseparable from the other .
The new thing about the European employment strategy is the adherence to three priorities : firstly , getting as close as possible to the Lisbon employment rates of 70 % for men and 60 % for women up to and including 2010 ; secondly , improved quality of work , the direct effect of which is to increase productivity ; and thirdly , the opening up of the labour markets to the vulnerable and those on the margins of society .
Jobs call for the right financial framework conditions .
The tax laws of many Member States are inimical to enterprise and employment .
Far from there being further increases in taxes , these should be reduced .
Consumers and enterprises must have the burdens lifted from them , and administrative expenditure must be reduced .
We must get back to job creation being worth it in financial terms .
Reducing VAT on services up to the end of this year was the right way to go about it .
I propose that there should be more mini-jobs subject to reduced taxation and levies , quite independent of full-time jobs rather as an alternative to them - as I am alleged to have said .
It is always a matter of balance between , on the one hand , greater flexibility , and , on the other , long-term security .
Above all , small and medium-sized enterprises need favourable conditions , for they are , after all , the driving force behind employment , providing as they do 70 % of all jobs and 80 % of all traineeships .
I have not contented myself with generalised commitments to support for SMEs , but have made very specific demands .
They range from the making available of venture capital at favourable rates via favourable tax treatment for start-ups to the speeding-up of approval procedures , from networks for people starting up businesses to ways of freeing them from bureaucracy .
Different experiences at national level meant that there was intensive debate on these proposals in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , but together we achieved compromises with some reservations .
Let me , at this point , thank all the groups ' shadow rapporteurs for their constructive suggestions .
We learned a great deal together and from each other .
We can also expect employment to receive impetus from more flexible ways of organising work , such as contract work and part-time jobs , from which women benefit in harmonising work and family .
We call on the Member States to do more to provide childcare facilities and tax benefits for the people who work in them .
Flexibility is also of benefit to the long-term unemployed , to those starting work and to those with few qualifications , who can acquire new employment skills .
Too little attention is paid to demographic change and the lack of specialists .
The way people are treated when they are in their fifties is not acceptable ; many of these , who find themselves laid off and excluded are willing and able to work , and want to learn more .
They want more training and can take the strain .
Experience is a bonus ; it cannot be a defect .

One final thought : if this new European employment strategy focuses on the three priorities I have mentioned , we may well not have long to wait for effective changes in our labour markets , and so we will be taking a significant step closer to the Lisbon targets .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , five months ago I presented the results of the evaluation of the European Employment Strategy to Parliament and Parliament passed a resolution approving the core results of this evaluation and the basic guidelines .
The presentation of the results was followed by an extended debate between all the European institutions .
Broad consultations were also held with the social partners , so that the Commission could present the results of the debate together with specific proposals for future priorities and improved management of the Employment Strategy .
As a result , the Commission presented a document in January containing a new approach to the Employment Strategy .
Basically , the new approach focuses mainly on implementing the Lisbon objectives .
As Thomas Mann said , the situation is different , the economic situation is not auspicious , and this is having a significant impact on unemployment , with certain groups of the populace being harder hit than others .
Thus , despite the positive evaluation of the results of the Employment Strategy , with reforms in all the Member States and ten million new jobs created between 1997 and 2001 ; despite the positive approach , there can be no doubt that we need to activate more policies and speed up the reforms .
In order to be able to focus more on Lisbon , we have set three basic objectives : full employment , labour standards and productivity and a cohesive labour market .
I should like to emphasise that the gender dimension has been mainstreamed in all three objectives and in our priorities and specific reference is made to the particular conditions faced by women in the labour market .
Having agreed on the three basic objectives , we then come to the substance of the guidelines .
Both Parliament and the Council called for fewer , simpler guidelines focusing more clearly on results .
Our objective , therefore , is to cut the number of guidelines , if possible by half , and to articulate them around highly specific priorities .
We have selected eleven priorities ; the new priorities and those that have come up against the greatest resistance , in the sense that some countries accept them while others do not , are undeclared work and immigration .
So we have three basic objectives and eleven basic priorities around which the guidelines on employment are structured .
We believe , in the light of experience over recent years , that the quantitative approach plays a very important part .
In other words , the guidelines need to include quantitative targets , if policy is to be quantifiable , and governments need to be judged on the basis of specific targets .
Our proposal therefore includes specific sectors which can be used as a basis for discussion and in which Member States can agree on European or specific national targets .
Another important point is partnership .
The method of administering the procedure for the Employment Strategy does , of course , vary from one country to another .
Each country takes a different approach , depending on its culture and on how the social partnership and local authorities are organised .
However , the evaluation identifies certain points which are common to every country .
The social partners need an enhanced role , the procedure needs to be advertised in order to increase awareness among as many citizens and agencies as possible and , of course , in the European and national parliaments , the territorial dimension of the strategy needs to be developed in the form of regional and local employment plans , civil society needs to be galvanised into action and , finally , parliamentary bodies need to be more involved in the procedure .
This last point brings me to timetabling .
I should like to say from the outset that I understand perfectly Parliament 's concerns this year , as far as approval of the guidelines is concerned , because this year is the first time we shall be implementing enhanced coordination of economic policy cycles and employment policy cycles .
In order to implement this coordination , which has been called for on numerous occasions , including in Parliament , we need four different stages .
The first stage is to decide on the general guidelines for the strategy on employment and the broad economic policy guidelines at the spring Council .
The second is to submit the guidelines as quickly as possible after that , as a package .
This means that , once we have the spring Council 's guidelines , the Commission will present a package of guidelines on both economic policy and employment .
The third is to approve the guidelines ; this needs to be done as quickly as possible , if possible at the June Council .
The fourth , once these guidelines have been approved , is to draw up national action plans and the joint report on employment by the autumn .
Clearly , therefore , we are all under a great deal of pressure this year if we are to keep to this timetable , but may I remind you that we shall not be starting the debate in April from square one .
The debate on the reform of the Employment Strategy started back in July last year .
A very specific debate was held in Parliament , followed in January by the recent communication and I think that , if Parliament and the Commission work closely together , we should be able to overcome timetabling problems and coordinate economic policy and employment policy this year .
This is very important if we are to avoid overlaps and ensure that one procedure does not take precedence over the other .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur for his report , which I see , moreover , as a courageous one .
For the first time , some new ideas are raised , ideas which have not always come up in recent years and which also tie in somewhat with the new reality that we are now faced with , in the context of a less favourable economic situation than we have seen in recent times .
That is why I find it a courageous report , and , moreover , it is not very politically correct on a number of points .
I think that that is a good thing too , because if there is to be a genuine debate on employment , it cannot just be politically correct , and that is something I believe applies to this aspect as much as it does to others .
As I said , we are faced with a kind of economic slump .
That is always bad news for employment , with unemployment rising , as a rule .
In that case , we generally see unemployment among young people increasing more sharply than unemployment as a whole .
That is because it is harder for young people to find a job than it has been in the past .
The minute the situation suddenly improves , young people are the first to find a job .
The minute the situation is less good , however , they are left standing .
In order to prevent that happening , and precisely because we can see it coming , we should be focusing on this in particular .
That does not mean that we should completely forget about the other groups we have indicated - that is , women and older people .
On the contrary , you take the view that we should also continue with this , but I believe that young people need extra attention that they have not received in recent years .
I should now like to turn to the matter of comparisons .
At present , unemployment in the European Union is approximately 2.5 % higher than in the United States and Japan , but the differences are not as great as they seem at first glance .
Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Austria , Ireland , Denmark , Great Britain and Sweden are doing better than the United States .
The other countries are therefore doing somewhat worse .
If , however , we look at the differences , that is very alarming .
It is precisely for that reason that this policy and these ideas are so important .
One cannot help but see that if a country has very high unemployment and this unemployment does not go down , something is not right .
There are countries that have historically had high unemployment , whose unemployment is going down .
On the other hand , there are other countries that have historically had low unemployment , whose unemployment is rising .
This is especially the case if one part of such a country is doing well and another part is not .
In Germany , for example , which is of course our greatest concern at the moment , there are states that are simply at the European level .
How is that possible ?
That is a very interesting question .
It is not a valid approach to only look at the countries , but also at the regions .
That is the way to bring it together .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to be frank , it gives me a bad taste in my mouth to be discussing a new employment strategy in the midst of an international crisis situation and maybe immediately before a war in Iraq , but it is perhaps important to do so .
The Lisbon process must be kept on the rails even in difficult times .
On behalf of my group , I can tell you that the Commission 's new approach to the employment strategy has been received very favourably in our camp .
Increased stability in the employment strategy is indeed necessary .
That does not mean that we must be less ambitious , but it does mean that , in future , we shall possibly have to concentrate more on depth and make the employment guidelines more results-orientated .
We also agree with the Commission that there should be more cohesion between the coordination processes .
It is becoming increasingly the case that the broad economic guidelines are in practice playing the role of overarching instrument .
In our opinion , however , that also means that the economic guidelines must take more account of the ambitions with regard to employment , the fight against poverty , the future of pensions , and health care .
In our opinion , it also means that the economic guidelines should actually be economic and social guidelines , on which not only the Ministers for Economic and Financial Affairs express their opinion , but also the Ministers for Employment and Social Affairs , the Ministers for Education and possibly the Ministers for Science Policy .
In our opinion , that means that , while the processes must run autonomously , a great deal more coherence is needed between the various political processes .
That also has consequences in terms of content , because it means that , in our view , the economic policy must also stimulate economic growth .
Therefore , a lot more work must be done towards innovation , research and development , and investment in people .
In the opinion of our group , this means that the Stability and Growth Pact must also fulfil its role as a growth pact and must enable counter-cyclical operation in the Member States and breathe life into the economy .
My group fully agrees with the Commission that greater coherence is also needed in the coordination in the social sphere ; that is to say , between the pensions issue , the pension process , the poverty process and the health process .
We should therefore like to lend our full support to the intention of the Greek Presidency to activate these processes and give them more continuity .
We fully agree that more attention should be paid to an effective implementation of the employment strategy .
We must not let this strategy become a paper tiger .
At present , the disparity between the Council 's intentions and reality is still too great : not only with regard to the employment participation of older people , young people and migrants , but also as regards investment in people .
For example , we see that there are serious shortcomings in businesses ' training efforts and that people with low skills and older people are treated unequally .
That is why we think that the involvement of all the stakeholders is very important .
That is why we also say to the Convention that the open coordination method must be incorporated into the Constitution not only with regard to employment but also to the social process , in order to guarantee more democratic legitimacy and transparency .
My group thought that the Mann report was reasonably balanced , reflecting our main concerns , just as it came out of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We have no intention of tabling any amendments , therefore .
I have to be frank : the amendments that are now on the table threaten to distort the whole report .
This is not , Mr Pronk , a question of political correctness or anything of the sort .
In our opinion it is a question of the efficiency of this Parliament .
A report like that , with a consensus in this Parliament , may not be sexy , but the intention is to present a report which applies to the whole of the Union and not just to one Member State , and which sets out guidelines for a common policy .
Such a report does not lend itself to national political deliberations or ideological debates on specific points of this or that policy orientation .
My group is therefore inclined to reject these amendments .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the spring summit of EU heads of state and government has been devoted to the development of the economy and labour market .
It is , then , also only natural that the two topics be linked , since they are two sides of the same coin .
Success in employment policy is crucial to achieving the objective of economic policy . The fact is , moreover , that an economic policy that increases competitiveness and flexibility and so improves the economic incentives for creating jobs is the core of employment policy .
In addition , there are the factors so brilliantly emphasised in Mr Mann 's report , which those of us in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party are able to support and which we think will be improved by the amendments tabled by ourselves and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , amendments that we too shall of course support .
Mr Mann 's report emphasises that we must have a stronger commitment to training , to improved incentives for accepting and creating jobs and to less bureaucracy and more flexibility in the labour market .
Unfortunately , the common employment policy is seen , from the job figures and unemployment statistics , not to be an unqualified success . We are much too far from the ambitious targets set in Lisbon three years ago .
It might be enquired whether they were too ambitious .
No , they were not ; but there are trend-setting countries that do not feel sufficiently bound by the promises .
There has been progress in some areas , but this is overshadowed , I believe , by a general picture of too modest a desire to comply with the common objectives .
I agree with the proposal you have tabled , Commissioner , for simplifying and clarifying the open coordination of employment policy with a view to having fewer guidelines .
These are constructive reforms that have been presented , and I also think it good that we should have better coordination with the common economic policy .
Furthermore , we must also become much better at monitoring and ensuring that the Member States do in fact feel bound by the fine promises given at the Lisbon Summit , and this also applies to the large countries .
Mr President , I too would like to thank the rapporteur .
The report that eventually came out of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs was indeed a reasonable report .
However , my group had one major problem with it over the support for the rigidity of the stability and growth pact .
Consequently we are going to be supporting the amendment on that which will be coming from another group this afternoon .
Because we felt that what came out overall had a sense of balance to it , we are not going to be supporting many of the other amendments seeking to reinstate certain parts of the original text , e.g. Amendment 17 concerning GATS .
We do not agree that the General Agreement on Trade in Services will be a job engine , either here or in the developing world .
That was the subject of the extensive debate that Parliament had on Monday .
What concerns us as well is that the present text again lacks a mechanism for sustainability , that is , an environmental dimension that really must be incorporated into all that we are doing .
Too often we see that the poorest people in the worst quality jobs also live in the worst environment .
If we are really going to do something to upgrade employment or our social environment , we need to take account of the physical environment .
We also agree with a lot that the Commissioner said about the ownership of this employment strategy .
It would be very useful if national parliaments debated the national action plans that were put forward by governments .
In our delegation visits from this committee , we have found all too often that national parliaments do not have a clue that these plans even exist and they certainly have not participated in them .
That would be a welcome step forward .
To pick up on the issue of small- and medium-sized enterprises : yes , they are important , but only if - as Mr Schmidt said - they are of high quality .
You can have a small sweatshop as well as an ethical business and regulation is there to support the latter , not the former .
Madam President , Commissioner , there is no doubt that Mr Mann has done an excellent job .
Indeed , his proposals are based on the highest Community tradition in social matters and employment policy and , in terms of proactive measures , incorporate a broad range of innovative points and fields such as the knowledge-based society and its strategic implications .
I am certainly not making the points that follow out of a desire to criticise , therefore , but , if anything , in order to share our hopes , although I fear that they may be quite insubstantial in areas such as small and medium-sized enterprises , with regard to which a number of different points have been made .
Indeed , we all know that , as regards taxation , if we want to implement the recommendations made we have three options , which can either be treated as alternatives or employed in parallel : the Stability Pact and its durability , particularly with regard to the possibility of complete exemption for SMEs for the first three years , in view of their substantial contribution to national GDP ; a review of the areas covered by the subsidiarity system ; or , again , a review of the areas requiring a unanimity vote in the Council .
I am not being pessimistic here , just realistic .
Another good example in the area of financial matters is the proposed policies for making credit available to small and medium-sized enterprises , which would appear to be in contrast with the contents of the 2002 Basel agreement , which does not allow the necessary raising of sufficient venture capital for small and medium-sized enterprise and for the internationalisation thereof .
The same may be said of incentives to promote employment , as the rapporteur calls them , which are considered to be a different matter from flexibility and bureaucratic relief .
If they are , then they are direct examples of State aid pursuant to Article 87 ( 3 ) ( a ) and ( c ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which , as the rapporteur is aware , only apply in areas identified in 1998 , apparently without possibility of amendment , not even where situations have changed with the passage of time .
The role of the social partners , however , which the rapporteur has rightly emphasised , is a consideration worthy of mention .
Called upon to implement forms of local partnership and contractual flexibility within a coherent framework of principles , the social partners are now , despite the European social dialogue , in a position where they do not , in practice , have the bodies or policies to lay down minimum social standards for enterprises , particularly in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , notwithstanding , inter alia , the fact that a great many of these enterprises originate from current Member States .
This is a situation which , in these countries , usually combined with lower taxation and a gradual increase in the consideration given to the Community acquis in environmental matters , is certainly creating new jobs , although it does mean that there is no hope of narrowing clear social gaps , even in the medium term .
A further point concerns the knowledge-based society itself , aims and objectives of which we support .
As the rapporteur is aware , the knowledge-based society cannot be achieved just by increasing the number of computers in families and schools or by introducing better , more focused training , although that is needed , but it is based on both the full , appropriate exploitation of useful information and the availability of this information .
In conclusion , what I fear is that , despite all the emphasis continually and repeatedly placed on the importance of employment and social policies and their horizontal integration with other policies , they will remain merely a kind of by-product , a by-product which , within the Member States which are unmindful of the content of the European social agenda , combines the sterile display of positive or negative quantitative results with , I am sad to say , constant rhetoric and equally persistent erosion of quality .
Madam President , the economic doctrine of the European Union in general and this report in particular create an impression of total disassociation between , on the one hand , declarations of principle , good intentions and an honourable debate on employment , and , on the other , the terrible , distressing social reality of global competition and the economic war .
Of course , we all recognise that encouraging investment and enterprise fosters job creation ; that reducing fiscal pressure and bureaucratic constraints boosts activity ; and that training young people and older people to enable them to enter or remain in the world of work is a good thing .
Having broken down these open doors , however , having explained that , in addition to employment and growth , a third , environmental dimension is required , not to mention the objective of promoting health and well-being in the workplace , having listed all these good intentions , we must wake up , leave behind our daydreams and come back to reality .
And that is a severe shock : instability , social plans , delocalisation , social dumping , increasing unemployment , mass immigration , falling growth , demographic collapse and a social protection system about to implode .
We owe all of that to a European political class that has managed to combine the problems of bureaucratic socialism with the problems of ultra-liberalism and globalisation .
In other words , we are struggling with the worst of both worlds .
Furthermore , it is clear that eastward enlargement will now throw the doors wide open to large-scale delocalisation and mass immigration .
It is clear that the Union 's economic policy of opening up its internal market to global competition is selling off what is left of our labour-intensive industries .
Allowing irresponsible free-trade extremists and globalisation fundamentalists to take charge of the future of our economies and our social structures is dangerous .
Economic and social recovery is to be achieved through the recovery of our internal markets , through national and Community preference , through national and Community protection and by redefining WTO trade rules , and certainly not within the framework of the terrible nation-grinding machine that the European Union has now become .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Mann observed during the discussions in committee that his report had not enjoyed the support to which he had previously been accustomed .
This of course is partly due to a number of demands which have a very specific national character and which do not really belong in the European debate at all .
I support the intention expressed in his report , which is that the guidelines should concentrate on what is essential and that annual reports should also continue to be produced in future .
Also in terms of the objectives , I believe that we have achieved broad consensus , especially as regards flexibility on the labour markets , without subjecting the workforce - the employees - to any unnecessary dismantling of their social protection .
The path towards this goal is undoubtedly a matter of debate .
Fresh ideas would be all well and good , Mr Pronk , but in some areas , we can detect very clear retrograde steps , starting with the involvement of the national parliaments .
Mr Mann has called for the national parliaments to be allowed to exercise greater control , yet we agreed some time ago that they will not only exercise control but will participate through the framework of legislation - which goes much further .
Indeed , Sweden and Denmark have already applied this in principle .
Moreover , Mr Mann calls for implementation of the national further training plans to be pushed through .
Here too , we agreed that there should be legislation imposing a binding obligation and setting out workers ' rights to further training .
Furthermore - and this , of course , is where we cannot agree with him - he calls for indiscriminate tax cuts and wage subsidies .
These are not fresh ideas .
They are completely obsolete .
Nor do they promote the entrepreneurial creativity that we urgently need .
Mr President , I should like to make a couple of brief remarks .
I think that , in the context of economic development , demographic developments , technological developments , enlargement , and a possible war , we have together ended up in a complicated situation in which the things we like , such as a comprehensive approach , will become increasingly difficult .
That was something I just wanted to say on this day when elections are being held in the Netherlands .
For , although we have taken pains over it , it will not be easy , for example , to continue in the coming period to attain the standards of employment creation to which we have become accustomed .
In any case , I concur with remarks such as those by Mrs Van Lancker with regard to the linking of economic and social policy .
In my opinion , we should also adapt the economic policy to the social policy .
I also concur with a number of remarks by Mr Pronk regarding the frequently erroneous comparison between the United States and Europe .
You have to have a much better , much more careful look at this .
I am in agreement with the main objectives of the new employment policy and should like to call attention in particular to the second objective .
The first objective , full employment , needs be elaborated , including with regard to the social economy , but of course it is also necessary to devote attention to better employment , and that will become even more difficult in this period .
Looking at the priorities , it is funny to see that some eleven remain of the original eighteen guidelines .
I think that we have to look very carefully at how to present and systematically secure the new fields , such as immigration and undeclared work .
If we look , for example , at those elements which the evaluation of employment policy revealed to be relatively poor - the improvement of the organisation of work , and better work , for instance - we have to ensure that we do not break these down again into all manner of categories , when we are presently just at the stage of initiatives in this field .
In other words , I think that we need to do some work on this in the coming period .
With regard to the streamlining of the whole package of guidelines , which makes sense to me , this also means that - as I said at the beginning - we have to adapt these to each other .
Lastly , I think - and hope - that the Council will also commit itself in the coming period to implementing the method of working which we have adopted together , namely the open coordination method , without any kind of deviation .
Mr President , I also wish to join with the others in thanking the rapporteur for his work on a very important topic which has become even more so in the last year because of the increase in unemployment across many economies in the European Union .
If we wish to be serious about how we develop people 's opportunities and give them the tools of freedom and independence , then giving and assisting in employment is one of the most important tools for combating poverty and exclusion .
Whatever side of the political divide we come from , we all agree that more needs to be done to achieve a more effective Europe-wide employment strategy .
Many of the proposals in Mr Mann 's report and some of the amendments will help towards this final goal .
However , we must also learn from the mistakes of the past .
In particular , the guidelines need to be simplified and reduced .
Appropriate targets have to be put in place to guarantee the delivery of proper results rather than a mere tinkering with figures .
We need to create proper conditions for full and stable employment to improve quality and productivity at work and labour market cohesion .
We need to ensure that all employment policies are people-centred , not merely a response to an urgent need in one or other Member State .
Our strategy requires not only that people be given training and skills but also that there be no discrimination between men and women .
This year , in particular - the International Year of the Disabled - we should also be working more actively towards integrating people with disabilities into the workforce .
We must maintain and improve the incentive to work .
The most effective way is by guaranteeing proper wages and ensuring that people can maintain as much of their own earning potential as possible to reduce labour taxes .
However , this is where we differ from some of the speakers and from the proposal in Mr Mann 's report , in particular Paragraphs 11 and 13 , which deal with taxation .
These issues are exclusively for Member States .
If a Member State , or a group of Member States , wishes to follow the best practices of another Member State , then so be it .
However , you can look at all the models that you wish and analyse all the processes that have been put in place but the only way of increasing employment that has been successful is the reduction of labour costs .
My last point concerns my own amendment to Paragraph 24 .
The purpose is to boost consumer confidence through proper corporate social responsibility , which can create and contribute to higher innovation performance .
The idea is to distinguish between how an enterprise relates to internal stakeholders , shareholders and employees .
Corporate social responsibility can also have beneficial effects in terms of building good relationships with consumers , suppliers and others .
If we can deal with the question of taxation , we can all support this report .
However , the question of taxation has to remain outside the responsibility .
Mr President , first of all , I wish to congratulate Mr Mann on this report , which makes an excellent contribution to defining a future strategy for employment and social policy in the European Union .
Now that five years have passed since this strategy was launched , this is the right time to assess the experience , to evaluate its weak points and to try to provide responses that are both realistic and bold , to the emerging challenges that are common to the current and future Member States and bring them into line with the aims of the Lisbon strategy .
The strategy for employment has undeniably contributed to reducing unemployment , but we are today facing a different scenario , with Europe 's economy in a period of stagnation , a situation to which the Member States must pay particular attention .
We must also focus on clear issues , on adopting global priorities in the medium term and on achieving results .
One of these issues is that of active ageing as a response to the demographic challenge , whilst not forgetting young people and the least-favoured social groups .
Recent history has shown that the greater the involvement of regional and local policies in policies adopted at national and at European level , the more the strategy for employment has to gain .
The importance of the role of the social partners , civil society and non-governmental organisations in achieving the objective of full employment and of better jobs for all cannot be over-emphasised .
The report rightly highlights the role of the small and medium-sized enterprises in particular .
These have indeed been the driving force behind job creation in Europe .
Consequently , measures promoting the creation and existence of SMEs will surely have a positive effect both on the quantity and quality of jobs created .
I also wish to highlight and express my total agreement with the idea of cooperation between the various universities , in addition to there being a genuine interface between universities and businesses .
Lastly , I shall refer to the principle of equal opportunities : a lasting increase in the general employment rate is only possible if the female employment rate is strongly improved , and this will require effective measures to square the demands of family and professional life .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , following the conclusions of the Lisbon Council , the various reports voted upon here in Parliament dealing with employment have consistently highlighted the need to strike a balance between quantitative and qualitative development of employment , or between economic development and social development .
The strategy implemented has made genuine progress possible , and , as has been stated , Commissioner , we fully support the proposals regarding the way in which you plan to follow up this work .
Today , however , in a difficult context , a context of waves of company restructuring and mass redundancies that are increasing instability on the job market , the European Parliament must once again send out a strong , clear signal .
Mr Mann 's own-initiative report , however , takes the opposite view to the message we should be sending , presenting to us an exclusively liberal creed , and the work carried out by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in order to balance the text is in danger of being completely nullified by the amendments reintroduced in plenary .
Mr Mann , what we need today is not just increased flexibility : we also need a policy that is both durable and flexible .
We do not want second-class jobs or deskilled casual work , as you are proposing .
We must focus on training and qualifications , and support the most vulnerable categories , which are women , young people and the elderly .
Nor do we want a policy that insists on seeing fiscal pressure as the cause of all evils in this matter .
Nor do we want deregulation , uncontrolled opening up of the service trade markets , sacrificing all the social acquis on the altar of free competition .
If the report were to be amended in the way you are proposing in plenary , we would have to oppose it .
I shall end , Mr President , by saying that , in promoting employment strategy and social policy in the European Union , which is the title of the report , we cannot overlook the principles of solidarity and social cohesion , which are guarantees of the prosperity of our economies .
Mr President , unlike the rapporteur , who spoke earlier , I believe that the European employment strategy has played a major part in combating unemployment thus far and that it has had a positive effect on national labour market policies - not in all the Member States , of course , but certainly in some .
Then , because of the ambitious goals we set ourselves , the Lisbon Summit was a decisive step , with the goals being updated each year by specific indicators , just as the Commission 's assessment of the national plans and the respective recommendations are a point of reference and an incentive to follow the example of those countries which are more successful than others in obtaining positive results by means of a proactive policy involving the social partners at all levels .
Each year , the European Parliament has consistently succeeded in its resolutions in finding the right balance between flexibility and security and putting economic policy , employment policy and social policy on an equal footing .
Now , in the face of the new generation of guidelines proposed by the Commission , which seek , as has been said , to achieve three objectives - to bring the employment rate further into line with the Lisbon objectives , to improve the quality of jobs and to promote a labour market which is open to socially vulnerable groups - it is a little surprising that the rapporteur proposed in committee and is proposing once again in the form of amendments in the House a series of instruments - reducing taxation across the board , recourse to what is known as ' minor work ' , the introduction of excessive flexibility - which are incompatible with improving job quality , investment in human resources or effective reconciliation of family and professional life which is not detrimental in terms of security .
I feel that these instruments serve the purposes of the ideological debates taking place in some of the Member States - Italy , for example - rather than stimulating and coordinating the Union .
This line was partially adjusted in committee and the result is more balanced , and that is why , as has been said , we do not support the amendments .
I would like to end with a comment .
Mrs Bastos rightly upheld the paragraph of the resolution which calls for greater cooperation between universities and research centres .
It is a shame that her group has tabled an amendment seeking to replace cooperation with competition .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do not think I am in danger of being complacent , as figures are not really open to interpretation . I might only be looking at one side of the coin , however .
Nonetheless , it is pleasing to note that the number of people unemployed in the European Union has fallen dramatically . The total stood at 17 million in 1997 but by 2002 it was down to 13.5 million .
The scenario and pace are now quite different .
Of course , I have to admit there is another side to this coin . A hard core of 7.4 % of the unemployed have never actually worked , have lost their job , or face major obstacles in getting back into work .
In general , these are older people .
At least , they are likely to be too old to benefit from schemes for the young , and too young to be considered for early retirement .
Alternatively , they might be young and lack the necessary experience and training .
I have already referred to two groups in particular need of protection or initiatives , namely the young and older people who have lost their job .
Turning to a third such group , on 8 March we celebrated International Working Women 's Day , and its memory should still be fresh in our minds .
Women also need support .
It is important to honour the commitment given at the Lisbon Council , namely to ensure that over 60 % of women are in employment by 2010 at the latest .
The proposal we are debating today encompasses three main objectives . These are to increase the rate of employment , to improve job quality and to open up the labour market to the most disadvantaged groups in society .
2003 is the year of the disabled , and this should be in the forefront of our minds .
In addition , the horizontal policies so frequently referred to in the House must permeate all our activities .
It is difficult to rank these horizontal policies , but health and safety in the workplace , equality and sustainable development are certainly amongst the most important .
It is also vital to ensure the involvement of society as a whole and of all levels of administration , regardless of how close they might be to the citizens .
The enlargement countries will be watching our activities with interest too .
Mr Mann 's report takes account of all these considerations .
The report is to be commended in its original version , and also as it now stands following the improvements made in committee .
I congratulate Mr Mann and call for a vote in favour of this report .
Mr President , there can be no doubt that Europe was in need of an employment strategy in 1997 even though the economic cycle was at a high and it was possible to argue that the market itself would provide for our needs . In the light of the present situation , however , it is even more necessary to make every effort to improve this strategy , particularly as we face up to a war situation and its aftermath .
The Commission 's communication and reform must therefore be more than welcome . Let us hope that the second half of the decade that began in 1997 will actually surpass the first .
I must begin by echoing what other Members have said .
I do not know whether to start by commenting on Mr Mann 's report or on the amendments to it .
Further to the statements made by the rapporteur and by Mr Pronk , I find I am bound to state strong opposition to all the amendments .
Mr Mann 's report does indeed contain a number of positive ideas .
These enjoyed broad support in committee .
Unfortunately , the amendments amount to a strong reaction against the most sensible and balanced ideas of the European strategy for ideological reasons .
I should like to focus on the objectives and point out that there can be no valid strategy if the objectives are scaled down . As the Commissioner stated , the Lisbon objectives are crystal clear .
There is no doubt that the objectives for the coming five years are more jobs , better job quality and better social inclusion .
Mr Mann , more jobs is not synonymous with full employment .
It is not acceptable to maintain that it was over-ambitious to hope to attain the rates of employment set at Lisbon .
That is backtracking .
Similarly , better quality is not synonymous with lower taxation , nor is more social inclusion synonymous with fewer fiscal demands .
Public resources will be needed to launch proactive policies and to ensure those in danger of being excluded from the labour market are drawn into it .
If these amendments are adopted , I shall therefore be obliged to vote against your report , Mr Mann , along with many other Members in my delegation .
Mr President , I hope that my good friend Thomas Mann has forgiven me for not voting for the report in committee , and indeed that he will forgive me again , as he knows I will not be supporting it in the plenary .
There are many points that I welcome in his report ; the recognition of the need to deliver the Lisbon conclusions , the encouragement and support for SMEs and the need to improve employment of disadvantaged groups in society .
But I do not accept the basic thrust of the report that one of the solutions is to strengthen the roles of the social partners .
I am all for social dialogue , but this should be between employees and employers within their companies .
The rapporteur confirmed the importance of SMEs as the motor of employment , but SMEs have only a tiny voice within UNICE and most of their employees do not have membership of trade unions .
So within the social partners their voice goes virtually unheard , and yet the social partners presume to speak for them .
There was an interesting report in the UK press at the weekend about Germany : Chancellor Schröder was apparently finding it increasingly difficult to get acceptance of much-needed labour market reforms because the social partners were blocking them .
A German minister was quoted as saying ' when it becomes necessary to drain the swamp , you don 't stand around asking the frogs ' .
With unemployment approaching 5 million in that country , the swamp is getting bigger and the need for change is very clear .
So I am all for social justice and social inclusion , but the biggest enemy of both is unemployment .
Governments need to do what is necessary to address this .
Clinging on to outdated concepts does not help ; strengthening the role of the social partners simply leads to more paralysis .
If some countries wish to persist in this , it is of course up to them .
But please , rapporteur , please , Commissioner , do not inflict such concepts on the rest of us .
Mr President , Commissioner , today we are debating the future of the European Employment Strategy , at a time when the economy is seriously overshadowed by the threat of war in Iraq , rising oil prices and economic problems in the countries in the eurozone .
Unfortunately , the current labour market is not dynamic enough to create new jobs .
As far as women are concerned , to whom you alluded extensively , despite the increase in the number of working women , who now account for about 41 % -42 % of the total workforce , and the gradual increase in the number of women in purely male-dominated sectors , unemployment is far higher among women than it is among men .
The Lisbon objectives to improve the position of women in the labour market would appear to be some way off , given that unemployment is still about double among women : 14.6 % compared to 8.7 % among men .
We also note that exploitation is rife among women , with over 250 000 women working at home with absolutely no social protection .
At the same time , the black market is flourishing , relying heavily on hundreds of thousands of mainly female foreigners who are left out of labour and unemployment statistics .
The European Employment Strategy recognises the role that women can play in increasing employment rates , and we are delighted that it is moving towards eroding the differentials between men and women as far as wages and the representation of women in all sectors of the economy are concerned .
We are also delighted , Commissioner , with the importance you have attached to gender mainstreaming in all sectors .
However , it is clear from the statistics on the number of women in work that the policies already being applied require greater momentum and evaluation .
Most importantly , quantifiable , qualitative and quantitative targets need to be introduced at both European and national level .
For example , we could set ourselves the objective of halving the current differential between men and women on pay , training , pensions and promotions and the length of time women stay in work by 2010 .
I hope the forthcoming spring Council will accept your proposals and that we shall have new national employment plans by the autumn , as you said in your speech .
Mr President , as we have discussed the individual subjects broached by the honourable Members on several occasions , I have just three brief comments to make .
The first concerns the objectives of the spring Council .
It is important that the Greek Presidency has made employment a priority at the spring Council .
This will be the second time since Lisbon that employment has been one of the Council 's priorities .
Interestingly , it would appear from a series of initiatives between prime ministers over the last month that they are all promoting employment as a priority and at the spring Council , war permitting , it will be top of the agenda .
However , we must bear in mind that the quantitative target of full employment by 2010 set in Lisbon depended on two basic preconditions : 3 % annual growth and the implementation of a reform package .
As far as the first target is concerned , we are clearly behind schedule .
In several countries growth is below 3 % ; in fact , a number of countries have almost zero growth , which by definition will make it very difficult to achieve our targets .
On the second issue , the positive evaluation of the employment strategy notwithstanding , numerous reforms need speeding up .
The message , as far as reforming the Employment Strategy is concerned , is that we cannot insist on reforms relating to the labour market and to the modernisation of social systems and to another set of policies relating to the employment strategy .
I think this is where the main difference lies ; in other words , labour market reforms are part and parcel of the Employment Strategy , which is much wider and which , as many members said , ranges from taxation to education .
So we believe that it is very important that the spring Council and Parliament will be sticking to the Lisbon objectives ; it shows that we all hope to be able to make up the last two years ' lack of growth over coming years .
My second point has to do with discrimination .
Briefly , one of the three basic objectives is a non-discriminatory job market , and what we are proposing to the Council is that there should be individual quantitative targets for groups vulnerable to discrimination .
My third point has to do with women .
For the first time , more women than men have entered the labour market .
Of the ten million jobs created between 1997 and 2001 , 75 % were filled by women , a clear signal that our targets are being achieved and our polices are effective .
I shall of course be insisting on gender mainstreaming in all measures and priorities .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0063 / 2003 ) by Mr Friedrich , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the ECB recommendation for a Council decision on an amendment to Article 10.2 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank ( 6163 / 2003 - C5-0038 / 2003 - 2003 / 0803 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , this is indeed an important issue .
What is at stake , after all , is the stability and development of our single currency , the euro .
At present , the voting modalities in the European Central Bank are as follows : we have twelve central bank presidents - or governors , if you will - plus six central bank directors , making a total of 18 votes .
That is a relatively small and manageable body .
Every member has full and unrestricted speaking and voting rights .
We can assume that sooner or later , other countries will join as well .
I hope that Great Britain will be one of them , but some countries from the Central and Eastern European accession candidates will undoubtedly join too , which means that it is essential to consider how these voting modalities can be amended and adjusted to the new dimension , given that in future , some 15 , 20 or 25 countries may be part of the euro-zone .
The Council has now asked the ECB to draw up its own proposal on this issue .
Under pressure of time , a proposal has been drafted which really is not acceptable .
Let me cite just a few examples : it proposes forming three groups of countries , although it is very difficult to explain why any country is in a specific group .
I could do so , but it would take about ten minutes .
Of course , this system is not remotely transparent , especially since a rotation system would then be introduced .
This means that the first group comprising the ' biggest ' countries would not take part in 20 % of the votes , but would take part in 80 % of votes .
In the other groups , it is entirely possible that a country , that is to say , a central bank governor , would not participate in as many as 40 % of votes .
In practice , this could mean that a large country belonging to the first group would look precisely at when it is not entitled to vote , in a bid to influence the agenda and ensure that important items are excluded from the agenda when it has no right to vote .
This will mean that there will be massive debates about the agenda . What is more , the details of this rotation system still have to be hammered out by the Central Bank 's Governing Council .
As we can imagine , it is quite likely that a country which is not entitled to vote will make even greater efforts to influence the voting behaviour by delivering lengthy speeches during the debate .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - quite rightly , in my view - has now said that this model is not functional , transparent or efficient for such an important body as the Governing Council .
We have also taken the trouble to speak with academics from France , Germany and Great Britain because we believe that the academic sector should have an input here as well .
Last Monday , at 7.15 p.m. , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs accepted my proposal which - without any prior discussion on our part - is also endorsed by many other bodies and parties in this House .
We say this : we are not under any real pressure of time !
We say this : Let the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference , put forward a new and better proposal .
It will be 2006 at the earliest , and most probably 2008 - in other words , four years - before any of the new Member States joins the euro .
So take time to work out a new , transparent and viable proposal !
We have presented two options in this context .
We have said that even if weighting is needed , there should be no rotation system . Give us a ' one country , one vote ' system every time , but with a weighting system based on population size , GDP and the relative size of the financial services sector - we were thinking to some extent of Luxembourg here .
We have also said that in the long term , you really do need to get down to brass tacks .
If confidence in the euro has increased to an adequate extent in a few years ' time , the academics ' proposal could be adopted .
This entails differentiating between short-term operational decisions and long-term institutional / strategic decisions .
The short-term decisions could then be taken by the board of central bank directors - currently six , but in future perhaps nine people - while the strategic decisions , such as the overall monetary strategy and monetary policy instruments , could remain the responsibility of the Governing Council as a whole .
For this reason - and let me cite the relevant passage in English to conclude my brief speech - we are asking for ' calls for proposals to be made by the Convention in view of its adoption ' .
I just want to say that the ideas I have put forward here have been drawn together in writing as a compromise amendment , for we anticipate that a new proposal - if these principles are accepted - will produce a better voting procedure than the untenable solution which has been put forward at short notice by the Governing Council , and which is not acceptable to anyone .
Mr President , in this my first intervention I should like to say a few words about the Commission 's ruling .
I shall outline our differences with Mr Friedrich 's report and refer also to our final position .
Any reform of the Central Bank must comply with four conditions .
Firstly , decisions have to be taken quickly and efficiently .
Secondly , decision-making bodies have to act taking account of the interests of the Eurozone as a whole . Thirdly , the system has to be impartial and fair to present and future Members .
Fourthly , the markets and the public as a whole have to be aware of transparency .
This is crucial to understanding the operation of the system .
The model advocated by the Central Bank does help to ensure efficiency .
Nonetheless , the key feature of the Central Bank 's proposal is based on the enabling clause in the Treaty of Nice . It is therefore based on the premise that the system legally in force may not be modified .
I should like to return to this when I have heard what Mr Friedrich has to say .
The Commission is of the opinion that taking the European Central Bank 's proposal as a point of departure , the rotation model may be improved by reducing the maximum number of voting rights on the Governing Council .
Such improvement should be substantial .
It should involve adjusting the method of classifying countries into groups .
There is no need to develop new types of weighting .
The Bank 's own classification should be used instead .
This takes account on the one hand of population and , on the other , of GDP .
Improvements are called for , however , to clarify the frequency and order of rotation in this type of voting .
This is the thinking behind our proposals .
Having considered the proposals in the report , we believe them to be ambitious , but find they pose a fundamental problem .
They envisage interpretations going beyond the enabling clause .
We differ on this in two respects .
Turning to the most significant first , the report rejects the Central Bank 's model and presents a counter-proposal . The latter is no doubt technically valid , but it is not in line with the enabling clause .
The notion of a double key , involving double weighting of the vote , is not in line with the clause either .
This is because according to legislation currently in force , every Member of the Council must have a voting right .
Such adjustments are therefore better suited to a different context , to a more ambitious position , like the one you yourself referred to , Mr Friedrich .
The decision we have to take in the near future is whether or not to go ahead , following the accelerated procedure , and adopt the Central Bank 's proposal .
A decision must be made within the next few weeks if it is to comply with the enabling clause .
Were this to be the case , a unanimous vote in the Council of Ministers would be required . As you are aware , this is still outstanding .
Nonetheless , the Commission agrees with the House that a more thorough reform is called for . Such reform should go further than what is envisaged under the enabling clause .
We should be prepared to tackle it at the next Intergovernmental Conference on the basis of a different model .
As has been rightly pointed out , this can be done at the Intergovernmental Conference , but not under the current enabling clause .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we will all - institutions and politicians alike - have to review and reshape our communication strategies , priorities and working methods , but also our decision-making and opinion-forming processes in the light of the European Union 's enlargement to what will probably be more than 30 states - if we include the Balkan countries - but also in the light of the political challenges which are being set for us and which we are setting ourselves .
Against this background , we welcome the fact that the ECB has put forward a proposal unanimously .
We also welcome the fact that a clear political message has been sent that the ECB should in future regulate its decision-making mechanisms itself , and that we do not want to make any special provisions here .
There is absolutely no reason why this decision should be adopted hastily , as the rapporteur has already pointed out .
We can continue in familiar fashion and prepare a fundamental reform with the next Intergovernmental Conference .
The fundamental reform which is necessary , and which we intend , differs in one key respect .
We say : everyone should remain on board ; there should be no rotation principle ; in a common Europe , everyone should have a say in the ECB .
The solution is not rotation but weighting .
This weighting could be based on the weighting in the Council , but must build primarily on economic and financial market policy parameters .
Rather than more complexity , we want greater transparency .
We do not want new forms of discrimination , but more integration and therefore greater clarity for the public .
Take us up on our offer , which is to prepare a comprehensive reform instead of an over-hasty short-term solution !
Mr President , I agree with the rapporteur : the proposal submitted for reform of the voting in the ECB Governing Council is not a step in the right direction .
It is because it was developed from the perspective of national representation , not a European perspective , that it must be rejected .
What we actually need is an ambitious European solution .
Here , no Member of this House can be neutral , for the way in which such a key macroeconomic partner arrives at its decisions is important .
We must therefore know how the decisions are shaped , but there is still time for that at the next Intergovernmental Conference .
Specifying that representation should be on a national basis conflicts with the aim of an integrated monetary policy .
However , I should point out here that when drafting its proposal , the European Central Bank 's hands were tied , for the paltry spirit of the Treaty of Nice is also reflected in the enabling clause contained in Article 10.2 , and we therefore do indeed need a proposal from the Convention for the Intergovernmental Conference so that a number of issues become clear : should the Executive Board have a special role ?
Should we differentiate between monetary policy and operational decisions ?
Where should the strategic decisions be taken ?
This is possible with a unanimous amendment to the Treaty .
I really do think it is important for us to make this distinction , simply because it is necessary .
As the European Parliament , we also have a particular interest in doing so because we attach importance to transparency .
Like our colleagues in the USA , we want to be able to follow how decisions are taken and also how weightings occur in the discussions .
In this respect , the difficult proposal by the ECB , which we in the Socialist Group cannot endorse , sends out quite a hopeful signal - for up to now , we have always been told that the outcomes of the votes in the ECB 's Governing Council could not be published because no votes take place .
I think that in a democratic system , majority voting should apply , and then the voting behaviour of the individual members of the central banks or the Executive Board can also be published .
I am all in favour of anonymity , so that no names are mentioned , as in the USA .
Our key concern is to gain an overview of the various perspectives on monetary policy .
This will remove confusion and insecurity , create the clarity that is required , especially at present , and underline the Central Bank 's democratic duty of accountability .
Mr President , Commissioner , before us is a compromise which has achieved only one clear objective , that of unanimous consensus in the Governing Council , which is not exactly what the European Central Bank needs to prepare for enlargement .
The distribution of powers and responsibilities between parliaments , governments and independent authorities - the independence of the European Central Bank is a valuable asset which has worked well and must be safeguarded - does not give independent authorities the power to decide on their working procedures or , as in this case , on changes to the working mechanisms , particularly where it is a question of enlarging a club .
It is clear that the current members of the club have presented a proposal which , first and foremost , affords themselves and their prerogatives some protection against the prerogatives of the members who will join the club in the future .
It is absolutely obvious .
I believe there is a serious procedural defect that has led to this situation and to a proposal containing a number of shortcomings , which have already been pointed out by Mr Huhne , who said that the hierarchy of countries is dubious .
I hope Mr Goebbels will forgive me if I say , just by way of example , that I too believe that Luxembourg must not have a greater role than Poland .
Of course , the presentation of the European Central Bank 's proposal is in line with the Treaty of Nice , which , moreover , stipulated that the Council could decide on either an ECB proposal or a Commission proposal .
I believe that we must somehow go back to square one and that the Commission must produce its own proposal , taking Parliament 's recommendations into consideration .
The ECB will be consulted , but it cannot be allowed to be the promoter of this decision which concerns it so closely .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have adopted a clear position on the ECB Governing Council 's proposal , Commissioner , but the Commission , unfortunately , has not done so .
You have shied away from it !
We want the Council of Heads of State or Government to devise and adopt a different model , with other weighting criteria being used in this context .
The draft on changes to the voting modalities proposed by the ECB Governing Council and endorsed by the European Commission , is unnecessary and unjust .
It is unnecessary because we are certainly not under the time pressure that you , Commissioner , have described .
Summer 2006 , in a best-case scenario , is theoretically the earliest that we will achieve a figure of 15 eurozone members .
We therefore do have enough time .
With this model , you will create a two-class system among the members of the ECB Governing Council , with the governors of the smaller countries ' central banks suffering a severe curtailment of their rights .
In a single currency zone , it is essential for every member of the ECB Governing Council to have a permanent and equal vote .
To ensure that this is guaranteed in future too , and thus to retain the existing rules , we have proposed that other weighting criteria should be used .
Our colleague Dr Friedrich has already spoken about this .
My proposal to use population as one of these criteria has not found support among a majority in the committee so far this time .
Since the rules have to be agreed unanimously , there will be no movement without a compromise .
The rotation system , Commissioner , is a bad compromise .
I have proposed that in addition to a simple majority of votes , at least half the population of the Member States of the eurozone must be represented .
This will avoid majority decisions being taken in the ECB Governing Council without taking sufficient account of the economic realities in the European Union .
Population as a criterion is more appropriate and more representative , for a variety of reasons , than other criteria such as the relative size of the financial services sector or GDP .
Current and precise population figures are available for all Member States ; they are calculated on a per capita and therefore absolutely comparable basis , and take account of the fact that the primary focus of a rational monetary policy based on the EU treaties must not be on the capital markets , but on the people affected by it .
Mr President , I am disappointed by the proposals for reform of the management structure of the European Central Bank , under which different classes of member will be created and a small group of large countries will in practice make the decisions .
Nor do I see how it is possible to reconcile the fact that a few large Member States that now happen to be obstructing the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact should have a prominent place in this lead group , while smaller Member States , which from the beginning have conducted a responsible and correct monetary policy , are relegated to second class .
These proposals affect the equality of the Member States .
Must those in the second and the third groups simply keep quiet in the discussion or stand aside while the great of the earth cast their votes ?
No , Mr President , I think that the situation as we know it at present is perfectly all right .
The rapporteur rightly says that we still have plenty of time to look calmly at a better system .
Let us first acquire some experience of enlargement before we turn things upside down and subsequently opt for a simple and transparent management system with a European and not a national perspective .
My own country would find the whole situation even more disagreeable .
The Netherlands is one of the countries that have conducted a strong monetary policy for years .
Initially we will be allowed to go along with this lead group , but as soon as the United Kingdom joins the euro zone we will be thanked for services rendered by being returned to the bench .
Whilst I fervently hope that the United Kingdom will join at some stage , it is a rather sorry state of affairs when it entails consequences of this kind .
Countries that have for some years been sawing more or less vigorously at the legs of European monetary stability are seeing themselves rewarded .
It is nonetheless inconceivable , Mr President , that we throw away the euro in this way .
Mr President , I am pleased that the European Parliament 's Committee on Budgets yesterday opted to support what is also the Finnish Government 's policy , according to which any reform proposed by the Council cannot serve as a basis for decision-making .
The work of the European Central Bank 's main decision-making body must be reformed in order for effective decision-making to be possible after enlargement .
The model proposed by the ECB Governing Council , however , is overly complicated and vague , and will not make it any easier for the general public to follow how monetary policy is formulated .
We all want to make decision-making on monetary policy more effective , but the system must be more transparent and comprehensible .
The problem at present with decision-making in the ECB is not how votes are cast , but the fact that the Governing Council is trying too hard to avoid voting in general .
The existing version of Article 10 ( 2 ) of the Statute of the European Central Bank states that the ECB Governing Council takes its decisions by a simple majority .
Proposals for decisions are not , however , put to the vote before there is consensus in the discussions .
According at least to the statements made in Parliament by the President of the ECB , Wim Duisenberg , consensus means more than a majority but less than unanimity .
For the ECB to be able to react more swiftly to market changes it should practise majority voting .
From this point of view , it is not sensible for the voting procedures to be made complicated and off-putting with even less voting happening than before .
Moreover , the rotation model being proposed by the ECB violates several principles which both Parliament and the central bank governors themselves used to consider of vital importance .
The preparatory work to reform the ECB 's voting procedures is to be postponed until the Intergovernmental Conference takes place .
Two proposals by Parliament are worthy of support .
The first is the call for double key voting and the second the proposal that operational decisions concerning practical monetary policy should be distinguished in decision-making from longer-term institutional and strategic decisions .
We hope that Ecofin takes Parliament 's opinion into consideration when it makes its decision .
Mr President , let me make it clear from the outset that I did not vote for the report that was adopted yesterday evening in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Certainly , our German rapporteur relinquished his initial proposal to give each eurozone country a vote in the ECB Governing Council but to counterbalance this exclusively with the represented population .
I would remind you that the ECB Governing Council examined a similar proposal by the Bundesbank during its lengthy deliberations and finally rejected it .
Why ?
Because in a eurozone enlarged to 25 or 27 members , it means that four large Member States would have a de facto veto in the ECB Governing Council at the other countries ' expense .
This is unacceptable .
Even if - as was agreed yesterday as a compromise in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - the two objective criteria of GDP and TAPs were additionally considered , this would result in a far less balanced system than the ECB model , which only uses these two criteria for ranking the Member States that are granted voting rights in a rotation system .
Of course the ECB model is new and takes time to adjust to , but it is not so complex and lacking in transparency as to make it incomprehensible to those who have to deal with it .
That would be an indictment of the Member States ' politicians and their central bankers !
Ultimately , a currency is influenced by economic and financial strength rather than by a country 's population .
The ECB 's proposal reflects this truism .
Another reason why I did not endorse the so-called ' compromise ' amendment is that it would lead to what amounts to renationalisation .
It envisages even more enhanced competencies for the enlarged Executive Board of nine members at the expense of the ECB Governing Council , which currently meets twice a month , but which - with as many as 27 members in line with the Committee 's proposal - could henceforth naturally only play a subordinate role .
I hope that the Council will endorse the ECB Governing Council 's far more balanced recommendation and that this can be ratified before enlargement - for the scenario which is now being proposed would deal a fatal blow to confidence in the euro .
Mr President , I shall be brief .
Two different issues have emerged during this debate .
The first concerns the system proposed by the Central Bank , based on the implementation of the enabling clause .
The question arises as to whether it is logical or not and whether a better system could be devised .
The second issue concerns what a better system might involve .
It might be the system detailed in Mr Friedrich 's report or it might be different again .
What we are concerned with at present , however , is the enabling clause established at Nice . The governments are referring to it authorising the Central Bank to present a proposal which must be unanimously approved .
They are also referring to it in connection with a Commission proposal , which must also be unanimously approved .
The enabling clause only provides either for all the members of the central banks to be present and for all of them to vote , or , alternatively , for a system of restricted voting . Such a system would have to involve rotation .
Clearly , a system of rotation means that not everyone would be involved in everything . The issue of the nature of the system of rotation then arises .
There is no doubt that the model presented by the Central Bank does provide for a weighting of the countries based on their respective financial and economic significance . As a result , the smaller countries are given a significant role .
The Commission is of the opinion , however , that there is not sufficient justification for the proposed system of rotation . The Commission therefore proposes adjusting the system of rotation only .
All the Commission has done is to propose using the current Central Bank criteria to define its voting system .
As I said , all this means is using the system the Bank has in place at present .
This system will of course involve a change . Not everyone will be present .
The enabling clause does however provide for this . It would not make sense to table a further proposal for a different system of rotation , instead of suggesting an amendment to the Central Bank 's proposal .
It has been argued in the House that the enabling clause will not resolve all the problems , and that a more ambitious stance is called for .
I sympathise with these views .
The Commission has adopted a similar position in some cases .
Nonetheless , if a vote or decision is taken on the basis of the enabling clause , there is no doubt that the Central Bank 's proposal , suitably amended , could prove useful . It would resolve the potential problem of the transition .
It is worth remembering that any alternative model would also require unanimity and ratification , and would not be easy to implement .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place next Thursday .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.05 p.m and resumed at 5.20 p.m. )

The next item is the statement by the Commission on the neighbours of the enlarged Europe : a new framework for relations with the neighbours to the east and south .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to inform you of a slight change in the order of business .
The next item will be the statement by the Commission , and the debate will continue until 5.45 p.m.
Question Time will follow at 5.45 p.m.
Mr President , I will be extremely brief , just making a few points regarding the document presented today on proximity policy .
This is an extremely important document which clarifies our proposals for European and Mediterranean relations after enlargement .
The enlargement process has , in fact , given the countries near to the Union great hopes , but it has also generated frustration and tension which can be summarised in a number of quite clear , quite comprehensible comments made by the countries of the East excluded from enlargement .
They have reproached us for merely shifting the iron curtain eastwards , while the Mediterranean countries have reproached us for concentrating primarily on the East rather than on the Mediterranean countries .
Our neighbours have many hopes and I have always believed that they must not be disappointed , that we should create a proper policy for the Union 's relations with them too , both in their interest and in the interest of the Union .
The communication approved by the Commission today on proximity policy meets this need , the need to create a reference framework within which we can develop ever closer relationships with our neighbours to the East and South , to create what I have described on several occasions , initially intuitively and then after increasing analysis and reflection , as the ring of friendly countries , the ring of friends which stretches from Russia to Morocco , a ring with which we can share everything except the institutions , in other words with which we can share programmes , market , rules and political dialogue but not Parliament , not the Council and not the Commission .

In short , our aim is to develop a policy for these countries which are calling for a special relationship with the Union but for which the Union cannot foresee an enlargement strategy , at least in the short term .
Clearly , then , the western Balkan countries are not included in this ring : the prospect of their membership has already been agreed , although the date has not yet been set .
The reference framework we have outlined in the communication complements rather than replaces the relationship the Union has with individual countries or groups of countries .
Clearly , the intensity and , above all , the speed with which relations between the Union and the individual countries develop within this reference framework will depend on the abilities of each individual country .
In other words , the principle of differentiation will apply in this case too .
The objective is twofold .
Firstly , to create , together with our partners , an area of prosperity and stability based on the principle of economic integration , strengthening of political bonds and cultural cooperation , and on this last - cultural cooperation - I insist .
Secondly , to make the development of these preferential relations dependent upon the gradual adaptation of the countries to our rules and our set of values in both the economic and political domains .
Thus , we want to develop with each individual country , on the basis of experience and our current contractual obligations , an agreed action plan which sets out the path we intend to pursue together .
These action plans will include objectives , timeframes , procedures and monitoring mechanisms applying equally to both parties .
With a view to this , therefore , we will assess whether there is a need for us to create a specific contractual instrument - a proximity agreement - and an ad hoc financial instrument - a proximity instrument .
In practical terms , we will work with our neighbours to create a single market , to promote the free movement of persons , goods and services , to strengthen cooperation in the fight against common threats , to strengthen our cooperation in conflict prevention and crisis management , to promote human rights , to step up dialogue between cultures and religions , to integrate transport , energy and telecommunications networks and to create a wider research area , in short to bring about ever greater integration based on the shared values and principles of tolerance , peace , freedom and solidarity - the very principles on which our Union is founded .
Mr President , the Commissioner obviously wanted to say something just now , and perhaps I can ask him a question at the same time .
I fully endorse the proposals that Mr Prodi has outlined here .
What would interest me is this : what will be the institutional framework for all this ?
You mentioned the financial instruments and the treaties with neighbouring countries .
However , my question to the President or the Commissioner is this : are any specific institutional arrangements required ?
Theoretically , after all , there is still the European Conference .
There are various possibilities .
In connection with the Mediterranean region , we have discussed the option of establishing closer parliamentary cooperation as well .
We must not leave this in abeyance , and we must also ensure that the responsibility is clarified within the Commission , for what we are dealing with here , really , is an interim phase between normal traditional foreign policy and integration in the European Union .
In my view , this interim phase must be defined very precisely , and the Commission should submit specific proposals to deal with it , setting out detailed arrangements and describing which institutions are involved .
Will the European Conference be revived ?
Will there be specific responsibility within the Commission for this area of cooperation ?
Will it remain with Commissioner Patten ?
These are the questions that interest me .
Perhaps you could explain the situation in more detail .
Mr President , we have just had an extremely interesting discussion in the Commission in which the leitmotif of most of the contributions - the strongly-held argument of most of those who spoke - was that it was absolutely imperative that we give the question of the relationship with our new neighbours the priority which in the past we have given the whole process of enlargement ; that , in other words , it becomes part of everybody 's responsibility to promote the concept of an institutionalised ring of friends to whom we can offer ways of sharing in our security , stability and prosperity .
The honourable Member will see from the communication we are publishing today the practical ways in which we try to give expression to this notion .
It is not easy .
We have tried it in the past .
To some extent it has been like the philosopher 's stone ; we have never quite found a way of expressing our views about our neighbours that does not involve offering them all membership of the European Union .
That is not the subject of this communication .
However , the honourable Member will see from our proposals that we have put forward sensible and concrete ways in which we can encourage our neighbours , both on our land and our sea borders , to share in our market , to share in our policies , not to share in our institutions but to share in the prosperity and political stability which have been the hallmark of the European Union .
The simple answer to his question is that there is no disagreement .
The Commission believes that this is a responsibility for the whole Commission and that responsibilities will have to be shared between us .
In view of the short time remaining and of the number of Members who wish to speak , I shall give the floor to sets of three Members at a time , preferably one from each group .
I have a long list of Members before me .
The Commissioner will reply once the three Members have posed their questions .
This is not relevant to this afternoon 's debate .
Mr Prodi is welcome to respond if he so wishes , but I would urge Members to keep to the order of business .
I want to confirm what I said this morning : the document will be made public as per the interinstitutional agreement .
Mr President , I have followed the Commission President 's introduction very closely and have also read the speech he made on the same subject in Brussels in December .
In both his introduction today and in that speech he vacillates dreadfully between the position that we must not entirely rule out the prospect of membership and the view that we must not initiate it either .
That I understand perfectly well and that is no criticism of Mr Prodi either .
There is a ring of friends in which Morocco and Russia will be treated on the same terms , in the same way .
My question - it is an open question to the Commission - is whether it is not better or would be better to say in even clearer terms : ' in this ring of friends there are friends who are ever so slightly closer to us ' .
Ukraine and Belarus might become members in the future for example , while we cannot imagine the same of Russia .
We must be perfectly clear about this .
The same applies to North Africa for example .
Does that not create the clarity that these countries demand of us and is it not better to make a distinction between potential members and countries or neighbours who will never be eligible for membership ?
I should like to endorse Mr Lagendijk 's question .
I understand perfectly well what the Commission is doing and also what priority it wants to give its policy with regard to the countries around us .
In this Parliament we shall be returning in detail to the announcement that the Commission is making today .
I really only have one question .
The objective of course is to prevent the creation of a new divide , a new Iron Curtain , in Europe .
If this is what we want to prevent , then we are going to have to help countries such as Ukraine or Belarus to undergo the same development as countries such as Hungary or Poland .
Does the Commission think it will be able to develop sufficient influence on and cooperation with these countries with its proposal , so that the same reform processes take place there as in the present candidate countries and in time a kind of equality will develop that opens the way to answering the question as to whether these countries can also become members of the Union ?
For me , what it comes down to in the end is whether , by means of what you are proposing , we can achieve the same positive effect on those countries as we have achieved with the enlargement process in a number of other countries in Central and Eastern Europe .
Given what is currently happening in those countries , I think that this is the only way to prevent a new divide in Europe .
Mr President , the accession of the new Member States will expand Europe 's borders further , in that the Union will exert even greater influence over the continent , with the development of proximity policies which will create new potential partners which might become new Member countries in the future , as has happened in the case of the current accession countries .
We find it hard , however , to imagine enlarging Europe even further without launching a debate which is now urgent : ultimately , how wide can Europe 's borders stretch ?
If we look southwards , towards the African shores of the Mediterranean , we see situations which have always been such as to make it clear that those countries cannot share development criteria , ideologies or political or religious beliefs with Europe , except , perhaps , Libya and Israel .
If we look eastwards , we might consider granting membership to the Republics of Ukraine and Georgia .
The same may be said of Norway , to the North , while , to the West , the Atlantic is in itself already a border .
What are the widest borders that we can consider if we are not to drown the Union in an area of free trade , given the need to have a Union which does not go under whenever it has to address major international issues , as , I am sad to say , has been the case in recent days ?
The debate on which countries will be destined to become part of the Union and with which countries we should just form preferential cooperation relations will have to be addressed very carefully , given that cooperation cannot concern trade measures alone but must cover relations on sensitive issues such as respect for human rights and the control of migration flows too .
I will respond very briefly to the three related questions .
I want it to be clear that this objective of building a ring of friends does not imply any commitment or any exclusion as regards enlargement : none of these countries has the right to membership and none of them is excluded .
However , clearly , this does not resolve the issue raised in the last question .
Here , I want to reiterate a request - which I have already made to Parliament many times and which I am told has been heard - for a debate to be held in the near future precisely on the Union 's borders .
However , the ring of friends is a different project , a project which is not concerned with the enlargement of the Union but which still offers a relationship of close cooperation , which offers gradual integration , which genuinely offers the Union and the countries around it a future of economic and political security .
Membership is something different .
To turn to the second question , Mr Wiersma , this was done precisely in order to avoid the accusation that we have merely moved the iron curtain eastwards , as I said in my previous speech .
There is no longer an iron curtain . There is no exclusion any more .
There are Member countries , but countries which have a relationship of increasing active cooperation with the countries around them , with the ring of friends .
It is an organic strategy that will increase the number of Members of the Union through enlargement and create an ever stronger and closer proximity policy through the ring of friends .
Mr President , I am pleased that the Commission has now put forward a proposal for us to discuss , on whether there are alternative options to full membership of the European Union .
This will undoubtedly be a key issue for the future after enlargement and the accession of ten new countries .
I would like to ask two questions .
Firstly , I am not altogether clear whether what is being proposed is a flexible system of bilateral relations between the EU and the various countries , or a multilateral approach - a kind of a ' European Economic Area plus ' .
I think this is an important point .
My second question relates to the Balkans .
I know that a highly differentiated approach is essential when considering the Balkan countries and that some of them will be able to join the European Union earlier than others .
However , the other countries will still need a long period of internal development .
It would therefore be wrong not to include them in a strategy of this kind , for during the interim period - which could last a long time - they could be included in this network as well .
Perhaps the Commission could review this position once again .
Mr President , the general framework set out by the President of the Commission for relations with other countries following enlargement generally has my backing .
However , general principle policies do tend to fail in practice .
This being so , I have two questions : first , what other good can come out of relations with the Mediterranean countries of North Africa in practice , when general policies have not , in my opinion , been particularly successful .
And secondly , on the subject of the candidate countries of the former east bloc , because the quality of relations is sometimes determined by neighbouring countries rather than general principles and because , as we recently realised , many of the candidate countries have proceeded as they see fit on strategic policy matters - we are talking about the problem of Iraq , irrespective of what position you agree or disagree with - the question is : how can we influence these countries so that they do not set their own criteria for relations with their neighbours , which we see as countries of collaboration and peace and which others perhaps see as enemies .
Mr President , our discussions have focussed exclusively on the broad outlines , and , whilst these are , of course , very important , the problems lie in the detail .
One of the central issues in the neighbouring countries is what will happen at the borders .
Will there be new , decentralised instruments to facilitate practical cross-border cooperation ?
Will the border arrangements be eased , or will the borders lead to a real and tangible division by separating ethnic groups and severing existing relations ?
What interests me is what the Commission 's strategy says about this issue .
What form will the financial instrument take ?
Will it be a centralised instrument , as is currently the case , with the problems that we have , or will it be a decentralised instrument ?
Mr President , I can answer the three questions on the principle of work-sharing .
Firstly , the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy will recall that I have agreed to come to the committee on 25 March to have a full discussion on the Commission communication , which will enable us to follow up in more detail a number of the points being debated this afternoon .
He raised a couple of points .
Firstly , what we want to provide is a coherent global framework .
However , we recognise that one cannot argue that there should be a one-size-fits-all policy .
We must have a policy that is able to accommodate the different levels of economic development and of commitment to our value system .
Therefore I hope that there is coherence which is sufficiently flexible to ensure that the policy works .
He also referred to the Balkans .
We have specifically excluded from this communication the countries that are involved in the stabilisation and association process , i.e. Croatia and the countries of the west Balkans , Turkey , Romania and Bulgaria .
They have already been given the perspective of membership of the European Union and we are focusing in this document - as we were asked to do by the Copenhagen European Council - on those countries that do not have the perspective of membership .
As the President has said , I am sure there will be a debate in due course on the geographical limits of the European Union .
The President was making speeches about this around three and a half years ago .
However , this is not the time or the document for that debate .
I would just add that it is our intention that the accession candidates themselves should be involved in this debate in which many of them have a larger stake than us .
On the question of how the Mediterranean countries and the Eastern European countries can be involved in our policies , we very much hope that we can involve them in everything from the internal market , trade , migration and the movement of persons to justice and home affairs , financial assistance and issues like governance , human rights and the rule of law .
We have been trying to do that through the Barcelona process by , for example , giving more encouragement to those countries that are already involved in the Agadir process , encouraging them to move on from that and to start trying to harmonise their regulations with ours , and involving themselves more in our own internal market .
That will be the policy that we continue .
There are a number of countries in Eastern Europe - the western NIS one could call them - who have been unable to join the European Union , even though , like Moldova and Ukraine , they express their European vocation .
I hope that what we are proposing to them in terms of trade , economics and political dialogue will increase the size of the common economic and political space around our borders .
However , we do not seek to resolve the question of membership for those countries of the European Union in this document .
Finally , I am pleased to have the opportunity to answer the honourable Member 's question on this because it is one we have discussed in the past .
She quite sensibly asks about coherence in our financial instruments for dealing with cross-border issues .
I can assure her that she will find in our document the proposal for a neighbourhood instrument , which will deal with the sort of problems she has referred to .
My colleagues who work on enlargement and regional matters will be working with my own directorate-general and others to try to bring this new instrument into operation in the most effective and least disruptive way possible .
Mr President , I was unaware that British Members of this House had a reputation for being verbose !
The President of the Commission introduced the communication in broad outline , so perhaps I could ask Commissioner Patten about two points of detail since he has touched on them .
Could we have an assurance that , as the President has said , we are not attempting to create a new iron curtain and that , for example , the present visa arrangements between Poland and Ukraine will not be made more difficult once Poland becomes a member of the European Union ?
I see the President of the Commission is nodding , so that will cut down the time for his answer .
The second question to Commissioner Patten is that , since the acceding Member States have tremendous experience of relations with countries such as Ukraine , Belarus and Russia , would it not be timely now to set up some sort of working party ?
Those acceding Member States could then begin to feed in their experience in foreign policy relations with our new neighbours , perhaps reporting to Commissioner Verheugen or indeed to Commissioner Patten himself .
Mr President , I strongly believe that at least offering Ukraine , Belarus and Moldova prospects of potential long-term membership will encourage the necessary reforms needed in their economies , their systems of governance and human rights and also support those politicians and parties who share our values and aspirations .
Will Commissioner Prodi retract his statement - if it is true - that Ukraine is no more European than New Zealand ?
It was clearly seen by the Ukrainians as a geographical nonsense and a signal to their government that they were much better off making their bed with the Russian bear .
Fortunately Russia does not want to join the European Union , but Ukraine does .
We should not exclude this possibility , particularly if at the end of next year the Commission sanctions the much weaker case - to my mind - for Turkey 's membership .
Can the Commission provide more funds to combat illegal immigration and border flows through these countries , irrespective of our disapproval of their governments in office at the moment ?
Mr President , we are in some danger of begging the question .
The current enlargement round depends on the outcome of eight referendums which have yet to be held across central and eastern Europe .
Does the Commission believe that it is right for these countries to be left to take that decision on their own , or does the Commission believe that it is acceptable to intervene politically and financially in that decision ?
So far there has been one referendum , in which the European Commission admits to having spent EUR 700 000 , a sum which in per capita terms is equivalent to spending EUR 100 million in Commissioner Prodi 's native Italy or in Commissioner Patten 's native United Kingdom .
If the terms that we are offering these countries are so favourable , why do we need to deploy colossal resources on this scale in order to help them make up their minds ?
Mr President , I think the House is going to have the benefit of the President after the External Affairs Commissioner has made one or two points .
Firstly , I should like to assure Mr Beazley that there is no question of us seeking to create another iron curtain in Europe .
Indeed , part of the intention of this communication is to prevent any notion of a fortress Europe being created with the 25 Member States .
When one talks about easing visa regimes , it is important to consider the conditions under which interior ministers are likely to regard that as a tolerable option .
One of the things that they look at is not simply the border between the country making the application and Europe , but the other borders for which that country is responsible .
When , for example - I hope after we have concluded a re-admission agreement with the Russian Federation - we begin discussing the question of visas , one question which will be raised again and again is the security of the thousands of kilometres of borders which Russia has with other countries .
There are a number of conditions precedent to any serious discussion of visas .
The honourable Member also asked whether we were going to try to involve the applicant countries which have not yet joined , and whether we were involving those countries in the debate .
We have the democratic process to go through , as the honourable Member said a moment ago , but the simple answer is ' yes , we are ' .
A number of applicant countries , for example Poland with its recent discussion document on the eastern dimension , have made very sensible and thoughtful proposals .
From April the candidates for accession will be sitting in the meetings of the General Affairs and External Relations Councils and listening to the debates , so I hope that will inform their contributions in due course .
I am aware of Mr Tannock 's concern about the Ukraine which he has expressed on a number of occasions .
As Mr Prodi said , this document itself is not a definition of the geographical boundaries of the European Union , but I hope that our friends in the Ukraine will recognise the real efforts that we have made to help create a common political and economic space which will be to their advantage .
I would wish that we were able to have a closer and more benign relationship with Belarus .
It is not our fault that does not exist .
The honourable Member knows the style , objectives and policies of the regime in Belarus which led to the unfortunate visa ban not long ago .
At the moment we can still provide Belarus with support for civil society developments , and I look forward to the day - perhaps after the next elections if they are conducted freely and fairly - when we can develop our relationship with that country .
We do not want any country on our borders to be isolated by its own will , or by the will of its regime .
I have attempted to answer the honourable Member 's point about a buffer zone .
One has to take account of all the borders of other countries .
Finally , I say to the honourable Member - whose interest in these matters I readily acknowledge - that he should recognise that many of us believe passionately that when we discuss enlargement we are not just talking about a matter of money .
We are not just talking about commercial , economic or even geostrategic interests .
For many of us the case for enlargement is a moral one .
The honourable Member should not worry too much if we think it is worth expressing that case as vigorously and as comprehensively as possible .
Though I have intervened in their debate myself , I do not believe that the people of Malta , who have a certain reputation for courage and independent-mindedness , are likely to be swayed by the occasional advertisement in one of their newspapers , or even , I must confess , by the occasional interview with the Commissioner for External Relations .
They might be much more swayed by interviews with the Commissioner for Enlargement who has a much more silver tongue than I do , but I hope , as this democratic process rolls across Europe , that the honourable Member will see one country after another voting to come home .
The debate is closed .
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0085 / 2003 )
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part I
Question No 50 by Bill Newton Dunn ( H-0095 / 03 ) :
Subject : Reports of national quotas for soccer players inside EU
Newspapers in the UK , some of which are notorious for reporting EU matters inaccurately and sensationally , are reporting that ' a deal is close between UEFA and the European Union ' to limit the number of ' foreign ' players in each team to 50 per cent - so that soccer clubs inside the Union could be forced to field teams which include at least half from their own Member State .
Will the Commission kindly confirm that these reports are incorrect , because such a deal would conflict with the Union 's basic principle of free movement for its citizens ?
. The Commission is not aware of the United Kingdom press reports to which the honourable Member refers .
As far as any enforced limit on the number of foreign players is concerned , I should like to recall the following .
The application of the Community rules on the free movement of workers in sport was decided by the European Court of Justice in the 1974 Walrave case , in which the Court held that sport was subject to Community law when it constitutes an economic activity , whether by professional or amateur athletes .
This was confirmed by the Court in its now famous 1995 judgment in the Bosman case .
In this case-law the Court also held that nationality clauses could only be justified in relation to specific official matches between teams representing countries - such as the Olympic Games - or certain world or European championships .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for what seems to be a very satisfactory answer and to congratulate her on the newspapers she chooses to read , or rather chooses not to read .
Question No 54 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0066 / 03 ) :
Subject : The Annan plan for Cyprus and the ' acquis communautaire '
Referring in its resolution concerning ' the progress made by each of the candidate countries towards accession ' to the Annan plan for a political settlement of the Cyprus problem ( EP Minutes of 20 November 2002 ) , the European Parliament ' calls on the Commission to certify whether the plan can provide the basis for a viable and operational settlement in the framework of the European Union in accordance with the acquis communautaire ' .
Now that the Commission has studied this plan , can it certify that it is consistent with the ' acquis communautaire ' ?
Does it intend to communicate its considered opinion to Parliament and , if so , when ?
Mr President , the honourable Member will of course be aware that his very important and interesting oral question has sadly been overtaken by events over the last 24 hours .
I would therefore , with his permission , like to take this opportunity to inform you about the latest developments .
The Commission regrets that the efforts made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Mr Kofi Annan , to seek a comprehensive solution to the problem of Cyprus have proved unsuccessful .
The Commission gave this process its full support , and it recalls the European Union 's readiness to facilitate a solution in accordance with the principles on which the European Union is based .
Notwithstanding the European Union 's preference for a political solution , the Commission confirms that the accession process will continue as planned in line with the existing timetable .
All the preparatory legal steps to enable this to take place have already been taken .
In other words , we will now submit to Parliament a protocol supplementing the accession treaty with Cyprus and setting forth how Cyprus 's accession will be organised under the present circumstances .
The Commission notes and endorses the UN Secretary-General 's statement that the peace plan will stay on the table .
The Commission is also ready to support all further endeavours in this context .
The Commission encourages all the sides concerned , including Turkey in particular , to work actively to achieve a solution .
The Commission underlines its solidarity with all Cypriots and appreciates the courage with which the Turkish Cypriots have expressed their European convictions .
The Commission will continue to promote projects in Cyprus to the benefit of both communities , so that economic inequalities on the island are reduced and confidence is built between the two communities .
May I start by thanking the Commission and expressing my appreciation of all its hard work on the accession of the whole of Cyprus to the European Union , acknowledge the importance of the announcement it has taken this opportunity to make and ask the following question : given that negotiations with Turkey are scheduled to start at the end of 2004 , is resolving the Cyprus question one of the preconditions , the implementation of which will require a positive and constructive contribution from Turkey if it wishes to integrate ?
Also , now that this stage of the Annan plan has come to a close , does the Commission think that the European Union and the Commission will perhaps take on a more substantive role in negotiations between the two communities ?
Mr President , Mr Alavanos , when I visited Ankara at the end of January I left the Turkish authorities in no doubt about the possible consequences of a failure of the Cyprus talks .
In my discussions with the Prime Minister and the leader of the AK party and also with other leading figures in Turkish politics , I made it clear that the Commission is expected to issue an opinion and a recommendation at the end of 2004 stating whether or not Turkey meets the political criteria for accession and , if so , recommending when accession negotiations with Turkey should start .
I have to say very clearly that the Cyprus problem is part and parcel of these political criteria for accession .
We have also expressed this unequivocally in the accession partnership with Turkey .
Today , what I can say , with all due caution , is that if , at the end of 2004 - when the Commission has to table its report and recommendation - the situation in Cyprus were to remain unchanged , that is be exactly the same as it is today , then we would have a situation where a country , namely Turkey , wished to negotiate accession with us but did not recognise one of our Member States , namely Cyprus .
I find it very difficult to imagine how , in such a situation , the Commission could issue a positive opinion on starting accession negotiations with Turkey .
I apologise for my inability to be any clearer , and , indeed , for my not wishing to be any clearer , but I think that what I have said is clear enough .
If you consider what I have just said in connection with what I have said about the protocol , then this means that there is obviously still an opportunity for a solution to be reached between now and the end of 2004 .
That is why both the United Nations and the European Union are saying that yesterday 's failure does not mean that the Cyprus problem is a closed book , but that as soon as the political situation allows , obviously , talks about the plan can be resumed .
It is very important for the United Nations plan to remain on the table .
Allow me to make one further point : the most recent version of the United Nations plan was an extremely favourable offer , especially for the Turkish Cypriots .
I am firmly convinced that there will never be a better offer or a better solution for the Turkish Cypriots than this one .
That is why it is extremely important from the point of view of the Turkish Cypriots for the United Nations to say that the plan will stay on the table .
We can only warmly welcome this .
Commissioner , allow me a brief comment , if you will , before the supplementary question .
Not only has the process to integrate Cyprus into the European Union failed to resolve the Cyprus question ; by integrating the free part of Cyprus , it has resulted in de jure partition and recognition of the Turkish occupation .
Not that things would have been much better had the two sides accepted the Annan plan which , unlike the UN resolutions , attempted to impose a particular form of federation which was not so very different from the recognition of two states in Cyprus , in other words partition .
Under these circumstances I wonder , Commissioner , how the Commission is going to deal with a situation in which a candidate country , in this case Turkey , has forces occupying and has colonised part of a country which is already a Member State of the European Union , in violation of numerous UN resolutions .
I am not just talking about resolving the Cyprus problem , I am talking about dealing with the occupation .
Will the European Union accept responsibility for liberating the occupied part of Cyprus ?
Mr Alyssandrakis , I do not agree with you that Cyprus ' accession , in the form currently proposed , will mean a de jure division of the island .
The protocol that I have already mentioned several times makes it absolutely clear that Community law will not be applied in those parts of Cyprus over which the Government of the Republic of Cyprus cannot exert effective control .
But this is not tantamount to recognising two Cypriot states .
Like the rest of the international community , we still regard the Government of the Republic of Cyprus as the representative of the whole of Cyprus , as its only legitimate representative under international law .
From a purely legal point of view , the whole of Cyprus will become a Member of the European Union .
In practice , Community law will not be able to be applied in part of the territory of Cyprus for as long as there is no political solution .
Once there is a political solution - whenever this may be - all that will be required will be a unanimous decision by the Council and the whole of Cyprus will be a Member , both de jure and de facto .
We would not need to hold further negotiations .
Neither would another Treaty be required , or renewed ratification .
All of these matters are settled in the protocol , which is part of the Act of Accession .
What can the Commission do to improve the situation ?
I think the most important thing that we can do is to continue to cooperate intensively with Turkey , to continue to use all of the means at our disposal to encourage Turkey to drive forward political , economic and social reforms and to meet the political accession criteria .
That is the only thing that we can do .
At the end of the day it is also the only thing that will help .
Mr President , I would ask you to call my question again , and for the following reason : I was here at 5.30 p.m. and the debate was still in full swing .
I then went to another meeting .
As soon as I saw that Question Time was starting and Mr Prodi had finished speaking I rushed here from that meeting , but the first part - which according to our documents was supposed to last 30 minutes - was already over .
I really would therefore crave your indulgence .
In such cases it is extremely difficult , even for someone like myself who endeavours to attend Question Time on every occasion , to be here on the dot ready for this procedure . I would therefore ask you to call my question again .
Mr Posselt , believe me that I am sorry because you are one of the most committed Members during this Question Time , but there are several Members in the chamber who have thought the same thing and the Rules of Procedure state that the Member must be present when their question is replied to .
The question has lapsed and the Rules of Procedure do not leave any other option since that would amount to setting a precedent .
I understand your argument , but I cannot do anything , either for you or for Mr Salafranca who is now going to speak .
I will give the floor to Mr Salafranca for a point of order ; but , for example , Mr Lamy has already left .


I know that we have started late , because Mr Prodi arrived late .
I know all of this .
But the Rules of Procedure lay down that the questions lapse .
Mr President , I am very glad that you know what I am going to say , because I did not intend to say what you have suggested .
I simply wish to say that your interpretation of the Rules of Procedure is correct and that , when the Member asking the question is not present , the question lapses .
I wanted to stress that I was paying great attention in an opposite room watching the screen , which indicated the order of speakers and that Question No 51 , the one previous to mine , did not show up on the screen .
I saw the first one , but I did not see the second .
The speaker was not present and Mr Lamy did not wait very long , because I ran into him leaving .
Therefore , Mr President , without wanting to accuse you of having any responsibility for the way the debate proceeded - although it would be desirable not to change the agenda - I would request that you ask the services of the House to ensure that the screen and the monitor work correctly so that this kind of situation does not happen again .
Thank you for very much improving on what I thought you were going to say .
It is always important that the President can be mistaken in his judgments .
You have many reasons and you have explained them to me .
I will ask the Commission to answer these questions in writing given the extraordinary circumstances , but there will be no oral reply .
Mr President , I just wanted to clarify three points : firstly , Commissioner Verheugen is still here .
Secondly - and this is also an important point - you made an exception at the last part-session .
I will check in the Minutes to see which Member was concerned .
I have a very clear recollection of this precedent being set .
Thirdly , I should like to say that I would request that Question Time begin , as in previous years , at 5.30 p.m. precisely , regardless of what is happening in plenary .
That was the practice in this House for almost 20 years and it was something that we could rely on .
But being sloppy about the start time , only then to be strict when applying this rule , and extreme when interpreting it , is not something that I can accept .
Either you are liberal in both cases or strict in both cases !
I would ask that this be the last point of order , since we are going to spend more time on this than we would have done answering the questions .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for kindly suggesting that the Commission should reply to my question in writing , but I would prefer my question to lapse in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
I will present it again for the next part-session since I would prefer there to be a debate in the Chamber .
I can only say to Mr Posselt that in that case , which was very different from today 's case , I made it very clear that I was not setting a precedent and I hope that that is recorded in the Minutes .
But you will remember that I said that I was not setting a precedent .
Mr President , Mr Crowley , the point you raise in your oral question corresponds exactly to the subject of a formal complaint that has been submitted to us .
The formal complaint came from the Media Observatory Czech Republic , and has been endorsed by the company Media Print & Kappa Pressegrosso .
It stated that alleged violations of EC competition law had been observed in the Czech Republic .
Both I myself , and the EU delegation in Prague , have also had this matter drawn to our attention in conversations with the chairman of the Media Observatory Czech Republic .
And I can tell you that immediately afterwards I had the opportunity to raise this issue with the Czech Government at the very highest level .
For the time being , the Commission is of the opinion that it is first and foremost the Czech competition authorities and courts that are responsible for the matter , because it mainly concerns distortions of competition on the Czech market in print media .
Nevertheless , the Commission services have contacted the Czech competition supervision authorities .
The Czech supervision authorities are currently examining the case and recently issued a temporary order against the company Prvni Novinova Spolecnost and its parent company for possible violations of the Czech competition rules .
I hope I pronounced that correctly .
I am not quite sure .
Czech is a difficult language !
Implementation of legislative provisions by the Czech competition authorities is being closely monitored in the run-up to accession , and with this in mind the Commission will continue to observe progress on this case .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his brief response .
However , Commissioner , you did not answer the basic aspects of the question .
The reason I gave so much information - like you I had access to this information - was that it could be an attempt by a private company or by groups of private companies to distort the market before the full impact of European Union law becomes legal and to interfere so that no action can be taken afterwards .
Commissioner , I should like to know , firstly , your own directorate 's response to this type of action and , secondly , whether there are any other mechanisms , besides going through the Czech authorities , that can be utilised in future to prevent this particular instance and also similar instances which are currently threatened in Poland , Hungary and Slovenia .
Mr Crowley , the different roles that we play here explain our different accounts of the situation .
As a Member of Parliament , you are of course free to express a political judgment .
As a Member of the Commission , I obviously cannot make a political assessment of a case when the legal proceedings are not yet concluded .
You will understand this and you would certainly object - and rightly so - if the Commission were to express an opinion in other cases that are sub judice and where the proceedings have not yet been concluded .
I must therefore say that I simply do not know today whether we do in fact have a breach of competition law on our hands .
The question of whether competition law has been violated is being investigated at this very moment by the Czech authorities , and the Commission services are in contact with the Czech authorities because it is our job to ensure that in the pre-accession phase the relevant instruments are correctly applied and the relevant procedures adhered to .
That is the connection .
Incidentally , if this had happened after accession it would not have made any difference .
There is no doubt that this is a case for the national competition authorities and not for the European competition authorities because it is only the domestic Czech market that is affected by this dispute .
The Commission is therefore already doing what you asked me to do at the end of your statement .
We are acting on this matter .
I can even go a step further and say that given that this is about media pluralism and given that media pluralism plays a significant role in promoting democracy in a country , the Commission is also taking this case particularly seriously .
Question No 56 by Anne E.M. Van Lancker ( H-0125 / 03 ) :
Subject : Accession negotiations with Slovakia and the Roma minorities
In its resolution of 20 November 2002 ( Paragraph 114 ) the European Parliament urged the Slovak Government to undertake decisive action to overcome the problems of discrimination against the Roma minorities , in particular with regard to the elimination of possible discriminatory practices by state institutions and public authorities .
In late January 2003 , the Centre for Reproductive Rights published an investigative report confirming that forced sterilisation was being practised on Roma women in the Slovak health-care system .
Does the Commission share the questioner 's view that these practices amount to a violation of the Copenhagen criteria and of Articles 1 , 3 , 4 and 7 of the European Union Convention on Fundamental Rights ?
Will the Commission ask the Slovak Government to launch a searching investigation and adopt measures to put a stop to the practice of enforced sterilisation , which constitutes a serious infringement of human rights
Mrs Van Lancker , yes , I must say that this is a particularly depressing question .
I also found the reports to which you refer deeply disturbing .
I read the report on the alleged forced sterilisation of women from the Roma minority in the Slovak Republic with great concern and consternation .
A practice of this kind would in fact constitute a serious violation of human rights if it were either ordered or at least tolerated by the state or any other public institution , or if the state were to refuse to investigate the accusations and call those responsible to account .
Immediately after this report appeared I therefore expressed my concerns to the Slovak Prime Minister , both verbally and in writing , and asking him to ensure that light was shed quickly on the accusations , which have been made by various human rights organisations .
I am very pleased to be able to tell you that the Slovak Government responded immediately and without hesitation .
The Deputy Prime Minister of the Slovak Republic responsible for human rights issues acted straight away to instigate the necessary steps under criminal law .
A special investigation team was set up .
This investigation team is supported by the Home Affairs Minister 's advisor on Roma issues .
This Home Office advisor for Roma issues himself belongs to the Roma minority .
In addition , the government has invited the Vice-Chairperson of the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly 's Committee on Health to the Slovak Republic on a fact-finding mission .
In the meantime I have also received a written reply from the Slovak Prime Minister in which he assures me that there is no state-sponsored practice of this kind in the Slovak Republic , that the accusations are the subject of a meticulous investigation and that should they prove to be true the full force of the law will be brought to bear in taking action against the perpetrators .
I can assure you that the Commission will closely monitor the progress of the investigations .
Obviously we will do all we can to ensure that any abuses are remedied forthwith and that the necessary steps are taken under criminal law , should the accusations be true .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for the steps that he has already taken in this matter .
If he will allow me , I will shortly be handing him a copy of the investigation .
You will see , Commissioner , that absolutely nothing of what the people of the Centre for Reproductive Rights , which carried out this investigation , are saying is either nonsense or invented .
So I am really shocked by the Slovak Government 's response to the effect that these practices do not go on .
I should like to urge you yourself to demand an independent inquiry of the Slovak Government and also to demand that they discontinue the proceedings against this organisation , which has produced serious work .
The fact is that , at the moment , it is the complainant who is in the dock .
Mr President , Mrs Van Lancker , you have clearly misunderstood me .
At any rate your supplementary question does not reflect what I said .
I did not say that the Slovak Government had dismissed the accusations as untrue .
I simply said that the Slovak Government stressed that there was no state-sponsored practice of this kind , that the state did not tolerate these practices and that the accusations that you and others are making were the subject of a meticulous investigation by the competent authorities .
If the Slovak Government were to say that there was no truth in these accusations then it would not need to order an investigation .
I would ask you not to be too quick to condemn another country .
So far , in my opinion , there is no proof that this is a systematic state practice . Instead the suspicion that is uppermost in my mind is that what we have here are individual cases of abuse , admittedly of the gravest kind .
I must draw your attention to the fact that the Commission does not have any executive power in the countries that will be joining us .
It is therefore completely out of the question for us to undertake a criminal or criminological investigation in a future Member State , just as we would be unable to do so in a current Member State .
We have done what we can to use our political influence to make the Government of the Slovak Republic aware of the urgency of this matter and to ask it to carry out a thorough investigation .
I really must insist on stating here that the Slovak Government responded immediately and has complied with all of our requests without hesitation .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answer and I would like to congratulate Mrs Van Lancker for bringing this forward .
On a slightly wider point , I visited , albeit a year or so ago , Bratislava and Kosice with a parliament delegation and we looked at the conditions of the Roma people there .
What I saw was that , despite the commitments of the government , the discrimination continues , partly because it seems to be ingrained in the society and almost institutionalised .
There are poorer conditions for Roma people , fewer facilities , nowhere near the same number of opportunities and generally they are far more alienated from society , for example in schools where there was no evidence of mother-tongue teaching , no evidence of any Roma teachers at all .
As a criterion for membership of the Union , is respect for minority languages and cultures being seriously independently monitored and if so by whom and how ?
How is the Commission responding to any criticisms that may be coming up ?
Mr President , I am a little taken aback by Mr Evans ' question , because there is hardly an issue that I have reported on more often to Parliament than the issue of the situation of the Roma in the Slovak Republic , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Bulgaria and Romania .
There is barely no other issue either that I myself , and the Commission as a whole , are working on as intensively as this one .
First and foremost I must remind you that discrimination against Roma is not only a sad fact of life in the future Member States , but that unfortunately we also find this in a whole series of current Member States .
It is just that it is not as noticeable in the figures because there are not as many of them in the Member States .
The crucial point here is whether the constitution , the judicial system and the state administration system in the future Member States really do discriminate against the Roma or not .
Our investigations - in agreement incidentally with the Council of Europe and a considerable number of human rights organisations - show that there is no as it were institutionalised discrimination against the Roma in either the constitution , legislation or administrative structure of these countries .
What we do find is deeply rooted , traditional discrimination in society , which in some parts of these countries has taken on really tragic proportions .
However , I must repeat that this is nothing new .
Our efforts have focused on ensuring that these countries develop a strategy to reduce the discrimination against the Roma .
We have made it a political precondition for the conclusion of the enlargement negotiations for such strategies to exist and be in force .
I have , however , always said - including here in this House - that we cannot expect social discrimination against the Roma to have been completely eliminated at the time of accession of the new Members .
Neither can we say that there is absolutely no discrimination in the present Member States .
I could name a series of cases of discrimination in our current Member States where we are also not saying that the fact that people are being discriminated against constitutes a violation of the Treaty . Instead we say that European Community law requires measures to be taken to put an end to this discrimination .
That is the situation that we find in these countries .
In its pre-accession instruments the Commission addressed the needs of the Roma minorities in a big way .
It has deployed a great deal of money , made significant human resources available and provided considerable advice to help the future Member States to develop and also apply a strategy to combat discrimination against the Roma .
I do not think that you will find anyone for miles around who is better acquainted with the reality of the situation faced by the Roma in these countries than I am .
I never let a visit to these countries go by without addressing this problem directly and on the spot .
I do not do this because I believe that I can solve the problem by visiting a Roma settlement , a Roma school or whatever it may be ; I do it to make a powerful and symbolic contribution to shaping political ideas .
I want the people in these countries to see on their television screens that when the Commission comes to their country it does not regard the Roma as untouchables , but as a section of the population that needs particular attention and particular care .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner very much for his answers .
He really is very convincing on this issue .
I should also , however , like to thank the questioner for even raising this matter .
I have a small and perhaps naive supplementary question : would it not be possible then for either the Commission or perhaps even Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities to invite one or other of these women to visit us and describe to us what is actually happening there ?
I would be interested to talk to this woman in person .
Perhaps it would not be without interest for the Commission either to hear a personal account of the situation on a one-to-one basis .
Mrs Flemming , Parliament is of course free to make its own decisions and I would consider it a worthwhile initiative if it were to go along with the suggestion that you have just made .
If it did then the Commission would be very grateful to have this opportunity to receive information of this kind first hand .
We shall now proceed to the second part of this Question Time , during which Commissioner Fischler will respond .
Part two
Questions to Mr Fischler
Question No 57 by Bart Staes ( H-0067 / 03 ) :
Subject : Guarantee of food distribution to disadvantaged groups
In his answer to Question E-1695 / 02
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the question posed by Mr Staes concerns the distribution of food to those in need in Belgium .
This is clearly a matter for the Member States , so , in this case , it is a matter for the Belgian authorities .
The funds that were provided for the 2002 programme in Belgium were no lower than in 2001 .
On the contrary , funding was increased from around EUR 2.3 million to EUR 3.5 million , precisely so that beef , which was available again in 2002 , could be distributed without this entailing a reduction in the quantities of the other food that had been made available .
The decline in the quantities made available to the Belgian Federation of Food Banks is due to the fact that the Belgian authorities divided up the food available differently from in previous years .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am rather surprised by your answer , because it is of course all a matter of juggling with figures .
All I know is that these food distribution organisations are manned by people who are highly committed , very socially aware , and also well disposed towards Europe .
In any event they have told us , in response to an earlier question , that problems had already been reported and I asked a question about this together with Mrs van Lancker , Mrs Maes and I believe Mrs van Brempt as well .
In response you said that just as much food is being distributed as before and then we have the disconcerting assessment that in fact 750 tonnes less are being distributed .
I repeat my question : can you confirm here that in terms of quantities - I am not talking about figures or about values - just as much food was made available in 2002 as in the years before ?
Have I understood that properly ?
If I have indeed understood that properly , then I shall be putting further questions to the Belgian Government through the federal advisory committee for European affairs in the Chamber and Senate and with fellow Members of the European Parliament .
Mr Staes , in my statement I was talking about amounts of money and not about tonnes .
I also said , however , that you need to bear three different things in mind here .
First of all , as I said , it is the Belgian authorities that are responsible for dividing the food between various charitable organisations , which then pass this on to disadvantaged groups .
How much each organisation gets is therefore decided by the Belgian authorities , and it may well be the case that the organisation that you mentioned received less , but this would mean that another organisation would have received more .
The only way of finding this out is , however , by contacting the Belgian authorities .
The second point is that there is also a link between the Community and Belgium because , as you know , we have provided a financial grant , but we do not give this grant to the individual organisation , we give it to the Member State .
We then leave it up to the Belgian State to divide these resources amongst the individual charitable organisations in accordance with its particular priorities .
Question No 58 by Dirk Sterckx , which has been taken over by Mr. Vermeer ( H-0080 / 03 ) :
Subject : Calculation of a ' fishing day ' to limit the fishing effort in accordance with Regulation ( EC ) 2341 / 2002
Annex XVII to Regulation ( EC ) 2341 / 2002
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the problem raised by Mr Sterckx in his question is one of which the Commission is very well aware .
I agree : it is true that the definition of fishing days in the temporary recovery plan for cod is very inflexible .
We accept this and are working on amending Annex XVII because in this way we can resolve the problem .
I can also tell you that we invited all those with responsibilities in this sector to Brussels on Monday morning .
We discussed this issue with representatives of the Member States on Monday and also today .
We are sure that we will find a solution to this problem that takes account of the practical situation .
Thank you very much for that answer , Mr Fischler .
Yet I would ask you to be more specific .
You say that you are expecting a result to be achieved .
The grassroots , the people who go to sea , are asking : when are we going to do something concrete ?
Could you give a date on which we can specifically introduce a very practical policy , for example a policy with hours instead of days , so that someone who sets sail in the evening and only actually starts working the next day is then dealt with according to the number of hours ?
Can you be more specific ?
What kind of result have you achieved with the agreements that you have made during the meetings today and yesterday ?
Mr Vermeer , if you wish I can be even more specific . We are not putting off dealing with this problem ; we want to change it straight away .
We were simply waiting until we had met with those involved , the representatives of the fishing sector .
It goes without saying that this is something that we intend to change within the next few weeks .
Commissioner , Scottish fishermen and others north of 55o north are being restricted to 15 days , which they find difficult to accept , all the more when they see the industrial fishermen scooping up a million tonnes of sand eels and Norway pout , which are both the feedstock for their whitefish , and in many cases , immature haddock and other whitefish .
How can you justify this to the fishermen of Scotland ?
Mr President , the question that Mr Purvis has raised is actually completely unrelated to the issue that we have been discussing here .
The debate is a general one about the means by which we can on the one hand rescue our endangered cod stocks and on the other hand do so in such a way as to avoid the fishermen concerned suffering severe hardship .
Turning now specifically to industrial fishing , I can only say that we have been working on this issue for years .
We have also obtained relevant reports from scientists to ascertain whether fishing for sand eels does actually as it were take the food from the mouths of young fish and young cod in particular .
We were told that this is only true to a very limited extent . In addition , you will also see from the stock surveys that the sand eel stocks continue to be very large and are not in decline .
These stocks are in fact stable ; we do not have a problem there .
There is one problem with industrial fishing and that is the risk of cod being caught as a by-catch .
It is certainly important to monitor what happens here .
The experts are telling us , however , that these by-catches have fallen significantly thanks to new fishing technologies and that in the future it will be possible to virtually eliminate them .
Question No 59 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0090 / 03 ) :
Subject : Young farmers and recognition of historical farming rights in the new proposal for reform of the CAP
In connection with the new proposal to reform the CAP and with reference to the forms of aid totally decoupled from production to be paid to farmers on the basis of farming rights , how are young farmers to be incorporated in the proposal ?
Will they too receive aid based on historical rights ?
Has the Commission forgotten young farmers ?
Mr President , as Mrs Izquierdo Rojo has rightly said , the Commission proposal on establishing Community rules for direct payments under the common agricultural policy provides that the single payment arrangement is open to all farmers that can show that they have a valid claim .
All eligible farmers , including of course young farmers , who have already received direct payments under the old system , have an equal claim .
Furthermore , under Article 49 of our proposal , these claims can be passed on , either through specific bequests or by anticipating the line of succession .
This provision takes account of customary practice in Europe when a holding is taken over by young farmers .
In addition the proposal also specifically accommodates new farmers .
Article 45 provides for a national reserve in the Member States .
Reference amounts can be allocated from this reserve for the single payment to farmers who started their farming activity only after 31 December 2000 .
Finally , it goes without saying that reference amounts need to be allocated to new farmers in accordance with objective criteria and according to the principle of equal treatment , so as to avoid distortions of the market or competition .
Finally , if a farmer - and that obviously includes a young farmer - can prove that his production has been reduced in the reference period because of force majeure or other unusual circumstances , then he can claim that his case is one of hardship .
The possible cases when hardship pertains are described in more detail in Paragraph 4 of the relevant article .
As you can see , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , there are a whole series of ways in which we want to use our proposal to give a special helping hand to our young farmers .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for that very positive and illuminating reply , at a time when there is great uncertainty in the countryside .
However , given the importance of the issue , I believe more information should be provided .
So my supplementary question is : does the Commission plan to provide the farmers with direct information and guidance on the advantages and improvements represented by the reform you are proposing ?
I say this with knowledge of the facts , because in my country there are many parodies in which farmers are constantly being told that decoupling means that the less they work , the more they earn and that they will earn more the more they ' scratch their bellies ' , to employ the terminology actually used .
Therefore , Commissioner , if we want the farmers to understand your proposals , bearing in mind that the Spanish Minister for Agriculture 's strategy is head-on opposition , I believe you should consider this question and that the Commission must propose measures to provide direct information , because what we have in Spain at the moment are ridiculous parodies .
Mr President , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , I can tell you that what you said about parodies certainly rings true with me .
It is actually sometimes the case - regrettably , I have to say - that when you listen to the comments of some national politicians you can barely recognise the Commission 's proposals .
We do actually need to do much more here .
We have prepared a public relations strategy specifically so as to ensure that the proposals are discussed in the public domain .
We do however expect - and quite rightly in my opinion - the national governments to at least provide correct information .
Whether a government representative likes these proposals or not is of secondary importance .
We have an entirely legitimate expectation , however , that no false information is put into circulation .
Unfortunately , this requirement is not always respected .
I would therefore say that this is a task for all of us .
I can only ask you , in your capacity as a Member of the European Parliament , to make the facts known for example in Spain and to keep farmers informed .
In any case I will continue to do everything in my power to send this information out directly from Brussels , particularly through the media .
Question No 60 by Mrs María Esther Herranz García , which has been taken over by Mrs. Redondo Jiménez ( H-0109 / 03 ) :
Subject : Imports of agricultural products and reform of the CAP
Under the reform of the common agricultural policy proposed by the Commission a few weeks ago , Community aid is to be made strictly subject to the requirements of food safety , animal welfare , the environment , and safety at work .
If the proposal were to be accepted , farmers would be penalised if they failed to comply with any of the directives , of which there are about forty , that they would be called upon to observe .
The Commission 's proposed reform will entail a substantial increase in production costs , which will be offset only in part by the new accompanying measure provided for under the heading of rural development in order to help farmers obey the rules .
The new rural development aid being proposed by the Commission is a partial and temporary solution because it will decrease over time .
Does the Commission intend to apply the same requirements to agricultural products imported from non-member countries so as to ensure that Community producers will not have to compete on the market in a position of weakness ?
What steps is it proposing to take to alleviate the situation ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Redondo Jiménez is right to say that , according to Article 3 of the Commission proposal , a farmer in receipt of direct payments has to comply with the basic requirements of farm management in accordance with Annex 3 of the proposal and has to ensure that the land is kept in good agricultural condition .
This is intended to guarantee that farmers that receive direct support comply with binding EU standards on the environment , food safety , animal health , animal protection and also safety in the workplace and that they keep their land in good agricultural condition in accordance with good agricultural practice .
The EU standards included in these basic requirements have all been legally binding for a long time ; they are nothing new .
This Commission proposal cannot therefore directly create any additional costs .
Furthermore , the measures that are available to Member States under rural development have been extended to include instruments to improve quality and also achieve better animal protection .
In the context of these newly proposed measures to achieve compliance with standards , farmers can receive aid for a new standard for five years , if applying it involves additional costs and obligations for the farmer .
The aid that is granted for applying a particular standard is limited in time , but the measure itself is not .
As far as funding the measures on rural development is concerned , by introducing modulation the Commission is also laying the foundations for increasing the relevant budgetary funds .
Despite our efforts to secure the future of European farmers and promote important European trade interests , one of the most important objectives of the European proposals made in January for the WTO negotiations is that in the current negotiating round non-trade-related matters - such as food safety or the protection of designations of origin , or animal and environmental protection - be treated on an equal footing .
The Commission has already responded several times in no uncertain terms to the first proposal of modalities for the agriculture negotiations that was tabled on 12 February by Mr Harbinson , and it will continue to defend the European negotiating position .
The Commissioner has just told us only what he was able to tell us .
Other things have been left out , however , which have already been debated in the special committees on agriculture .
For example , with regard to rice , he knows that the subsidy price has been reduced by 60 % , that internal production has stabilised and that consumption has increased by 20 % .
However , for five years the situation has been unsustainable for rice producers , who are facing an increasingly bleak future , as a result of the Everything but Arms decisions and imports of basmati rice , which do not correspond either in terms of their characteristics or their origins .
We could also consider garlic , mushrooms , honey , tomato , rice , wine , concentrated juices , etc . , and we would see that the quality , the safety of products imported , as well as the production methods , both in terms of animal welfare and in terms of guaranteeing quality and the environment , are not subject to any control .
I would therefore ask you what supplementary measures are subject to the supervision of the Commission , but do not tell me that control falls to the Member States .
Mr President , Mrs Redondo Jiménez states that I did not mention various points , but I could just as easily reply that she did not ask me about them either .
In your question , Mrs Redondo Jiménez , you did not ask for example what is going to happen to the rice regime or what the situation is with food safety for imports .
What is more , this is not even a subject for which I am responsible .
I would however like to comment briefly on what you said .
Firstly then , why do we need a rice reform ?
We do not need it because of imports of basmati rice , which are I might add very limited , something which incidentally greatly annoys the Indians , who are therefore constantly trying to have their export quota to the European Union increased .
We need it as a result of the decision - which by the way was also made here in Parliament - to give the world 's poorest countries the right to export all of the goods that they produce , without any restrictions , to the European Union .
Of course the world 's poorest countries include a whole series of rice producers .
That is why our current rice regime will no longer work in the future and why we need to change it .
The objective of the reform has to be on the one hand to address the consequences of this external trade policy and on the other to ensure that at the same time the typical landscapes are preserved in traditional rice-growing areas , such as in southern Spain , where there is of course even a national park where rice is the main crop .
I turn now to the question of import controls . This may not be what you want to hear , Mrs Redondo Jiménez , but products that are imported through Spanish ports or via any other border post in Spain by train or lorry have to be checked at the border to ascertain whether they meet plant health and veterinary requirements .
All that the European authorities , for example the Veterinary Office in Dublin , can do is to introduce a control plan to check that the border inspections are actually working .
This is , however , as I said , the responsibility of my fellow-Commissioner Mr Byrne .
Let us continue with rice .
EBA : Everything but Arms .
If the 40 poorest countries are so poor and are dying of hunger , why do they have to send us rice ?
Let them eat it and then they will not be hungry !
But my question is this : how can the Commissioner and the European Commission prevent Vietnam , for example , which falls within the Everything but Arms countries , from introducing its rice via its borders with Thailand and then Thailand from introducing it into the European Union ?
How can we guarantee that ?
How can it be controlled ?
Will we put a label on every grain of rice ?
How can we prevent the 40 poorest countries in the world , by means of multinationals we all know , which import rice , some of them here , from introducing these products via the poorest countries and wrecking our markets ?
Mr President , Mr Bautista Ojeda , firstly , under the Everything but Arms initiative the world 's poorest countries have the right to export their own production , that is their entire production , to the EU if they so wish .
And if they wish they can also import rice for their own use .
That is part of the decision that was made in this House .
Incidentally , I might add that I expressed my own misgivings about this from the outset .
But the decision was made and I stand by it .
Now there is only one thing that we can do , and that is to be vigilant and ensure that no foreign rice that has not even been produced in these countries is exported to the European Union .
How can we ensure that this is the case ?
We can do so by using those instruments that we also use in all other areas to check the origin of a product .
This requires proof of origin , certificates and checks by the appropriate teams of inspectors , and in some cases on-the-spot checks or analyses are also necessary .
In some cases it is certainly possible to tell by analysing the imported rice whether it really is from the country of origin indicated or not , and this does happen in practice .
The next item is the joint debate on economic and monetary union :
Report ( A5-0051 / 2003 ) by José Manuel García-Margallo y Marfil , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the state of the European economy - preparatory report with a view to the Commission recommendation on broad economic policy guidelines ( ( 2002 / 2287 ( INI ) ) ;
Report ( A5-0047 / 2003 ) by Bruno Trentin , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the annual assessment of implementation of stability and convergence programmes ( 2002 / 2288 ( INI ) ) ;
Report ( A5-0037 / 2003 ) by Olle Schmidt , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission report : Convergence Report 2002 - Sweden ( COM ( 2002 ) 243 - C5-0326 / 2002 - 2002 / 2170 ( COS ) ) ;
Report ( A5-0018 / 2003 ) by Manuel António dos Santos , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication on Public finances in EMU - 2002 ( COM ( 2002 ) 209 - C5-0324 / 2002 - 2002 / 2168 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the Commissioner to this sitting .
I would like to start by thanking all the parliamentary groups which have cooperated closely so that we can offer Parliament a clear text today , which focuses on action and not on words , on speeding up and not slowing down the strategy agreed in Lisbon , in Gothenburg and in Stockholm , to restore confidence to the European markets and thereby speed up our growth with a very clear objective , highlighted in the first paragraph : increasing job creation , which is a necessary condition if we are to compensate for ageing and maintain our social model .
Secondly , I would like to point out three strict limits to demand policies , which are included in the policy in the short term : to maintain macroeconomic stability , to maintain European competitiveness in an increasingly globalised world and to reduce public debt , in order to free up resources which must be destined towards investment and to create resources for future social needs .
The second of these key ideas is to increase coordination ; we therefore welcome the strategies aimed at jointly examining the economic guidelines and the employment guidelines , but we would also like to integrate budgetary policies and supply policies , which remain in national hands , in order to create a framework which could provide a basis for the discussion of budgets , both European Union and national budgets .
In the field of monetary policy , which is the next section , the report stresses that the European Central Bank must closely follow the evolution of prices , in view of the underlying inflation in the services sector . But it says something further .
It says that everybody else , particularly the national governments , must do their duties : they must maintain the evolution of salaries linked to productivity , introduce measures in terms of the transparency of prices and reform their structures in order to increase productivity , in order to give the European Central Bank a margin , an additional margin , in the event that it is considered necessary to reduce interest rates , particularly if we want to bring interest rates into line with European export needs .
In the field of budgetary policy , the message seems to me to be equally clear .
This Parliament is stressing its commitment , which it has always maintained , to the Stability and Growth Pact .
Secondly , it welcomes the Commission 's efforts to interpret this pact , to assess the budgetary situation of each Member State , taking account of volume of debt and quality of expenditure , particularly when it is investment expenditure , which is coherent with the Lisbon , Stockholm and Gothenburg strategies .
Thirdly , it regrets the lack of application , the lack of diligence of those prodigal governments which , while running the risk of excessive deficit , do not appear to want to make any effort to reduce structural deficits .
And finally , as an express appeal to the Commission , it urges it to play a more vigilant role at times of boom in order to ride out the storm at a later date .
With regard to structural reform policy , we stress that the lack of investment is key , and is the most definitive explanation of our lagging behind the United States , particularly investment in new technologies .
We therefore call for the establishment in the economic guidelines of quantified objectives in the field of public and private investment and for the promotion of investment by the private sector in these technologies , essentially by means of the tax deductions , linked to obtaining profits rather than subsidies , since we have no very clear idea of which activities those subsidies are used for .
We call for a new industrial policy , because people cannot live on services alone , as well as an effort in the field of renewable energies , on which I do not need to insist given the international climate .
In the field of small and medium-sized businesses , the Commission is urged to continue with the objectives of the Feira Charter , to facilitate their creation within 24 hours by means of new technologies , to advocate a postponement of taxes during the early years of operation , to simplify their operation , particularly in an administrative sense , and to exercise strict vigilance in the field of funding in the Basilea II negotiations , to stress the role of the European Investment Fund and to establish a network of guarantees which allows them access to the markets .
In the field of the liberalisation of the markets , transposition and therefore stressing the penalty mechanisms for States which do not comply , increasing competition in the privatised sectors , liberalising energy networks and particularly their connection .
On financial markets we are essentially in agreement .
We welcome the efforts in the field of taxation and we would ask for further effort in order to achieve VAT at source and a consolidated basis in taxes on companies and we ask for stricter representation of the euro in international fora and a denomination of energies in this currency .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , I hope that the message is clear and that it is well received .
Thanks once again to all the groups and the President for their patience .
Mr President , Council representatives , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr García-Margallo 's excellent report has highlighted the need to pin , from now on , the broad economic policy guidelines and the objectives relating to the coordination of Member States ' economic and social policies to the goals set by the decisions of the Lisbon European Council , particularly where investment in research , lifelong learning and European infrastructure are concerned and as regards ensuring the efficiency of public services while safeguarding the general interest which they must serve , and , in addition , as regards an active ageing strategy which will help to bring about a substantial increase in the active population and employment .
This decision , which requires that binding stages in the implementation of the Lisbon strategy be provided for as an integral part of the broad economic policy guidelines , cannot fail to affect - and this is the subject of my report - the Stability and Growth Pact , which is still devoid of binding indicators relating precisely to growth and the quality of growth or to the coordination of budgetary policies , as Mr dos Santos rightly points out .
My explicit question on this point , Commissioner , concerns the compatibility of the Lisbon objectives with the objectives of the Stability and Growth Pact . Do the Lisbon objectives also concern the EMU States and to what extent , and , if they do , how can we make them as binding as the objectives set in the Stability and Growth Pact ?
If the answer to this question is yes , as I believe it is , the problem then arises of how to coordinate and reconcile the different areas of Union intervention as regards economic policy , social and employment policy , sustainable development , financial stability and growth and achieve synergic interaction between them .
Clearly , this is not a question of procedure but a choice which must impact on the objectives of the Stability Pact and the way it is applied .
Indeed , in this new context , the application of the Stability Pact cannot just be concentrated in those periods in which there are clear risks of a shift away from the objectives and constraints of the Pact as regards budget deficit or public debt , constraints that we have no intention of questioning , especially during this difficult , uncertain period .
Indeed , the Stability and Growth Pact ought to curb the behaviour of the EMU States in periods of growth too , in order to prevent decisions leading away from the Lisbon objectives paving the way , in precisely those periods , for further departure from the objectives of the Stability Pact .
The Commission must acknowledge the difference between an economic policy which favours regular expenditures over public and private investment in periods of growth and a policy seeking to meet the Lisbon objectives in clear stages between now and 2010 in the areas of research and development , training and integrated European infrastructures .
It must also realise the difference , at times of crisis or in the event of war , between an economic policy which seeks to reduce fiscal pressure across the board and a policy of boosting public and private investment , which the Commission itself should be able to see is in the common interest , not least in that it is bound up with European projects in the spirit of Lisbon .
At this point , it is necessary to ascertain whether investment intended to contribute to the achievement of the Lisbon objectives makes things worse rather than better in the event of the danger of a shift away from the 3 % constraint and whether it cannot be made compatible with greater financial rigour in order to comply with the criteria of the Stability Pact .
I hope that similar considerations and opportunities will all be taken into account together at the forthcoming Spring Council , and I would quietly point out , by way of conclusion , that there has to be institutional coordination of economic and social policies in the euro zone , coordination capable of taking majority decisions and showing , not least in the work of the Convention , that the enlargement of the Union which we are determined to make every effort to achieve will not hinder the progress or dampen the vitality of the European Union in the search for new , more advanced forms of integration .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen and most particularly , Commissioner Solbes Mira , the presentation of the Commission document on Public Finances to which my report is dedicated shared at the time the firmly-held conviction that the economic forecasts for the European area should then be systematically revised downwards .
The economic context of budgetary surveillance has indeed proven to be much less favourable than initially predicted and is demonstrated , specifically , by the doubling of the Eurozone 's deficit between the years 2000 and 2001 , by the ' fact ' that this imbalance grew and became more serious in 2002 and by the explanation and real scrutiny of the serious budgetary difficulties that have occurred in four of the Member States .
For this very reason , the Commission drew up recommendations and stated its intention to send early warnings about deviating from the budget to Member States that could potentially fail to comply . Although this was not carried out , it ultimately anticipated the true situation seen at the end of the year in those countries .
The tone of the speech President Romano Prodi gave this Parliament is therefore fully justified . In this speech he expressed his concern at the downturn in the economic cycle , but also emphatically criticised an inflexible and dogmatic enforcement of the Stability and Growth Pact regardless of changing circumstances and consequently called for adjustments and the introduction of more sophisticated criteria for implementing the Pact .
Since then , many politicians , experts , research bodies , academics and leaders of public and published opinion have contributed their thoughts on the matter .
The Commission itself has stuck to the prudent but ambitious interpretation of its President , redrafting a less rigid and more active framework of budgetary supervision that now adheres to the principle that the Pact 's implementation must make it an ever more valuable instrument in promoting stability , growth and employment .
The report endorses this viewpoint to the extent that it considers this to correspond to an intermediate stage between the rigid application of the Pact and the crucial development towards an interpretative model , which it considers to be inevitable in future , taking account of more sophisticated criteria such as inflation , employment , public debts and changes in these debts , financial burdens arising from the ageing of the population and investment requirements .
Finally , the quality of public expenditure must serve to bring the SGP into line with the objectives laid down in the Lisbon strategy and with the principle of sustainable development as agreed in Gothenburg .
The political prevalence of budgetary constraints and a rigid interpretation of the financial balance under multilateral surveillance have led in recent years to a steady decline in the ratio of public investment to GDP , although it must be acknowledged that private investment has followed the same trend .
All of this coincides with the increased difficulties that the European economy has been displaying .
The solutions proposed initially or which are now being adopted are not unheard of in the context of some developed economies in the OECD where the ' golden rule ' is a crucial element , not only for consolidating public finances , but also for launching and sustaining a process of economic and social development .
Following the enormous step that was the creation of the single currency , the Union appears today to be in a genuine state of paralysis .
The excessive restrictions on monetary and budgetary policies , which were designed with the intention of strengthening the European economy and its single currency and to allay the suspicions and fears of the Union 's most powerful countries , could turn into unexpected limitations that will make the sought-after recovery entirely dependent on the smooth operation of the driving force that is the US economy .
The flexibility and rationality that are being advocated are not incompatible with the need to ensure compliance with the real spirit of the Stability and Growth Pact , and nor does a public debate on the matter diminish the scope of its objectives .
The financial consolidation of the States that accept a common monetary policy and a single currency and which reject any self-sufficiency that hinders open relations with countries outside their own zone is crucial and must be pursued .
Many countries , incidentally , have enshrined principles and rules in their Constitutions establishing rules - some more rigid , some less so - for budgetary deficits .
This is also crucial in the political framework of the Union , but if this type of commitment is to be effective , priority consideration must be given to the interests of the zone as a whole - a very substantial area - with the use of discretionary instruments being acceptable in exceptional circumstances to aid the recovery of the least developed regions or countries .
We will otherwise face the risk of seeing only formal compliance with budgetary obligations , with countries in difficulty resorting to the most varied and creative accounting systems ( which also makes their rapid harmonisation a necessity ) , in the sole aim of keeping the Commission satisfied , as guardian of the Treaties , or of temporarily deceiving the financial markets and for a while escaping their rightful punishment .
This , unfortunately , is the situation seen in many European economies at the end of 2002 .
Determining the current problems of the European economy when drawing up the balance-sheet of the degree to which the objectives outlined at the Lisbon Extraordinary summit have been attained is , therefore , absolutely crucial .
It is also necessary to make it clear to Parliament , to the Council and the Commission that it is possible to achieve a balance between healthy financial consolidation in the countries of the Union and full compliance with these objectives .
Mr President , I will try within the time available to me to comment on the four reports presented to us .
I will deal initially with the three relating to the general economic situation , the Stability and Growth Pact and public finances and finally I will comment on the report by Mr Olle Schmidt on the specific case of Sweden .
I would firstly like to thank Mr García-Margallo for the work he has done and , as he has said , for the clear message contained in this report with regard to the broad guidelines for economic policies .
I would like to stress that the document for this year is of a more strategic nature than usual , insofar as it is a document which intends to define the broad European strategy for the next three years .
It is true that it is being produced in a situation of particular economic uncertainty , it is true that we have given certain indications on how to act in the event of asymmetric shocks , where naturally monetary policy must be used , when there may be sectoral repercussions , a situation in which we will undoubtedly have to use specific instruments of a different nature or if we experience those unusual events which are laid down in the Community legislation and which allow us to act also in terms of budgetary policy , while accepting however , the limits of 3 % laid down in the Treaty .
Mr García-Margallo has insisted on the need for a healthy macroeconomic policy and clearly supports the Stability and Growth Pact .
I believe we take the same approach and we have no great difficulty in accepting his recommendations .
He also refers to a point which we all believe to be fundamental and that is how we can increase the growth potential in Europe .
Unquestionably through an increase in employment and productivity .
We know that increases in productivity - you have referred to this yourself - and growth in employment are also closely related to the evolution of salaries , and that it is essential that salaries are compatible with reasonable evolution of employment and with increases in productivity .
But it is also essential - and this is the approach we adopted in Lisbon - to improve education and training .
We believe it is also essential to implement more appropriate taxation in order to achieve these objectives and of course to carry out more public and private investment .
I will discuss this in more detail when I come to the report by Mr Trentin .
In this regard , we consider it essential , within the Lisbon framework , to define the appropriate framework for both public and private investment to be carried out and to make progress on certain fundamental elements .
In recent weeks there has been an element which I would like to stress , which is the approval of the Community patent , which will undoubtedly be an innovative element and which will allow for greater European innovation and of course to define public expenditure according to criteria which will improve productivity or production .
The broad guidelines for economic policy , however , should not be seen independently from the Stability and Growth Pact .
Mr Trentin refers to this point when he points out the need to approach the Stability and Growth Pact jointly in Lisbon .
I believe we all agree that restructured public finances are essential not only in terms of allowing monetary policy to play its role , but also in order to provide the necessary margin so that the automatic stabilisers can function in a cyclical situation .
However , Mr Trentin raises something else : what more can we do , in relation to the Stability and Growth Pact , in terms of growth ?
How can we ultimately improve the quality of public finances ?
In his report , Mr Santos also stresses this point , which I would like to focus on further .
I believe that the key lies in greater investment in research and development .
We have set certain specific objectives on this point , since public investment in this sector functions satisfactorily but nevertheless there are more deficiencies with regard to the functioning of the private economy .
The Stability and Growth Pact , however , as modified in the Communication in November , introduces an additional element in relation to this policy so that it may further promote development in Europe .
It is true that the pact provides us with the initial means for achieving budgetary balance or a situation of surplus in the medium term .
In its analysis of the pact , however , the Commission has seen that in certain cases temporary deviations are justified provided that they are for reasons aimed at improving growth .
Our view is that physical investment and , above all , public investment is not the only element which can allow a temporary deviation in budgetary balance to be carried out within the framework of the pact .
We believe that all actions which ultimately allow us to increase our growth potential must be treated in the same way .
The Commission therefore proposed in its Communication that there could be temporary deviations in countries which fulfil certain conditions ; essentially those which have low levels of ratio in relation to public debt ; which furthermore have already achieved a situation of budgetary balance and which , of course , establish this type of deviation in order to increase growth .
And here we are talking about investments in infrastructures , investments in knowledge , but also measures of a fiscal nature , for example tax reductions , which may eventually allow us to improve growth .
Those are the essential elements which the Commission raised in its Communication , which have not been taken up in an entirely exact form in the final conclusions of the Council , but which nevertheless have allowed , or are allowing , sufficient progress to be made in order to achieve a result which we believe must allow us to improve in terms of growth .
What the Council says is that we must carry out analyses on a case-by-case basis , that there is no rule for this type of deviation ; it does not impose any condition with regard to how the Commission must implement its proposals and naturally the Commission remains convinced that the proposals we have made so far , in a couple of specific cases , with regard to these temporary deviations , are still valid and they are the criteria we will use in the future .
With regard to the coordination of our budgetary policies , I would say that the system has improved , but that , nevertheless , we cannot be completely satisfied , since we have too many deviations .
I believe it is essential to make progress on coordination and in this regard the broad guidelines for economic policy are intended to make improvements , not only by means of the tri-annual approach , but also by paying more attention to application reports than to general approaches .
And I believe we must improve our multinational coordination systems , since - as we have highlighted in our proposals to the Convention - there are certain deficiencies in the current system which prevent ' peer pressure ' from functioning in the manner which was drawn up in the Treaty .
Finally , I would say to Mr dos Santos that I am grateful for his support on the analysis of the public finances for 2002 and the quality of public finances .
That report is a key to understanding what is done subsequently , in November , when we present our proposal for a communication to the Council .
In our Commission Communication to the Council we do not intend to modify the pact or to make it more flexible .
Our intention , on the basis of our experience over recent years , is to ensure that the application of the pact is better suited to the specific situations of each of the countries involved .
We also believe it essential in our Communication that the Member States confirm their commitment to the pact .
That is why we requested a European Council resolution to allow this progress .
Though I have said this several times , it is perhaps worth repeating that we insist in our communication on certain fundamental points .
3 % is still the nominal deficit limit ; however , we have to take account of the evolution of the cycle and therefore the evolution of cyclically adjusted deficits is an essential element .
Secondly , in order to achieve budgetary balance in the medium term , those countries which have not yet achieved it will have to make budgetary efforts to the tune of half a point per year , as a minimum , or more in the event that there is a difference .
Thirdly , we are aware that there has been a relaxation of the budgetary policy at good times in the economic cycle , which has created subsequent problems and it is therefore essential to pay more attention to ensuring that there is no further procyclic behaviour in these circumstances .
We believe it is essential to pay attention to debt and as Mr Trentin pointed out previously , I believe it is essential to consider the specific situation of certain Member States , in such a way as they have greater room for manoeuvre .
All of this has been approved by the Ecofin Council , with the corrections which I referred to in relation to the report by Mr Trentin .
I come to my final comment on the report by Mr Schmidt .
It is true that in our convergence report on Sweden we referred to compliance with the convergence criteria with two exceptions : the legal convergence criterion , particularly in relation to the Swedish Central Bank , and non-compliance with the exchange rate convergence criterion .
We are pleased to note that , when we talk about the figures relating to development in Sweden , the remaining convergence criteria are being complied with even more comfortably than in the past .
However we have yet to deal with those two elements which I hope can be resolved in the future .
You know what our position is in relation to them .
In the legal field , the Central Bank 's independence system must be adapted .
With regard to the exchange rate criterion , we have to apply the Treaty ; but , as I have said many times , we will have to take account of past experiences without a doubt .
I personally believe that the adoption of the euro would be beneficial to Sweden and I hope that that country will soon fulfil the necessary conditions .
I also believe it would be beneficial for the European Union and for the eurozone in particular , since it would represent a significant advance in our process of integration .
Mr President , I should first like to thank the Commissioner and applaud his clear statement in the debate on these four reports . He said that the Commission did not wish either to make the Stability and Growth Pact more flexible or to adapt it , but that it simply wished to impose stricter standards when assessing the situation in the Member States .
I consider this to be a better policy than the proposals made by Members from the other groups , in particular those put forward by Mr Trentin and Mr dos Santos .
What Mr Trentin said here bears no relation to the report tabled by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , nor are his comments appropriate in a debate on the subject of the annual assessment of the stability and convergence programmes .
In school I would say to Mr Trentin that he had strayed from the subject .
In his draft report there was not a single word about it , and it was only the amendments tabled by the various different groups that brought the report closer to the issue at hand .
Today you clean forgot about it once again .
I am also grateful to the Commissioner for reminding us once more of the Lisbon objectives , which are not at odds with the Stability and Growth Pact and budgetary consolidation , but in fact encapsulate all of the framework conditions : a flexible labour market and the need to increase investment , reduce taxes , and invest in research and training .
This cannot however absolve the Member States from applying strict standards in their budgetary policy , as prescribed by the Commission .
In the Trentin report we have at least demanded that in future the Commission be able to send out the blue letters on its own , without this being dependent on a vote in the Ecofin Council in which the offenders are indirectly involved .
We want to strengthen the Commission 's independence .
The proposals that have been made in the reports are inconsistent in many respects .
This is shown by the fact that for two years now there has been a consistent policy of calling the Stability and Growth Pact into question and of undermining it in every possible respect and with every possible proposal , with the sole aim of ensuring that the consolidation of state budgets in several Member States is no longer recognised as a necessary precondition for stable finances and a stable economic and monetary policy .
It is of course not the case that there is insufficient room for manoeuvre .
Eight out of twelve Member States in the euro zone have already managed to balance their budgets .
The offenders who are not sticking to the rules are the ones who are now calling for the Stability and Growth Pact to be changed .
Those that have stable budgets and that are even making a surplus are penalised because in the euro zone everyone is in the same boat , my own country , Germany , as much as any other .
If Germany with its considerable economic power does not comply with the Stability Pact then it puts the stability of the euro at risk .
We cannot deflect attention away from the Member States ' responsibilities by correcting and retouching the rules .
The golden rule that appears in some of Mr dos Santos ' amendments is of no use here either .
There is no such thing as good or bad debt .
There is just debt : debt in investment and infrastructure and consumer debt .
Mr Trentin , I am sure that you are familiar with the scala mobile , the debt that brought the Italian State to its knees over the last twenty years , when new debts were repeatedly accumulated , with the unions playing along with it , but no way out was found .
The European model has brought lower inflation and stable monetary policy conditions .
That is what we should keep as our basis , what we must be rigorous about keeping as our basis .
Finally , I should like to say to our Swedish Members that we welcome the fact that Sweden wishes to join the Economic and Monetary Union .
We will do all we can to help it to do so , but we ask that it be under the conditions laid down in the Maastricht Treaty .
If the government does not yet meet them - independence of the central bank or even the issue of two-year membership of the European Monetary System - then it needs to address that ; it must not be allowed to let it slip .
In this respect we have every reason to thank the Commission for the line that it is taking .
Mr President , proactive and resolute leadership is needed on economic policy at the EU 's spring summit .
We cannot go on trotting out the same old formulae .
Unfortunately they fall far short of what is required at a difficult time , which is not only characterised by an economic downturn but also , regrettably , by the shadows that an approaching war is casting over economic and employment policy .
That is why Parliament 's reports - and I mean all of those on the table this evening - show a glimmer of hope but at the same time make demands that mercilessly expose the weaknesses in the European economy .
I should like to underline that it is out of the question to eliminate a Stability and Growth Pact that has been created to bring order to the economy . Instead we need to apply it taking into account the Lisbon objectives in a time and a place and in such a way that it makes sense , because the people of Europe deserve no less .
I think that we need to make every effort to halt the economic slide .
We cannot deny either that even the European Central Bank is now talking about risks of a downward trend in the European Union .
This means that we need to pursue a proactive policy and to that extent the repeated references to structural reforms do not serve any purpose either .
Besides , we do not yet know what economic benefits these structural reforms will bring to the European Union and we have no idea what impact they will have on employment policy .
Economic institutes , national ministries and also the Commission have not answered this question .
But we need this answer to know which direction is the right one .
I believe that the saying still holds true : employment creates growth , but growth also creates employment .
We have to work on the basis of real growth and not only on the basis of potential for growth .
I should like to point out once more that it is absolutely right - as the reports also state - for us to refer repeatedly to the lack of investment in both the private and public sectors .
We are not honouring the Lisbon agreement about 3 % growth .
Neither are we respecting the agreement to invest more in research and development , and that too applies to both the private and public sectors .
Japan and the USA are streets ahead of us in both respects .
At the moment we perhaps do not really need an economic government , but coordination up and across our governments , coordination that is worthy of the name , is in the interests of growth and employment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would firstly like to express my group 's agreement with the text of the reports we are discussing , but not with some of the statements which have been made on presenting them to this plenary session .
The immediate aim of this debate is essentially to prepare for the Spring Council and it is intended to respond to the corresponding assessment of the so-called ' Lisbon process ' , complemented by the decisions of the Gothenburg and Barcelona Councils .
Within this context , I would firstly like to express my concern and that of my group at the fact that the aim established for 2010 of being a more competitive economy with higher quality and greater levels of employment has not been achieved .
When assessing these three years , despite the difficulties of the American economy , we find that , in terms of growth , productivity levels and employment levels , we are further behind than three years ago .
It is therefore clear that there is a very worrying difference between what is preached in the Councils and what is practiced in the Member States , and this prejudices the Union 's overall result .
We in the Liberal Group believe that the main problems principally stem from the lack of compliance with the liberalisation processes agreed , since , as the report by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil points out , there are still significant structural reforms to be carried out and certain basic markets , such as the labour market , must be made even more flexible .
In the current situation , which is not exactly one of the best economic situations the European Union has been in in recent years , there are three key aspects which particular attention must also be paid to .
Firstly , we must improve the level not just of research and development but of its application within the productive system .
Let us hope that this historic agreement on the European patent , as Commissioner Solbes has mentioned , will provide promotion in this area , but that it will also pay special attention to the creation and development of small and medium-sized businesses based on the application of new technologies , because , as was demonstrated in the 1990s , they are significant sources of work .
I do not have the time to mention other issues , Mr President , but I would like to end as I began : rather than making grand statements in Spring Councils , we must comply with what has been agreed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have to recognise that there are a number of reports on broadly the same subject .
This being the case , we will not support the report drafted by Mr Trentin , whom I greatly admire .
We will consider instead Mr García-Margallo y Marfil 's report .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is faced with a real operational problem .
When a rapporteur from the left and a rapporteur from the right decide to address the same issue , the report from the left is pulled to pieces by honourable Members on the right . With a bit of luck , the report is approved when it is put forward by a rapporteur from the right .
We must therefore recognise that the García-Margallo y Marfil report is much better and much more useful than Mr Trentin 's , now that it has been cut to ribbons by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Be that as it may , I have long acknowledged that Mr García-Margallo y Marfil has demonstrated considerable qualities in his role as a rapporteur .
As Mr Langen said , the Trentin report is clearly not actually a report drawn up by Mr Trentin .
Mr Trentin 's speech almost entirely contradicted the contents of his report .
I will therefore only comment on the contents of the García Margallo y Marfil report , in its present form .
It is my belief that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance support all the objectives and comments on the subject as included in the García-Margallo y Marfil report .
It has the virtue of bringing the objectives of economic policy back into line with the Lisbon and Gothenburg objectives .
We want to ensure that Europe is a model of economic growth . Growth should be based on high-quality investment in human resources , high-calibre public investment and on the use of environmentally-sustainable technologies .
Given the size of the continent of Europe , which has one of the highest population concentrations in the world , it is my belief that this is the only way forward for the European Union .
The García-Margallo y Marfil report does contain discrepancies .
It is forced to juggle the fact that the Stability and Growth Pact must be welcomed , while also acknowledging the need to finance investments .
It acknowledges that the article in the Treaty of Maastricht which prevents European institutions from criticising the European Central Bank must not be undermined , while also stating that it is nonetheless necessary to provide credit at special rates for the required investments . It mentions taxation , not interest rates .
In short , the report tends to skirt round the real problems of institutional impasse we are currently experiencing within the European Union . Next year these problems will catapult us back into the situation of so-called europaralysis we experienced during the dark years of working towards the euro from 1990 to 1997 .
As we cannot control the interest rates fixed by the European Central Bank , interest rates will be too high . This will present problems for Member States wishing both to invest and pay off their debts .
These excessive interest rates will also make the euro too strong . It will hamper exports at a time of global recession .
Unless we resolve to tackle the Stability and Growth Pact as it currently stands , we will be unable to finance the investments Mr García-Margallo y Marfil calls for .
.
( NL ) Mr President , in this joint debate on a number of reports , we are discussing the progress of Economic and Monetary Union , a Union that exists by the grace of compliance with agreements made .
The Stability and Growth Pact is an agreement , an agreement that we must hold one another to .
The words that Mr Trentin writes about the Stability Pact in his report are worth reading .
He says that even in periods of economic recession the pact must be adhered to closely and I am in complete agreement with this .
Nor must we now go back on that .
Likewise Mr Garcia-Margallo y Marfil rightly says that the European leaders at the forthcoming spring summit must dispense with vague and self-satisfied declarations and must speak plainly .
Clear agreements about the way in which we wish to achieve the economic objectives remain necessary to comply with the pact even in this period of recession .
I am therefore greatly amazed when it appears once again that France is unwilling to comply with the agreements made .
Last Thursday it again became clear that this Member State would make no attempt to put its 2003 budget straight .
Where Germany , Portugal and Italy are trying to put their budgets right within the agreements made , France , on the contrary , does not even express its intention finally to give account for the agreements made .
Let me conclude , Mr President , by saying that if this Parliament wishes to make a serious contribution to policy-making in the economic field , then it is high time that we summoned the Member States and politicians that are unwilling to comply with these agreements to this place to give account .
Mr President , Commissioner , the reports being discussed today are major , substantial documents - before I start I must pay tribute to the rapporteurs for that - and they represent a major contribution to the debate on the policy guidelines for public finances in Europe .
The radical Members will support them in their present form .
I do not want to go into the details of the individual resports , but I would like to take this opportunity to make some more general comments .
Firstly , I believe that we should be a little mistrustful of high-sounding slogans and goals such as the Lisbon objectives , to which we are constantly referring .
I do not feel that the fact that Europe decided at a certain juncture to set itself , and I quote once again : ' a new strategic goal for the next decade : to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world capable of sustainable economic growth ' and all the other goals we are familiar with is either a great leap forward or the basis for a new economic policy for the Member States , unless we think that , in the past , the States did not want to make their countries competitive countries and did not want to aim at full employment .
In addition to constantly stressing these objectives and performing analyses - the European Parliament is a political body , not a research centre - I feel we should discuss the reason why these high-sounding goals are not being met and which are the political costs which we in Europe do not have the courage to face in order to achieve them , to convert them into practical reforms , the reforms discussed in the reports before us today .
I feel that the European economic structures need to be completely overhauled .

We are continually referring with pride to the European social model and the social market economy , but then we state explicitly in the reports - I think this is the case with Mr García-Margallo 's report - that the fate of the European social model is dependent on US economic recovery : if there is no economic recovery in the United States there will be no economic growth in Europe , and the social model we are so proud of will experience much more difficult times than those we are already experiencing today .
The economic crisis in Germany is an indication of the crisis of an old economic model , the model of an old Europe which has nothing left to invest .
We state repeatedly in the reports that we need more public investment - although we do not say where we are to find the money - and more private investment .
I do not believe that private investment in Europe is low because of interest rates or , therefore , that our only objective should be to pressurize the European Central Bank to give us a more flexible interest rate policy , thereby facilitating private investment .
Private investment will not increase because of lower interest rates : it will increase if and when we have a more flexible economy , with flexibility introduced in large doses .
Reforms to make the economy more flexible carry a political cost , and we are failing to discuss that cost : there is a price to be paid for meddling with the structure of the labour market and going against the powerful lobbies constituted by the monopolies - half of the European Union 's budget is tied up in agricultural subsidies and protection - and there is a political cost for considering using these resources to spark off a new wave of investment in high technology and scientific research .
I will end with a comment on the subject of pensions : the need for rigorous national budgets arises , first and foremost , from the need for national budgets to have the capacity to deal with the problems related to the aging of the population and the costs derived from the structural reform of the pensions systems .
We owe this to the future generations of European citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the Commissioner very much for reminding us all once again of the corner stones - not only because these are uncertain times , but also because this has been a very confusing debate - and for not setting them against each other either , but reminding us that they are principles of European economic policy .
I should like to start where Mr Gasòliba i Böhm left off .
We are not setting new objectives .
We are not making new promises or developing new hypotheses and analyses . What we are doing is finally taking ourselves seriously .
If you do not take yourself seriously , then others will not take you seriously either .
Some of us complain about the common principles of economic policy and at the same time criticise the fact that they are not respected .
We regret the fact that growth , productivity and employment are falling , and that we are not making up ground but are lagging behind , and some of us think that the response to this diagnosis is more state intervention and more debt .
Do the Members on the Left really believe this , even though at the same time we have to acknowledge that we do not even meet all of the objectives that we have set ourselves ?
We talk about the rules , but at the same time we say - at least some of us do - that the rules should not be respected in such and such a case by such and such a country .
At the same time , we regret the crisis of confidence in Europe about many economic policy measures and the principles and objectives of the European Union .
You only create confidence with accountability and you only create accountability if you keep to and act on the things you resolve to do , both at European level and in the Member States .
That is why I say very clearly on behalf of my group that we say ' yes ' to the internal market .
If we say ' yes ' to the internal market however we must finally see to it that the barriers in the internal market are eliminated , that we really do create an action plan for financial services , that we really do implement the Risk Capital Action Plan , that we really do make the Charter for Small Enterprises a reality .
We say ' yes ' to competition policy .
But that also means that we must , at last , eliminate tax provisions that distort competition .
For some types of tax , such as value-added tax , energy tax , corporation tax and the taxation of pension funds , a convergence programme is necessary .
We say ' yes ' to the Lisbon strategy , but if we say ' yes ' to the Lisbon strategy then we also have to say ' yes ' to a model of the market economy that takes account of environmental and social concerns and does not constantly play the market off against social security .
This also means that we finally need to ensure that with each piece of legislation we identify its economic impact and its impact on employment and the environment before we adopt it , rather than waiting until afterwards to be allowed to complain about the consequences .
We say ' yes ' to a benchmark .
We must learn from each other . And we say ' yes ' to the Stability Pact because it provides an ordered framework , and that is why we also say ' no ' to the golden rules , because they undermine the Stability Pact and we would thereby be stabbing the Commission , the guardian of the Treaties , in the back and betraying the Stability and Growth objectives .
Mr President , what has surprised me most in this debate is that nothing shakes the faith of some Members in the rigidity of the criteria for nominal convergence .
Neither the major economic downturn nor the reduction in private investment , nor the steady rise in unemployment and poverty shake their faith in the dogmas of the Stability Pact , whose budgetary and monetary rigidity has not only contributed to worsening the current economic crisis but has also limited the potential for growth in the European Union , with all the consequences this has for the increasingly high levels of inequality , poverty and social exclusion .
This situation is particularly serious , however , for the cohesion countries , such as Portugal , whose specific problems require a dynamic public sector and major public investment in order to attain a high level of real convergence , which is being hampered by the blind application of the Stability Pact 's irrational criteria .
As we all know , globalisation should make monetary and budgetary policies more flexible towards the specific needs of each country and not lead to the rigid approach currently being applied , which ends up imposing flexibility on salaries and the labour market , giving pride of place to monetary policies and attaching far less importance to social policies .
I regret the fact that the Committee on Economic Affairs did not consider the proposal I tabled , urging the Commission and the Council immediately to suspend the Stability Pact and calling for an in-depth revision of the EU 's economic and monetary policy guidelines , particularly in order to take account of issues such as the sustainable economic development of employment and the implementation of all social rights through universal and high-quality public services .
It makes no economic sense to set the same budgetary deficit threshold for countries that have different levels of development , and nor is there any economic justification for sacrificing everything in the name of zero deficit .
It is therefore clear that the fundamental objective of the pact is political , and this is why we are also unhappy about the proposals that have been put forward here , specifically by the Commission .
Mr President , the downturn in the economy has proved to be deeper and longer-lasting than was first thought .
The present situation clearly highlights how important the Lisbon strategy for growth and competition is .
The Union was to have become the world 's most competitive region by 2010 and an engine for growth , as our Member States ' leaders put it so beautifully at Lisbon .
It all seems to have gone differently , however .
In the last three years Europe has become a continent where the sun is setting , one which cannot keep its promises , which is betraying the confidence of its citizens , and which is leaving future generations to inherit only debts and uncovered pension liabilities .
Can we really not do any better than this ?
Only three countries - Denmark , Sweden and Finland - have done what was agreed at Lisbon .
Ireland , Great Britain and the Netherlands have also made considerable progress .
The three biggest economies in the euro area , however , have not done enough up till now .
If we were at school , ladies and gentlemen , Germany , Italy and France would be kept down a year .
I would not use such harsh words normally , but this is a serious business .
What in your opinion , after all , does a press report tell you which says that at present a hundred Germans lose their jobs every hour ?
International business cycles obviously play their part , but this does not alter the fact that our economic structures are so constrained that they are a huge barrier to growth .
Moreover , when we then try to eliminate these structural problems , for example with the directive on port services , a whole crowd of brawlers and egotistic anarchists gather in front of the European Parliament .
At the moment we do not need new targets or new complicated rules .
Now is the time for action .
This means genuine commitment to the Stability and Growth Pact and structural reforms .
If Member States are to be allowed to deviate from the objective of balancing public finances under the Stability and Growth Pact , this will give out quite the wrong signal .
In practice this would lead to rules that are open to interpretation , and would weaken our credibility and our ultimate objectives in coordinating economic policy even further .
Mr President , a fiscal responsibility for Member States is a must , inside or outside the eurozone .
It would be disastrous for us to act recklessly and even worse for countries to consider themselves above an agreement which disciplines us all for the sake of a stable eurozone .
Having said that , I am and have always been in favour of an intelligent and flexible interpretation .
Clearly there is room for improvement . I am sure the Commission recognises this .
The economic cycle calls for more than an annual disapproval .
Monitoring over such a short period of time is incompatible with real-time analysis .
I am sympathetic to Mr Santos ' view that the cyclically adjusted deficit approved over the economic cycle is both sensible and prudent .
Growth and stability are twin pillars .
The Lisbon Summit gave voice to the possibility of a single market which was matched by investment in training and release of capital through the use of the financial services action plan , complemented by the risk capital action plan .
However , we are still falling behind competitively .
There are no high walls to keep the market out .
The EU is increasingly in danger of being left out .
The risk to the Community of not tackling substantial structural reforms is too great to be ignored .
If we delay now , that will worsen , not ameliorate , economic downturns .
Today 's discussions have been entertaining and humorous in many respects .
In particular I thank Mr Olle Schmidt for the view that Sweden will join the euro and hopefully set a very good example for the UK , which will join very shortly afterwards .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon strategy can only succeed if we promote competition between the European systems .
In other words , we are concerned here with competition between economic solutions and , above all , with the best solutions to emerge from competition between the EU governments .
That also ties in with the basic idea of subsidiarity in Europe .
To put it in plain language , there should simply be no further increase in cooperation concerning economic policy , meaning that macro-economic policy ought quite simply not to fall within the competence of the EU .
Socio-political objectives too , such as bringing about full employment , promoting social cohesion or establishing a balanced relationship between competition and public service are contrary to the principles of subsidiarity and competition .
Moreover , we should - in my view , anyway - also take care that such objectives do not find their way into the EU constitution .
What is more , we also need competition in the tax field , that is to say between European tax systems . Nor , above all , should we go on using the open coordination method in the form currently under discussion .
In other words , we need , in the future too , an economic policy for which the Member States themselves continue to be responsible .
In my view , only competition between economic policy objectives will , in the end , also lead to local conditions within the European Union that , against the background of general worldwide competition , may be further strengthened .
Mr President , I would like to thank everybody who has taken part in this debate for the ideas and issues proposed and raised .
I believe we have dealt well with the Union 's two great instruments for coordinating economic policies , the broad guidelines for economic policies and the Stability and Growth Pact , instruments which , although they are linked , must not be confused .
It is the case that , since the Lisbon strategy was drawn up , the broad guidelines for economic policy have essentially been aimed at improving the Union 's growth potential .
It is also the case that we often tend to compare what happens in the European Union with what happens in the United States in a rather simplistic way .
We must not forget that , for example , it is not the same to compare growth in productivity in the United States and the European Union with growth in productivity per hour in the United States and the European Union .
To put it another way , when we compare the United States with Europe , we know that in the United States the population is growing more , there is more active population and more hours are worked .
There are clearly other factors involved in terms of productivity and which affect the labour market .
This apart , however , there are two elements which I do believe to be important .
They are both in our synthesis report .
What has happened between 1999 , when we launched the Lisbon process , and now ?
We have seen that , in terms of employment growth , the Union has grown more rapidly than in the past and we have come closer to the activity rate of the United States .
Nevertheless , our productivity has decreased in comparison with the United States .
This highlights that there are certain elements which are failing in the European Union , which are clearly related to the labour market in a broad sense , but which also relate to the deficiencies in the internal market , to the financial market , to lack of investments and to training and all those elements we have tried to introduce in the priorities , particularly for 2004 , which we presented to the Spring Council , in order to improve our capacity and productivity in the future .
Within this context , is the Stability and Growth Pact an obstacle to recovery in Europe ?
I believe not .
I believe that the Stability and Growth Pact is a guarantee which will allow us , when we are able to improve our growth capacity and there is the possibility of growth , to make use of it in the best possible way .
The Stability and Growth Pact , by means of automatic stabilisers , has provided the Union with clear fiscal impetus .
We must not forget that , in very broad simplistic terms , each point that activity falls implies more or less a half a point increase in public deficit , which is approximately double what usually happens in the United States .
Does a further discretional fiscal policy in the Union make sense ?
We believe that an asymmetric shock clearly raises problems which are not going to be resolved through elements of general taxation policy .
Asymmetric shocks must be resolved through defining monetary policy and only in very exceptional circumstances does discretional fiscal policy make sense in the event of an asymmetric shock .
However , we have introduced the room for manoeuvre into the pact which I referred to earlier , but we have introduced it in connection with that Lisbon growth potential .
I know that , in relation to the elements I have just mentioned with regard to the pact , you may say to me that these instruments count in those countries with budgetary positions below 3 % in terms of deficit . And this is true .
The Commission believes - and I am personally convinced - that the 3 % , in nominal terms , should be the fundamental anchor of our entire system .
We must define a reference which is untouchable for everybody and I believe that that is the reference we have to work on .
But it is not a reference which we have defined and to which we are too stubbornly attached and which cannot be changed .
Let us imagine simply what the budgetary situation would be in those countries which began with relatively low budgetary deficit definitions if we had allowed the growth in public deficit to function , as has happened in the United States for example .
It is the case that , in our system , those countries which exceed the 3 % , at times with less fall in activity , must behave in a somewhat procyclic manner , but that situation is the result of not having fulfilled the obligations to reduce deficits in situations of higher growth .
In summary , I believe the instruments we have will allow us to confront the current situation with a certain degree of coordination .
If I am asked whether we should be satisfied , I must say that we have made progress , but not that we should be entirely satisfied .
You have raised some of the elements of concern to us all .
You have said that it is essential that what is agreed is fulfilled .
I completely agree with this principle and I believe it is one of the essential faults we currently have in our coordination system .
Others have referred to the need to pay more attention to compliance with what is agreed and not to agree new things .
This is why in the broad guidelines for economic policy we are paying much more attention to application reports than to the definition of new broad guidelines , which we propose should be tri-annual .
With regard to the Stability and Growth Pact , however , we have also constantly insisted on the need to achieve greater ownership on the part of the various Member States .
It is essential that the Member States accept and reiterate their commitment to complying with the Stability Pact and that that commitment is not simply formal , but that it is made reality .
Only if we are able to make progress on all these elements will we have a departure point which will allow us to grow rapidly when the economic context changes .
I believe that our fundamental balances are in a relatively comfortable position at the moment .
We are aware that our growth rates are relatively low .
We are aware that we are being very much affected by external factors and that we have not been capable of being more independent from them , but we believe this is an excellent departure point for confronting the problems which may arise in the future and for taking advantage of opportunities for growth in the best possible way at the point when they arise .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
- The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0042 / 2003 ) by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Council common position with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision ( 11212 / 4 / 2002 - C5-0534 / 2002 - 2000 / 0260 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Othmar Karas ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like , at the beginning of my speech on this report , to thank three groups of people : firstly , and especially , the representatives of the Spanish and Danish Presidencies .
The Spanish Presidency made the common position possible , and the Danish Presidency worked hard at seeking dialogue with us .
I am also glad and grateful that , in the last week , the Greek Presidency has set aside its self-imposed ban on engaging in talks .
I should like to thank Commissioner Bolkestein 's political staff and secretariat for their constant readiness to engage in discussions with us and to work with us on reaching compromises .

Finally , I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Kuckelkorn and Mr Huhne , together with my committee colleagues , who were extremely flexible and who conducted themselves in such a way as consistently to help us bring about this directive without our having to jettison the principles we laid down at first reading .
I should like to thank them most sincerely for their contribution .
The second point I should like to make is that this directive has also clearly shown the problems we have where legislative procedure is concerned .
In October 2000 , we received the Commission proposal ; and Parliament concluded the first reading in July 2001 ; but it was not until 5 November 2002 that the common position was made known to us .
Today we have the second reading debate , and tomorrow the vote .
As this needs to be recalled to mind , I would take this opportunity to state very clearly that we wanted to show our ability to conclude such an important directive at first reading .
Parliament 's first reading produced 458 votes in favour .
If the Council had accepted this gesture of cooperation on our part , we should already have had this directive long ago .
My third point , which I make partly in response to a number of today 's press reports , is that this directive is neither a pensions directive nor a directive concerned with social insurance products .
Nor does it just have to do with occupational retirement provision .
As its name suggests , it is a directive on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision .
That needs to be stated , because we are concerned here with a financial services directive . That being said , many wishes have of course been expressed to me in terms of defining the benefits , designing the products , and so on .
When they hear the words ' occupational retirement provision ' , people ask what the benefits are for themselves at a time of prevailing uncertainty in all the Member States where pensions are concerned .
In view of the fact that the financial services and internal market directives , together with the relevant institutions , play a key role in the funding of the European economy and the operation of capital markets , we have tried , in this highly charged situation , to follow the path laid down in Lisbon and to bring about not only competition but also a corresponding degree of social security .
We also had the task of structuring occupational pension schemes as the second pillar of retirement provision and of dealing with the social aspects of this .
This directive is a success for the European Parliament .
We amended the Commission proposal at first reading .
At second reading , we shall amend the common position along lines that reflect our own thinking .
This directive is not the end product .
It is a first step .
I believe that the directive will be of benefit to people because there will be more suppliers in competition with one another ; that , with the creation of the European market , it will have more advantages for people on the move ; that it will have more advantages for citizens and suppliers because the second pillar too will now be regulated on a European basis ; and that it will benefit the capital market by moving sums to the tune of EUR 2 000 billion around the market and hopefully increasing that capital .
The directive will be of benefit to the internal market due to the provision of venture capital , and it will be of benefit to the institutions because European regulations will exist , so making cross-border activities easier .
We have made amendments to six items as a matter of priority .
The amount of information to be given to recipients of pensions has been increased .
The biometric risks have been clearly formulated , and it has been made possible to cover these .
It has been clearly specified that our objective is life-long pensions , which must be at the heart of our arrangements .
The directive will lead to coordination of the work of the supervisory authorities , and it has laid the foundations for a level playing field .
It has still not liberalised the assessment stipulations .
Given the Council 's position , that was not possible .
Nor has the directive clarified the issue of tax harmonisation , and it has still not fulfilled our desire to see the second pillar structured in the same way throughout Europe , so providing for greater social security .
The directive is an important step in the right direction , however .
I believe we have maintained the balance within the framework of our competences and the existing options .
I should like most sincerely to thank all those who have contributed to the work .
Mr President , I would like to pay tribute to our rapporteur , Mr Karas , who has shown superb judgement in reaching a broadly acceptable balance in this complex but vitally important directive .
Our group was very concerned at any possibility of the directive failing for lack of consensus in Parliament or between Parliament and the Council .
But the rapporteur has very successfully squared this very difficult circle .
We in the PPE-DE Group are very pleased to support the compromise which the rapporteur and the Commissioner have engineered .
I should , however , flag up some residual concerns which we still have .
For example , compromise Amendments 4 and 12 give Member States the right to provide an option for coverage of biometric risks .
Certainly this is only an option , but we are concerned that differences between Member States might in any way impede cross-border occupational pension funds and the ability to transfer employees together with their pension funds around the European Union .
I would appreciate the Commissioner 's reassurance as to his understanding of the impact - or hopefully non-impact - of this option .
The other concern regards the requirement for a register which also has to show in which Member States the institution concerned is operating .
The rapporteur has assured me that , under the agreed amendment , no such register would be required if instead the institutions were ' authorised ' .
Again I would appreciate the Commissioner 's specific assurance that this is also his understanding .
This would certainly be welcome to the financial services industry with a view to eliminating unnecessary red tape .
Apart from these two matters , we are very pleased with the outcome which provides ample flexibility in , for example , how pension benefits are paid out .
The lump sum payment will continue to be permitted .
We are taking a major step forward in providing a Europe-wide single market in financial services .
Mr Karas and Commissioner Bolkestein are to be congratulated for this achievement .
Tomorrow we must ensure a resounding vote of support for this directive .
Mr President , since everyone has been so polite in thanking one another , I should also like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Karas , who has certainly made efforts in the first , and now also in the second , reading to reach a compromise in the committee and in plenary .
I would also back this compromise that has been reached if , under the leadership either of the rapporteur or of a delegation from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , it were to be introduced into plenary immediately following negotiations with the Commission .
In those circumstances , I would support it .
A submitted compromise , or a wording presented by the Commission , has a history to it , however , and such compromises or wordings seem to me to be matters of dispute within the ECOFIN Council where , according to what I have been told , one or other of the Member States was , in the end , quite prepared to use another veto .
From the time of the Green Paper up until now when the second reading is imminent , the directive has had several names . The name of the directive really does not matter now , however .
What matters , rather , is the content . Allow me therefore again to extract a couple of items from one of the Commission 's or , as the case may be , Commissioner Bolkestein 's proposals , for example from the proposal , as they put it , in expectation of reaching retirement age , which legitimises also those payments made before arrival at retirement age .
What this has to do with pension payments , you will first need to explain to me again .
When it comes to the biometric risks , there is clearly no European solution , particularly not in terms of guaranteeing the amounts paid in .
That means that the entire capital market risk has been transferred to the policyholders , which is to say to the employees , and that is something I am unable to accept .
There is no justification for saying , as has already been implied once here in Parliament , ' Give me your money ; trust me ; I shall invest it and , if it disappears , that is your bad luck ' .
I am particularly perturbed by the fact that , in the compromise proposal , the Commission has removed the policyholders ' obligation , upon request , to provide information about their current pension rights .
I do not think that what we have here is a good compromise , and I should have liked us to have had the opportunity of a conciliation procedure with a view to arriving in the end at a sensible European regulation .
Mr President , I too should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Karas , and the Commissioner and his staff for what I believe is a very good compromise reached between the European Parliament , the Council of Ministers and the Commission , which will allow millions of Europeans to accumulate better pension rights wherever they work in the Union .
This is an essential plank of the Financial Services Action Plan .
It will cut the administrative costs of many multinational companies ' pension funds , allowing people to have better pensions when they retire .
It will help millions of European old people to retire in the sun .
At present , European citizens are effectively being denied their right to free movement during their working lives and during retirement because of the patchwork of national pension systems .
These impose unacceptable barriers when people seek to change jobs or residence .
This is a big step forward in dealing with them .
We look forward to more progress , particularly on some of the tax issues .
Companies also suffer from a less mobile workforce and the additional bureaucracy , administration and costs involved in managing multiple pensions systems .
Firms with a presence in all fifteen Member States face an estimated EUR 40 million a year in extra costs through having to deal with fifteen different pension providers and legal arrangements .
This agreement also provides more choice of pension funds because it opens up the European market in investment management and pension administration .
In future , we can have a genuine pension savings market of 377 million people , expanding after enlargement to 450 million people .
This is a vast potential market .
Funded occupational retirement schemes in the EU cover 25 % of the EU workforce and are currently valued at more than EUR 2 500 billion .
They are expected to grow to more than EUR 7 000 billion by 2010 .
This is a key plank in the opening up of the financial services market .
It is also a market-opening measure without using sledgehammers to crack nuts .
It gives a passport to pension funds to operate throughout the EU without trying to harmonise everything .
Member States are responsible for determining the social requirements - such as death in service benefits - for their own pension funds and the tax reliefs that they give , consistent with subsidiarity .
For example , I am pleased that lump sums are specifically allowed .
In addition , the directive means that pension funds can now invest , taking into account their own beneficiaries ' requirements rather than arbitrary rules set down by governments for the purchase of their own bonds and so forth .
This insistence on the so-called ' prudent person rule ' - the rule that investments are decided prudently - will open up the fund management market .
Overall this is an excellent measure .
I commend it to the House .
First of all I should like to thank Mr Karas for his report .
It has been no easy task to reach a compromise on such a complex issue as the supervision of occupational retirement provision .
I can support the compromise reached in principle , although it is a weaker proposal than I would like to have seen .
I have submitted three amendments on behalf of the EDD Group , but also at the request of a number of fellow Members from other groups .
I would like greater clarity from Commissioner Bolkestein on this .
Is the European Commission prepared to promise that it will take account of the matters referred to in the amendments in the implementation phase of the directive ?
What promises can you make with regard to the subject of the annual reports and associated administrative burdens , as stated in the amendment to Articles 10 and 11 ?
A second question concerns the amendment to Article 18 , Paragraph 2 .
Are you prepared to review the absolute prohibition of loans and to give Member States the option of prohibiting them if so desired ?
In Recital 8 there is after all clear reference to the principle of subsidiarity .
This recital is not in my view consistent with the prohibition provision in Article 18 .
If I receive a satisfactory answer to my questions , I will be prepared to reconsider my amendment .
Finally , let me comment on the Dutch translation of the revised Amendment No 32 , in which the words ' or has a licence ' have been omitted in error .
The English text contains the words ' or authorised ' and I think that this is what must appear in the Dutch text too .
Mr President , I would like to join in thanking the rapporteur , Mr Karas , which I think is only fair .
I have been a privileged witness of the ferocity of the bulls he has had to fight : the Council - which is very divided - the Commission , the other groups in this House and in particular my own group , which has given him more headaches than all the other groups together .
Secondly , I would like to stress the generosity of the European Parliament .
It is true that we have managed to have many of the amendments we presented at first reading accepted , but it is also the case that we have sacrificed legitimate , well-founded and well-argued aspirations in order to achieve a text which can be accepted by the Council .
We have sacrificed these positions , however , because we have always been aware that this directive was essential , at least for three reasons .
Firstly , to make the freedoms enshrined in the Treaty more effective and more real , particularly the mobility of workers .
Secondly , in order to supplement the public social security systems at a time - as has been said - when the challenge we must face in the coming years is a demographic one , the ageing of the population and the sustainability of public finances .
These professional systems of a supplementary nature - I would insist on this aspect - will serve to maintain the future incomes of workers .
This is a social approach which my group applauds .
And , thirdly , because it will help to increase European saving , to increase the depth of the European financial market , which is the global objective of the financial services action plan .
That saving will allow us to fund - and this ties in with what I said in the previous report - the investments we need in order to grow , in order to increase our employment and our productivity .
Mr Karas has highlighted many of the amendments which have enriched the original text of the Commission and the Council .
I would like to stress the increase in transparency due to the information obligations required of the providers of these services , of the people who provide and guarantee these pensions , both with regard to the authorities and the participants .
Secondly , and contrary to what somebody said from the benches of the left , because it incorporates social orientations which are very dear to those of us who advocate a social market economy .
And thirdly because it increases the coordination of the supervision authorities and promotes the possibility of cross-border activities .
I would like to end , Commissioner , by stressing some of the deficiencies pointed out by the rapporteur .
It will be necessary to make progress on tax harmonisation - I pointed this out in the previous report - if we want these cross-border activities to genuinely be expanded and freedom of choice to be real .
Mr President , the vast majority of the Group of the Party of European Socialists will vote for the package of amendments negotiated with the Council and the Commission by Mr Karas .
I would like to thank Mr Karas for all his work .
The result of the second reading will probably be acceptable overall .
We are going to create a European passport for pension funds .
We are dealing with a financial instrument but one that has social objectives . Some improvements are therefore necessary in relation to the Council 's positions .
We need to guarantee European citizens decent pensions .
Pension funds will have a role to play in this respect , especially if there is also biometric coverage for contributions , or protection against the hazards of life .
To present pension funds as a panacea however would be a deliberate lie .
The press is today referring to a message from the European Financial Services Round Table to the Ecofin Council . It presents pension funds as a miracle solution to the problems of financing pensions in Europe in future .
According to this association of large employers , it will no longer be possible to finance the first pillar of the pensions system , which involves redistribution , as there is an increasing number of recipients and a decreasing number of contributors .
Pension funds that are based on the accumulation of capital , however , will experience exactly the same demographic problems once they reach maturity .
In fact , pensions paid in any given year always involve transferring funds from working people to retired people , whether by redistribution or the accumulation of capital .
Since the bursting of the speculative bubble , most pension funds have shown negative yields .
In the United States , pension funds provided by large companies are having to face up to a deficit of more than USD 300 billion .
In Great Britain , the company pension funds deficit was estimated at between GBP 65 and 130 billion at the end of 2002 . There are also significant deficits in Sweden , the Netherlands , Belgium and elsewhere .
Even the modest pension funds for Members of the European Parliament have just amended contributions by three points .
This type of exercise would also save all redistribution funds . Due to negative financial yields , companies with pension funds no longer have a guaranteed benefit system but a guaranteed contribution system .
In a guaranteed benefit system , contributors save money which they will receive in their retirement . In a guaranteed contribution system , people know how much they are contributing , but receive no guarantee of the result of fund managers ' investment policy .
It also goes without saying that fund managers always take their cut of the funds , however the fund is doing .
This explains why the financial sector welcomes the directive so warmly .
Once again , the Group of the Party of European Socialists are not opposing the second and third pillar pension funds . We do , however , think that we need to act very prudently and that very strict prudential requirements are necessary .
Mr President , pensions based on the accumulation of capital should not undermine national pension systems based on solidarity across the generations .
Mr President , it is true that first-pillar pension funds are more sensitive to demographic change and that second-pillar pension funds are more sensitive to changes in the conditions prevailing on the stock market and in the financial markets .
That is of course clear , and so it is also right that we have two pension systems alongside one another , counterbalanced by the third-pillar system .
Meeting our requirements as it does , though , this directive is extremely important .
I am also very pleased with this compromise .
In particular if you work cross-border - and more and more companies are no longer national companies , but have actually become European companies - there is an absolute need for this matter to be dealt with ; you can actually describe this as a sort of constitution for occupational retirement provision in Europe .
It is quite clear that not everything is regulated .
Some speakers have been addressing just one point , that we should do nothing social at all any more and that Member States should actually submit to the system that applies in the country that does least .
Fortunately , that is not the case in this compromise , or , for that matter , in the proposals beforehand , which is why I think that the compromise on biometric risks is very fortunate .
In my country it has up to now been customary to insure biometric risks .
If someone from Great Britain suddenly appears on the market and does not insure any biometric risks and makes no mention of that and only talks of pots of gold , as appears to happen in the United Kingdom , then it could be that people quite mistakenly make inadequate retirement provision .
It must be possible to prevent things of this kind and so that is why the compromise is exceptionally good .
With regard to the provision of information , there has been criticism of the fact that we have gained less than we originally sought .
That is certainly true .
It is perhaps a pity , but I believe that it is nonetheless a very significant advance that we are bringing about in this area certain common European standards rather than standards that are intrinsically American .
Finally , Mr President , the tax issue .
This we have of course left aside , as is , I think , far and away the best thing to do in political terms .
I believe that with its announcement the Commission has acted correctly , that is by examining the extent to which the present taxes are not discriminatory .
We have recently had the Danner ruling .
That is one of those rulings that lead to Member States thinking twice before taking discriminatory tax measures against pension funds that happen not to be established in their own country .
While we still have a long way to go , I think that all in all we have certainly made a start .
If we were to reject this compromise , then we will not even have a start and then I believe we will not be doing any good as regards the social objectives that are there as well .
The course of events surrounding this matter for codecision does not , in my view , deserve any beauty prize , but I can nevertheless agree with the compromise that has been achieved at the last moment and to which the Council has already given its approval .
It shows that the Council and the Commission were in any event prepared to take Parliament seriously as a co-legislator .
As far as the content is concerned , I am no great enthusiast either , but with the compromise proposals we are in any event certainly giving a sharper outline to the definition of the funds that fall under this directive and that are now acquiring a European passport to invest and to offer their services across borders .
In a European context , however , a far more profound discussion is needed about the content and the quality of second-pillar pension schemes .
At the end of next week , at the European spring summit , a good start can be made on this not only by sharing information informally , but also by agreeing to reach a consensus on content and convergence of policy .
If you want to propagate the second-pillar , fully-funded pensions , you also have to lead the discussion about the structure and the quality of these schemes .
In the Netherlands roughly half of the income of pensioners is provided by fully-funded second-pillar schemes agreed by social partners - in the future even more of it will be .
You cannot simply deal with them as if they were financial market products , which invest in the capital market and which have to find their way in the internal market as commercial services .
No , the second pillar in the Netherlands expressly belongs with the first pillar , with the social security schemes and must not be lumped together with the individual third-pillar products for those who can afford them .
That is a subject for social policy .
That was also always on the agenda in the discussion and that should also therefore be developed further by way of the spring summit and those discussions about open coordination .
I do however think that there is also more to do on the subject of internal market policy , because I do not agree with what a number of speakers have said , that is that this directive does not do so much to improve the mobility of employees and the opportunity to take pensions with you in the context of the free movement of employees .
On this point far more must happen , not only fiscally , but also where the portability of pensions is concerned .
Here too I would like to see a rather more ambitious approach from the Commission that finds its conclusion in legislation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to start with , I wish to thank all the parties concerned for their excellent levels of cooperation in achieving what is a constructive solution .
Commissioner Bolkestein and those officials reporting to him , as well as the rapporteur , Mr Othmar Karas , have done a magnificent job in particular .
In addition , I would like to say to my friend , Othmar , that the Republic of Austria has reportedly overcome the difficult challenges of its history through a remarkable ability to establish consensus and find solutions to benefit all parties .
I think with the work he has done with regard to this directive Othmar has shown he has the important qualities needed by someone who is influential in society .
Ensuring the existence of retirement provision will be one of the main political challenges of the EU Member States in the years to come .
To address this challenge , however , we have a difficult message for the people of Europe .
We must work for a longer period of time but at the same time the pension we receive from statutory occupational retirement schemes will be smaller than before .
It will certainly sound like a kamikaze mission to any politician but it is nonetheless inevitable .
The status quo is not an option .
Although the Member States have the main responsibility for retirement provision we at Union level can implement measures to help promote retirement schemes by creating a sustainable basis for financing them .
This directive on the activities of institutions for occupational retirement provision will create a legislative framework for Europe-wide action and will be one of the measures needed to defuse the pensions bomb .
The directive will encourage the development of retirement schemes that are financially durable , provide companies with the capital they need through investment , and meet the needs of individuals that vary from one to another more effectively than statutory systems do .
This will be especially true on the day we make headway with decisions on taxation .
The directive will , on the one hand , promote the development of European financial markets and , on the other , benefit employees , who will profit from a more efficient and more transparent investment policy regarding their pensions .
It took 15 years to establish common EU laws .
The EU citizen has long been able to benefit from local social and health services in another Member State .
Furthermore , there has been common legislation in existence now for years applying to institutions providing personal pension insurance .
The differing views among Member States on this subject , however - something we are discussing today - held up for too long this directive , which hopefully we will adopt in tomorrow 's plenary debate .
The directive now leaves the social partners in the Member States with a free hand to choose how to organise comprehensive voluntary retirement provision .
This is a reasonable European compromise considering the differences that exist among pension systems in the Member States .
Our negotiations were at times both very intensive and intense , but I believe that we will be satisfied with the end result .
The most important thing was that we avoided possibly having to resort to the conciliation procedure .
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur , the Commission and the presidency on producing a package of compromises .
It has been an issue of compromise all the way through .
I understand all the hard work that has been put into it , but let us say straight away that many people have been involved , inside and outside this Chamber , perhaps more than we know .
However , the people who have not been involved - as is so often the case - are the people most likely to benefit or suffer from our decisions .
Compromise was very necessary .
This is not a directive aimed at replacing the first pillar social security-type pension provision .
In the UK , for example , people aged 16 have recently been outnumbered by people aged 60 .
Throughout the European Union this must leave no doubt in anybody 's mind that we have an ageing society , one that will gradually cost more and must be adequately provided for so as to avoid future pensioner poverty , a very real risk .
The problem is that many people , even today , do not feel obliged or encouraged to save for their retirement .
Many companies are hamstrung by administrative and legal costs prohibiting the promotion of such funds across the European Union .
That is a statement of fact .
Even though this directive delivers a balanced view , taking into account the various factors affecting Member States , it is clear that the cross-border approach to supplementary pensions needs more in the way of liberalising articles .
I hope that we will come back to this discussion at a later date .
Some companies in my country which believe that they can pull out of defined benefit schemes have even looked to this particular directive as an excuse , but Brussels gives no such excuse to those companies .
Lump sum payments have been dealt with in a way that pensioners in many countries will feel is a reflection of what already occurs .
That is an important minimum .
It is clear that the changes we have introduced on transparency and registration are improvements that everyone in this House can live with .
Mr President , Mr Karas deserves our admiration .
My Spanish colleague Mr García-Margallo y Marfil talked in terms of Mr Karas 's winning a bullfight , and that makes me angry with him , as I do not like bullfights .
Moreover , he was the first and only MEP to talk about the greying of the population .
If he had told me that I am an old lady - perhaps on the model of the one whose visit proves so dangerous in Dürrenmatt 's famous play - I would not have minded one bit . What I am not at all keen on is being called grey .
What do old people want ?
Security , independence and autonomy .
It is just that all this is very difficult to achieve in the framework of occupational retirement provision that is only offered on a time-limited basis .
Even a one-off payment - however generous it might be - does not provide security .
Lifelong payments do most justice to the wishes and also to the needs of old people , corresponding to what we understand to mean by social security .
It is to Mr Karas 's credit that he has clarified this very important idea and embedded it in the report , and I should like to thank him for his efforts .
Throughout Europe , we are in the process of discussing and solving the problems of a society in which people at long last ought to be living longer .
With a whole package of measures for older employees , the freshly elected Austrian Federal Government has devised a range of options for giving older people the opportunity of being able to work longer . I say ' of being able to ' , please note .
A reduction in incidental labour costs for those aged over 58 , a push for higher qualifications and the promotion of part-time work for older people are just a few of these measures .
Mrs Lulling will certainly agree with me when I say that this society and this Parliament need us .
Anyone who , like myself , has six grandchildren can no longer just relinquish this society of ours to other people . We ourselves have to take care of it .
We oldies are not of course in the end fighting for ourselves , since we obviously already have an income . Rather , we are fighting for the young men and women whom we wish to see have much longer lives .
A child born today may live until the age of a hundred , and we wish him or her an extremely long and , as far as possible , secure life .
Mr President , politics makes a qualitative difference when it is able to counter negative trends and uncertainties with positive measures , and surely no such difference is being made through the way in which the second pillar of the pension system is being structured , even when , as here , we are concerned with a financial services directive .
In spite of his best efforts , the rapporteur has not succeeded in improving the common position , which really does not add anything in terms of quality .
Devising a framework within which products are offered that , from today 's point of view , may seriously impair living standards in old age has nothing to do with a sense of political responsibility .
What is really needed here are regulations to reduce people 's uncertainties at precisely the present time .
In recent years , British pension funds alone have lost 35 million pounds , and rather more still in the years before that , so they too have not exactly excelled . Nor have matters gone significantly better for the other Member States .
At a period such as this , people ought not , where the issue of pensions is concerned , to be led to expect quality when it is not present .
Quality regulation of the European market is certainly not brought about by a minimal duty to provide information , together with what is no more than discretionary wording enabling the Member States to define quality for a restricted market with reference to biometric risks .
If - as you yourself always do , Commissioner - we want to see such quality or an increase in quality , then we can , at this stage , really make no better start than by agreeing to the proposal by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left to reject the common position .
That alone would signify ' back to square one ' and , for us , new opportunities of obtaining an improved directive .
Mr President , I welcome the fact that , following years of tough negotiations between the Commission , the Council and Parliament - and thanks to our rapporteur , who has been indefatigable in his search for compromises - approval of this pensions directive is now within reach .
The Council has given an assurance that it is able to agree to the package before us .
That is crucial , because only in that way can a lengthy conciliation procedure be avoided which , for everyone concerned - employees , employers and financial service providers - might have the kind of damaging effect that this long overdue European regulation might have again postponed .
I could have lived with the common position because the directive concerned is of course designed primarily to regulate , without barriers to competition , the cross-border activities of pension fund providers , and not the product itself .
It was essential to devise a directive that , on the one hand , did not , from the outset , force these financial service providers into a suffocating straightjacket of regulations , for example governing investment policy ; and that , on the other hand , organised supervision in such a way that the benefits paid to policyholders were secured in the best way possible .
I believe we have to some degree succeeded in doing this .
It is not our task here to prescribe what kind of supplementary pensions are to be provided and for what sums .
Naturally , the directive can be made to reflect a pious desire for the arrangements concerning occupational retirement provision also to cover the famous biometric risks such as disablement , widow 's and orphan 's pensions etc .
It should , however , be left to companies and their employees to determine what they wish to cover that is not already covered by the public social security system - in other words , the first pillar - in the full knowledge that higher and diversified benefit entitlements naturally have their price .
Naturally , it should also be possible - as , by the way , it is in the case of MEPs ' pension fund - for capital to be paid out as a lump sum at retirement age , without its being prescribed what , specifically , the capital is to be used for .
If , when I am old , I want to use the money concerned to fulfil a life-long dream , such as going on a long journey around the world , I should be able to use the money for that purpose .
I must of course be certain that I do not then have to become a burden on the state .
I am sorry that we were unable to bring to fruition a concern , to which I and other MEPs had committed ourselves , that financial institutions in addition to pension funds and insurance companies should be able to offer their services in the field of occupational pensions insurance .
That would have led to a level playing field and so to greater competition .
The package does , however , oblige the EU Commission to examine how matters stand in the market for occupational retirement provision in order to make it possible for other financial services providers too to come within the scope of this directive .
That being said , this directive has done nothing to bring about a common market in supplementary pensions .
We definitely need a regulation to prevent the double taxation of premiums and benefits , and I hope that we shall have the considerable judgment required in order to devise a sensible regulation quickly .
Mr President , I hope it is not a disappointment to Mrs Lulling that the Commission has the last word .
I welcome the fact that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Parliament agree on the compromise text , which may not satisfy everyone .
At least it is an agreed text .
That is what we need on this most important subject .
Parliament is entitled to hear what the Commission thinks about the various amendments , but before doing that I should like to say something to three Members who have spoken .
First , the issue of taxation referred to by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , Mr Pronk and Mrs Lulling .
The follow-up to the pension taxation communication of April 2001 has developed along two tracks .
There has been a discussion process in the Council concerning the Commission 's suggestions to improve the exchange of information on cross-border pensions and to deal with double taxation and double non-taxation .
The process did not , I am sorry to say , lead to tangible results .
A number of Member States could only accept any sort of agreement if the issue of residence taxation of pension payouts versus source taxation was also tackled .
On that issue Member States remained deeply split .
Secondly , the Commission has been examining whether or not the national taxation rules on the deductibility of pension contributions are compatible with EU law .
Here the Commission kept its promises to take action .
Last month the Commission sent a reasoned opinion to Denmark and five letters of formal notice to Belgium , Spain , France , Italy and Portugal .
In all those Member States pension contributions paid to foreign funds are not tax-deductible , while contributions paid to domestic funds are .
That is a clear case of discrimination .
The Commission is convinced that Community law prohibits such a difference in treatment .
I can assure Parliament that these infringement cases are a priority for the Commission , which will do whatever is necessary to open up the markets effectively for cross-border pension provisions .
To Mr Blokland I say that , according to my information , the amendments which he has put forward have not been accepted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and therefore do not - it seems to me - form part of the discussion tonight .
Therefore the Commission has no opinion on them .

To Mr Purvis I say that this directive is based on two principles : first , the principle of compliance with prudential requirements of the home Member States and second , compliance with the social and labour legislation of the host Member States , i.e. where the company is established .
That includes provisions on biometric risks , but that should not be an obstacle to cross-border activity .
Once again , the compromise arrived at means that there will be no conciliation .
That is a good thing .
One never knows where conciliation might lead .
Personally , I have very vivid memories of conciliation from the takeover directive and am very anxious not to repeat that experience .
Let me turn to the amendments submitted to the vote .
I am please to say that the Commission can accept Amendments 1 , 5 , 13 , 15 , 22 and the package of amendments 25 to 37 .
The commission cannot accept the other amendments , which for the most part aim at widening the scope of the directive .
The directive does not intend to interfere in the way Member States organise their pension systems .
It considers that the directive should not regulate in a restrictive way the products offered by pension funds .
Nor should it define the precise arrangements for the payment of benefits .
The directive must also respect the diversity of occupational pension systems while setting some strict standards to ensure their mutual recognition , but without imposing unnecessary costs for pension funds .
That is why the Commission rejects Amendments 3 , 4 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 16 and 18 .
The directive should not experiment by allowing for the possibility of extending the scope of this directive to institutions that today do not offer occupational pension products .
Institutions that already benefit from a single market framework should not be covered by this directive , with the exception of life insurance companies , for which Member States must retain the option to apply this directive for activities linked to pension provisions .
That is why the Commission cannot accept , regrettably , Amendments 2 , 6 , 8 , 10 and 17 .
The directive must make full reference to an effective system to ensure efficient exchange of information between competent authorities and promote consistent enforcement of the directive , but that must be done without prejudice to possible future structures .
That is why the Commission cannot accept Amendments 7 , 19 , 20 , 21 and 23 .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment 24 tabled by the Group of the Greens and the European Free Alliance since it considers that pension funds , as very long-term investors with low liquidity risks , should not be overly restricted in their investment in non-liquid assets such as shares .
The Commission cannot accept the motion for rejection of the common position , since it considers the common position to be a finely balanced compromise and recommends its adoption to the European Parliament .
Today , in the Hague , delegates from the 89 co-signatory states of the International Criminal Court Treaty - the member nations of the ICC - will gather for a ceremony presided over by the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Kofi Annan , and Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands .
The court 's 18 judges will be sworn in and the court will be inaugurated today .
It is expected that prime ministers , presidents , and foreign affairs and justice ministers of the member states will attend .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I should like to say in the clearest way that we , in this Parliament , have promoted and defended human rights .
In so doing we have strongly supported the establishment of the International Criminal Court as a vital step forward at global level .
We can be proud , as Members of the European Parliament , that the court will take shape today .
In my opinion , for those who have offended the international human rights order , a body such as the International Criminal Court is better than a Guantanamo Bay .
The House will recall that we have already adopted resolutions in this regard on a number of occasions , including as recently as last October .
- ( DA ) The June Movement abstained from voting in the vote on Amendment No 8 , tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , to item 12 concerning the place to be given to European political parties in the budget .
That is because we are fundamentally opposed to the financing of European parties by the EU .
We do not therefore wish to get involved in the technical elaboration of such a system .
Iraq
The next item is the Council and the Commission statement on Iraq .
( A number of Members raise banners with peace slogans )
Would the Members be so kind as to remove the banners and sit down so that we can listen to the Council 's statement .
The honourable Members are well aware of the Rules of Procedure .
Please sit down and remove the banners .
( The Members complied with the President 's instructions )
The President-in-Office of the Council , the Greek Minister for Foreign Affairs Mr Papandreou , has the floor .
May I point out in response to the peace demonstration , Mr President , that following decisions taken by the summit Council and the Council of Foreign Ministers on 27 January , the Greek Presidency has instructions to exhaust every means of finding a peaceful and diplomatic solution to the Iraqi problem .
Iraq is a matter of concern to us on a number of counts .
I should first like to bring you up to date on the question of Iraq itself and how things stand , although this does of course impinge on numerous other issues .
Iraq is testing relations and institutions and setting all of us a tough challenge .
First of all , the unity of the European Union of the Fifteen is being tested , as is the unity of the European Union of the twenty-five and the twenty-eight .
Relations between the United States and the European Union , trans-Atlantic relations are being tested .
Relations between the European Union and the Arab and Muslim world are being tested .
The countries in the Gulf , which surely have their own specific concerns about how things are developing , are also being tested .
The concept of multilateral diplomacy and , more importantly , the relevance , future and modus operandi of the UN are being tested .
At the same time , new challenges are testing us , such as weapons of mass destruction and international terrorism .
Our approach , how we plan to step up our fight against these new threats , is also being tested .
This is where Europe has a voice .
This is a Union that believes in common values and our approach to current problems is based on these common values .
I should like at this juncture to point out that the European Union , as far as its unity is concerned - and , as the presidency , we have made particular efforts in this direction - has taken two important decisions .
You know what they are .
I should simply like to point out that , at the summit Council on 17 February , we achieved a common stand and made an important joint declaration , in which we stress that the Union 's objective is the full disarmament of Iraq and full compliance with Security Council Resolution 1441 .
We considered that war was not inevitable and I should like to stress that we still feel the same .
It is for Baghdad to end this crisis by complying with the demands of the Security Council .
The Fifteen fully support the ongoing work of the inspectors and wish to give them the time and resources that the Security Council believes they need .
However , inspections cannot continue indefinitely .
Primary responsibility for dealing with Iraqi disarmament lies with the Security Council .
Naturally , we - the Union - have our views , but it is at the UN that the decisions are taken .
The unity and firmness of the international community , as expressed in the unanimous adoption of Resolution 1441 , and the military build-up in the Gulf have been essential in obtaining the return of the inspectors .
Finally , in the wider context of the Union 's policy to secure peace , security and cooperation in the Middle East , we stressed that our top priority was to invigorate the peace process in the Middle East and promote , publicise and implement the roadmap .
I should like to point out here that recent developments in Iraq are giving us grave cause for concern .
We have listened carefully to Hans Blix and I can assure you that the Greek Presidency is making an effort to attend all UN procedures and meet all sides in the Iraqi debate .
We are in constant touch with Kofi Annan , Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei and , of course , with most , if not all of the members of the Security Council .
We recently had the opportunity to listen to Hans Blix ; according to the detailed Unmovic report , Iraq has now started to cooperate .
I refer to the start made on destroying the Al-Samoud missiles and private , untaped interviews with Iraqi scientists .
However , the international community is still waiting for Iraq to comply fully with its disarmament obligations , as set out in the relevant Security Council resolutions , especially Resolution 1441 .
We therefore call again on the Iraqi regime to comply immediately with these resolutions .
As far as the challenges facing us are concerned , I should like to highlight the initiatives being taken by the Greek Presidency , in collaboration with the Council secretariat , Mr Solana , the Commission and Mr Patten , and the vital importance we attach to them .
First of all , our relations with the Arab world .
We have taken important initiatives here .
We have visited the Arab world repeatedly over recent weeks .
Mr Patten has been to various countries in the region - Iran , Jordan , Turkey .
The presidency has done likewise .
I personally have recently visited the region four times .
I attended the council of foreign ministers of the Arab League and was invited to Sharm el-Sheik by the summit council of the Arab League to talk on behalf of the European Union .
A number of my colleagues in the Council , such as the Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs , to mention just two , have also visited the region on the presidency 's behalf .
Our objective is to collaborate with the Arab world ; first , in sending a strong message to Iraq that there is hope for a peaceful solution if they comply fully and , secondly , in order to stress that this crisis is not a political clash or a religious clash .
On the contrary , it is a crisis in which we are working with the Arab and Muslim world and this is well appreciated by the Arab world .
Our third objective was to galvanise the Arab world into action , which I think we have succeeded in doing .
An Arab League delegation is due to visit the region with a clear message for Saddam Hussein within the next few days .
A second important area concerns relations between the United States and the European Union .
I think it would be a mistake not to recognise that relations have been particularly strained recently , especially over the question of Iraq .
There may previously have been other reasons , such as Kyoto , the International Criminal Court and so on , but the question of Iraq has put relations under a great deal of strain .
I am sure that we all want to maintain a working relationship based on long-standing , joint efforts to achieve security and , of course , on the common values expressed by Europe and the United States ; the principles of freedom , democracy and peace .
What we want to highlight , therefore , is the need for a substantive dialogue on the future of security at international level and how we intend to combat these problems .
We have already met both Mr Powell and Mrs Rice and other political figures on the American political scene in a bid to ensure that there is a substantive debate between the European Union and President Bush on these issues at the summit Council in June .
Naturally we are in constant contact with the United States as regards our position on the Iraqi question .
As far as the countries in the region are concerned , we are working closely with Turkey , which has taken the initiative of starting a debate on the problems which the Iraqi crisis may throw up , and is working with neighbouring countries to avert the war and get Saddam Hussein to comply .
This close collaboration is ongoing .
Turkey is a candidate country and we are naturally worried about the possible repercussions of developments in the region , such as the Kurdish question , the question of refugees and economic and political repercussions in general .
So we are also working with them .
As far as multilateral diplomacy is concerned , I think , as I have said , that we have fully supported UN efforts .
The European Union and the Fifteen - or even the Twenty-Eight - have stressed the importance of the role of the UN and I think this will prove to be a key factor in any further decisions we take as an international community .
As the presidency , we too have therefore tried to support every initiative which has originated in the Security Council .
Numerous proposals have been tabled , by Canada , by Mexico , by Spain , Britain and America and by France and Germany .
What we are trying to do , of course , because we have a large number of members in the Security Council , is everything we can to foster a joint approach to the problem .
As I said , the Iraqi crisis is throwing up new issues or is perhaps highlighting the problems of the times we live in : how to deal with countries with weapons of mass destruction , how to address the fear that weapons of mass destruction might fall into terrorist hands ; I think that , here too , Europe has a vital role to play .
Europe is a community of values .
Europe is experienced in integrating countries that have lived through dictatorships and autocratic regimes , it has shown that it knows how to integrate countries into an area of real democracy and freedom and to contribute to peace on the continent of Europe as a whole .
This invaluable experience can guide us and give us an important base from which to deal with new problems in other regions of the world .
I do not see this experience as a sign of weakness , which is a criticism often levelled at Europe ; I see it as a very strong point and I think we should make use of this very strong point to raise a loud , united voice at international level .
The presidency will continue to work in this direction with all its partners , with the Fifteen , as well as the Twenty-Five and the Twenty-Eight and , of course , with the European Parliament .
With these few words I should like to thank you for listening ; I am , of course , here to answer any questions you may have .
I should just like to say that I wish I had more time for debate and could spend more time here in the House .
I trust you will understand that , unfortunately , a large part of my life is spent flying from one continent to another , from one region to another , especially on account of Iraq , representing the European Union at these difficult times .
Mr President , I wish to express my gratitude for the professionalism and courtesy of the Foreign Minister of Greece , with whom it is a real pleasure to work .
I say that , having worked now with eight presidencies .
The Minister said that he had spent a good deal of time in the last few weeks at about 30 000 feet .
I can honestly say that I have spent a lot of my time in the last three and a half years at that altitude .
On the whole , when I have not been at that altitude , I have been in this Chamber .
Because of the range of my responsibilities I have probably spent - and enjoyed spending - more time in this Chamber than any other Commissioner .
I think the House will know that I have tried to be pretty brief in my remarks so as not to take up too much debating time .
I hope today that the House will allow me to speak at slightly greater length , because I would like to talk about one or two things about which I feel very strongly .
I hope that I have never knowingly oversold to this House the achievements of the common foreign and security policy - or even its potential under the existing Treaty .
I have always been acutely conscious of its limitations .
Let me quote briefly from a speech I made almost three years ago , in June 2000 : ' In the important advances achieved in CFSP in the last decade , the Member States have not given the Commission a sole right of initiative ; nor , in general , have they agreed to abide by majority votes ; nor do they accept that Europe has ' occupied the space ' , reducing national freedom of action ?
Foreign policy remains primarily a matter for democratically elected Member State governments . '
Despite the brave and extremely professional efforts of the Greek Presidency , that has never been more evident than over the last few miserable weeks , which have also amply illustrated what I went on to say in that speech , namely that : ' All Member States should acknowledge what those actually doing the work of CFSP have long understood - that mere inter-governmentalism is a recipe for weakness and mediocrity ,
for a European foreign policy of the lowest common denominator .
That will become more obvious as the Union takes in new members . '
The sorry figure cut by the European Union in recent weeks should not blind us to the real and remarkable achievements of the common foreign and security policy over the last decade , in the Balkans , Afghanistan and many other parts of the world .
But it should also remind us how far we still have to go .
Of course , it is possible , as some have suggested , for a small group of Member States to act as a driving force to give Europe a coherent , high-profile foreign policy .
But without better machinery to harness common political will , they are just as likely to drive an incoherent high-profile policy .
This has not been a good time for those who believe that the way forward for European foreign policy is to leave things to the big Member States .
One lesson we can already draw from the unfolding events - a point made by the Minister - is the importance of developing the role and authority of the United Nations .
It is in the interests of the whole world that power should be constrained by global rules , and used only with international agreement .
What other source of international legitimacy except the UN exists for military intervention ?
On what other basis is it possible , indeed , to address the problem of weapons of mass destruction ?
I am here thinking not just of the particular case of Iraq , but of the wider issue .
America 's refusal to press forward with ratification of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty hardly strengthens the hand of the International Atomic Energy Agency and others seeking to prevent the proliferation of nuclear technology in Iran , North Korea and beyond .
I regretted , too , America 's decision to resile so lightly from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty .
For such decisions - and there have been many - send a dangerous signal about the value that the United States places on international commitments .
That , surely , is a critical battle lost in what some call the ' war against terrorism ' .
For I find it hard to conceive how the terrorist threat can be confronted effectively except through international cooperation and disciplines .
( Applause )
Impressive work has already been done within the European Union and through the UN Counter-Terrorism Committee .
We should continue to help countries which find it hard to meet their counter-terrorism obligations under UN Security Council Resolution 1373 .
And we should continue to work for a less unequal world - for example in the WTO Doha Development Agenda , by carrying forward the Monterrey decisions on development financing and by implementing the Johannesburg decisions on sustainable development .
As a general rule , are wars not more likely to recruit terrorists than to deter them ?
It is hard to build democracy at the barrel of a gun , when history suggests that it is more usually the product of long internal development within a society .
Because of the UN 's unique role as a source of legitimacy , it is of the greatest importance that if a war is waged in Iraq , the UN should authorise the decision to attack .
If , tragically , the position of the United Nations remains ambiguous - for example , if authority for an attack rested solely on Resolution 1441 , but without explicit Security Council confirmation that Iraq 's failure fully to comply constituted a casus belli - then it is still likely to be desirable that the UN should provide the framework as soon as possible for humanitarian assistance that may be necessary thereafter , that it should oversee the emergence of the new Iraqi polity , driven by the people of Iraq themselves and that it should help to coordinate the international reconstruction effort that will certainly be required .
No-one can seriously dispute , however , that it would be preferable if - a huge ' if ' - we were able to disarm Saddam Hussein by inspections .
The European Union is a massive donor in the Balkans and in Afghanistan , and we are already the largest humanitarian donor in Iraq .
If it comes to war , we shall certainly have to step up that help , not just to the victims of the conflict , but to those who may seek refuge from it .
The Commission has been engaged in intensive contacts with UN organisations and with the countries around Iraq about how we might best contribute on the humanitarian front .
EUR 15 million has already been set aside , but we may well need to go much further - drawing , if necessary , on the budget 's emergency reserve .
It will be essential that , with other international assistance agencies , the European Union should be free to give independent and impartial help .
A strict separation will need to be maintained between military action and assistance in order to preserve the so-called ' humanitarian space ' .
That objective will be much easier to achieve if the UN is recognised , at an early stage , as the lead assistance coordinator .
Immediate humanitarian help is one thing , but the demands upon us will certainly extend much beyond that .
As the House is all too well aware , Europe 's external relations budget is already heavily committed .
It will be very difficult in any circumstances to launch massive new programmes in Iraq and in the neighbourhood of Iraq .
But it will be that much more difficult for the European Union to cooperate fully and on a large scale - also in the longer-term reconstruction process - if events unfold without proper UN cover and if the Member States remain divided .
When I have made this point in the past I have sometimes been accused of , as it were , issuing a threat of European Union non-cooperation if the United States chooses to proceed without UN backing , on the principle suggested by the New York Times columnist , Tom Friedman , from the sign in a china shop : ' If you broke it , you own it ' .
But that is not my point .
I am simply making an observation of fact : if it comes to war , it will be very much easier to persuade you - the European Union 's budgetary authority - to be generous if there is no dispute about the legitimacy of the military action that has taken place ; about the new political order that emerges thereafter ; or about who is in charge of the reconstruction process .
I am not making a quasi-legal point .
I am simply offering a political judgement of no great novelty or sagacity .
It seems pretty obvious to me .
I am gravely concerned - and I know that many in this House share my concerns - about the potential collateral damage of recent events and of a war , if it comes to that .
Our joint efforts should be directed to trying to minimise those potential effects .
I am thinking not just of the death and destruction that might be wrought by war itself , or of the destabilising consequences for Iraq 's immediate neighbours , but of potential damage , for example to the authority of the United Nations , to NATO and to transatlantic relations , which are going through - to put it mildly - a very difficult passage .
In all these contexts we must look beyond the immediate arguments and remind ourselves of our long-term interests to cooperate and to strengthen the flawed but necessary apparatus of international governance .
But there are three other areas , finally , where we should also work to reduce collateral damage from recent events .
The first is the common foreign and security policy itself , which has suffered a severe setback because Member States on both sides of the debate have chosen to take firm national policy positions as if they spoke for the European Union as a whole .
We must not be disheartened by this setback .
There have been similar divisions within the United States , and even within the US Administration , but these do not pull the country apart because in the end the President is empowered to speak for the nation as a whole .
As a Union of independent nations we do not enjoy that luxury .
But that is a reason to redouble our efforts to build an effective CFSP , not to abandon them .
As we return to the work we shall find , perhaps , a little more humility even among the large Member States , which can surely see how much they have damaged their common enterprise and how much they have reduced their common influence as a result of public squabbling .
( Applause )
A second European project that risks being hurt by recent events if we do not work actively to sustain it is the cause of enlargement .
It is particularly damaging that disagreements over Iraq have been allowed to overshadow the debate about enlargement .
We should not call into question the European vocation of countries simply because of their views on the Iraq crisis .
( Applause )
Let us assure the acceding countries that we continue to look forward eagerly to their imminent membership .
But , on the other side of the argument , let us also acknowledge that those who join our Union are making an existential choice .
They are not declaring themselves for Europe and against the United States - emphatically not .
But , in the words of the Treaty on European Union , they are accepting a responsibility to ' refrain from action ? likely to impair [ the effectiveness of the Union ] as a cohesive force in international relations . '
The present members may have set a very bad example ,
( Applause )
but that does not reduce the responsibility on all members , including the acceding states , to meet that Treaty obligation .
Finally , I want to say a word about Israel and Palestine .
What happens if there is a war in Iraq ?
Let us suppose , let us pray , that it is brief .
Let us further suppose that all the worries expressed about the consequences in terms of the stability of the country prove unfounded .
Let us , in short , put all or most anxieties to one side .
I want to ask two questions . First , will the peace that breaks out drive Palestinians and Israelis into an historic reconciliation ?
The state of the Palestinians was described last week by Peter Hansen , Commissioner General of the UN Relief and Works Agency , and one of the finest international public servants in the world .
' The stark fact is ' , he wrote , ' that almost a quarter of Palestinian children are suffering from acute or chronic malnutrition for purely man-made reasons .
No drought has hit Gaza and the West Bank , no crops have failed and the shops are often full of food .
But the failure of the peace process and the destruction of the economy by Israel 's closure policy have had the effect of a terrible natural disaster ' .
Second , in the aftermath of a war , will America - the leader of a UN-backed operation or of a more limited coalition - take a much more proactive role in forging an Israeli-Palestinian peace ?
We have been told that will happen .
European leaders have been told that will happen .
We have been told that the road map will see the light of day before we all run out of road .
I sincerely hope that is so .
I genuinely fear the outcome if war in Iraq is followed by another year or more of violence in Palestine and Israel .
That would further inflame opinion in the Islamic world .
Some say that to defeat terrorism it is necessary to defeat Saddam Hussein .
That may or may not be true - some of us are at the very least agnostic on that point .
But what I am absolutely sure about is that to invade Iraq , while failing to bring peace to the Middle East , would create exactly the sort of conditions in which terrorism would be likely to thrive .
( Applause from the centre and the left )
And the truth is - and we should face this fact - that none of us would be immune from the consequences of that .
( Applause )
Mr President , we rejoice at the presence among us today of the President-in-Office of the Council , and hope that we will be able to rejoice in welcoming him here on many more occasions during the Greek Presidency .
Commissioner Patten , ladies and gentlemen , when issues of war and peace are at stake , we conduct our debates not only with our minds , but also , self-evidently , with all the passion we have , and must work on the assumption that we will , eventually , avert the threat and , it is to be hoped , secure peace at the same time .
We must introduce our analysis of the situation by describing the actual facts in clear terms .
We would not be having this debate , and the Security Council would not be giving its attention to the same issue that we are discussing , were it not for Saddam Hussein 's criminal regime in Baghdad .
We have to declare in explicit language that Saddam Hussein 's regime depends for its existence upon a secret service , upon violence , murder and terror .
I am very much in agreement with the President-in-Office of the Council when he says that our goal must be Iraq 's complete disarmament .
My dear friends , before we fix our gaze on America - about which I will be saying something in a moment - and before we criticise the Americans , the first point we have to make is that Saddam Hussein must disarm completely .
That is at the heart of the problem .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us now take a look at America .
It is with great disquiet that I see America put in the dock - around the world , not just in Europe - and so what I ask of us all is that we discuss these things in a right and proper way with our American partners and friends .
I remember very well our debate in Brussels on the day after the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington on 11 September 2001 .
Let us remind ourselves of those hours on 11 September 2001 , those few hours in which it seemed as if the nerve centre of the USA - not only the Pentagon , but also the White House and the Capitol - might be hit , in which event the United States would have been incapacitated .
It is because such a thing would have been a vision of horror that we say that it is a good thing that the United States of America exists .
We are America 's friends and partners .
That is true of our group .
( Applause )
It is because of this as much as because we acknowledge America 's great historic achievements - in the face of the twentieth century 's National Socialism and Communism - that I ask that , when talking about America today , we be constantly aware that America is a democracy , and that the Americans have always resolved difficult situations by their own democratic means .
The same will be true now .
Let us also remind ourselves that , although Saddam Hussein is now starting to disarm , to start ridding himself of weapons he has always maintained he did not even possess , such as the El-Samud 2 rockets , perhaps the nerve gas and the anthrax pathogens , he is willing to progressively dispose of these weapons only because there are 260 000 American soldiers in the region .
It would be a great achievement for President George W. Bush if the presence of these troops were to succeed - by peaceful means - in bringing about Iraq 's total disarmament .
( Applause )
This is something we have to make utterly clear .
Whilst there will of course be differences of opinion on an issue as important as this one , I speak for the whole of my group when I say that we are united in the belief that our moral strength lies in the respect we accord to the law .
So , just as Commissioner Patten and Mr Papandreou have done , we declare that any eventual action against Iraq must be taken by the international community and under international law .
It is for that reason that we hope that the United Nations will succeed in using peaceful means to steer Iraq towards disarmament .
Now it is time for us Europeans to look at ourselves .
We always make a big thing of criticising America , but it is not that there is too much of America - there is not enough of Europe .
Where Iraq is the issue , it is not a good sign when one government after the other goes its own way without consulting with the others beforehand .
( Applause )
Right now , I do not want to criticise individual governments , but Europe 's underlying bane is that everyone thinks they have to go their own way in isolation from everyone else .
If we carry on like that , we will not get anywhere in the world , nor will we be able to influence our American friends , but will have to ask ourselves how we Europeans can become capable of contending for our values on the world stage , as the President-in-Office of the Council very rightly said .
Let me just make two additional observations .
We must endeavour by all peaceful means to prevent this confrontation with Iraq 's criminal regime from becoming a confrontation with the Arab world .
Mr President , I would be very much in favour of an invitation to President Bouteflika of Algeria or to President Mubarak of Egypt to address plenary being sent out as soon as possible , for this would enable us to express our desire for partnership and - if at all possible - friendship with the Islamic and Arab world .
We welcome the visit to Algeria by the French President , which has met with great success .
He has stated that we have to step up the Mediterranean dialogue , and I hope for all our sakes that we can ensure that these words are not only that , but that they will be followed up by actions - actions not only in terms of political cooperation , but also in the sense of helping the countries of North Africa to help themselves , thus giving their people a future and preventing them from being led astray into violence of whatever kind .
Partnership and friendship with the Arab world !
Let me conclude by saying that Israel has a new government .
What we ask of Prime Minister Sharon is that he should now use his power to draw one step closer to the Palestinians in order to achieve a genuine peace settlement , with the State of Israel within secure borders , as well as a Palestinian state in which Palestinians can live with dignity .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , if we redouble our efforts towards this end - which will involve common action rather than each country of the European Union going its own way - we will be able , on the global stage , to achieve something for our values of freedom , democracy , and peace .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my group would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council to convey a message to the Spring Summit on the basis of the resolution that we adopted in January in Parliament and which remains fully in force .
We said ' no ' three times : ' no ' to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , ' no ' to tyrants and dictators like Saddam Hussein and ' no ' to unilateralism .
We also said ' yes ' three times : ' yes ' to the UN and multilateralism , ' yes ' to disarmament and ' yes ' to democracy .
On the basis of these observations , we feel that politics and diplomacy must continue to be given precedence over the use of preventive violence , which will only lead to more fanaticism and polarisation .

Last Friday , in the Security Council , Mr Blix and Mr ElBaradei presented an account of the progress made on the inspections and on the efforts to disarm Iraq .
Their report confirmed that progress has been made , including , where ballistic weapons are concerned , the gradual destruction of Al-Samoud missiles and others .
Although he has done so reluctantly - ' à contre-coeur ' , as the French say - Saddam Hussein must allow the inspection work to go ahead .
We also say that we must pursue a clear policy of inspection backed up by pressure , as stated in Security Council Resolution 1441 .
We must continue working on this basis , because war can be avoided and a peaceful solution is still possible .
Jimmy Carter , winner of the Nobel Peace prize , has written that , where Iraq is concerned , alternatives to war clearly exist and that a war would be unwarranted .
The authoritative voice of the former US President joins the multitude of voices that , in a way that is unprecedented in history , continue to call throughout the world for a massive unilateral attack on Iraq to be totally rejected .
We are entitled to ask ourselves what we would gain from waging a preventive war , especially given the US war plan to drop , as they have said they would , around 3 000 bombs , including ' the mother of all bombs ' .
At the outset of a potential invasion , however precise the operation is , massive collateral damage will ensue .
This means that the Iraqi people will be punished twice ; first there is the punishment of living in a dictatorship and then there would be the punishment of the massive destruction of the civilian population , unleashing a torrent of death and destruction on a population half of which is under fifteen years old and which has a per capita income similar to that of the Palestinians .
Incidentally , Mr President , it is extremely important that the European Union does not allow the roadmap for the Israeli-Palestinian peace process to be put on hold : we must hope that this process is reopened .
Our group feels that the approach we should adopt is to continue applying Resolution 1441 , within the framework of the law and of international law .
In our view , a preventive war neither guarantees world security nor complies with international law .
In fact , it will put us into the hands of those who truly advocate the clash of civilisations and an attack on this basis would give an excellent boost to international terrorism .
Preventive war as an instrument of defence policy does not fit in with our community of shared values , which is founded on mutual respect between nations and peoples , and such a war unequivocally breaches the principle of multilateralism and current international law , as upheld by the United Nations , which was created in San Francisco in 1945 - fundamentally due to the efforts of the United States , it should be remembered .
Like Kofi Annan , we reiterate that any unilateral action would breach the United Nations Charter .
The international community 's ambition to ensure world security must be based on preventive policies , not on preventive attacks .
We must be more ambitious and more decisive if we are to resolve the causes of inequality , violence and poverty .
I wonder , as we all do , what the consequences of a rapid military victory would be .
What plan is proposed for addressing the extremely complex problems faced by the region ?
Are we attempting to achieve the fast-track democratisation of a nation - mapped out on the drawing board after the First World War , composed of Sunnis , Shiites , Kurds and Turkmen - or are we attempting to establish a neo-colonial proconsulship , which can only be sustained by the force of these weapons ?
I recommend that the White House reads the observations of the British General Maude , who entered Baghdad in 1918 , and read to the Iraqis a letter in the style of the Three Kings , who also apparently - according to the Gospels - came from Babylon .
This letter promised peace , happiness and democracy in six months .
Six months later , there was war in Baghdad . We must bear this in mind and learn the lessons of history .
Ladies and gentlemen , the time has come , especially for Europe , to transcend our divisions . This is our message , which I repeat on behalf of my group .
We must be guided by solidarity and by our commitments to one another , as laid down in the Treaties .
These are obligations that are binding on all our States and on all our citizens .
We therefore require the Spring Summit , to be held next week , to make all necessary efforts to create a united European voice , as the Treaties stipulate .
Once they have signed a joint communiqué , each country cannot then pursue its own approach and there can be no repetition of the farce witnessed in the Security Council .
All we need to do is take a blackboard to the summit , of the type used in schools , and explain that , if we had four votes plus one , the Europeans would have a decision .
Why ?
Because we cannot , as a result of our division - and I am referring now to countries on both sides - be putting terrible pressure on Latin-Americans or Africans to get us out of the mess , because they too have their dignity and it is unacceptable to wring votes out of people under duress , with an attitude that is interpreted in those countries as totally neo-colonialist .
We therefore need , and this is a very basic equation that all Heads of Government could understand ?
( Applause )
? we need our votes , plus that of Bulgaria .
This would change matters , and , furthermore , Mr President - and with this I shall conclude - would make the Security Council even more relevant , and not irrelevant as the US Secretary of State for Defence , or for War , Mr Rumsfeld , claims .
What makes the UN irrelevant is saying that we will be going to war whatever happens .
We must state , and this is one of the European Union 's major responsibilities , that in the face of preventive and unilateral action , international law must be made to prevail .
( Applause )
Mr President , an eminent and noble friend of mine recounts how he became convinced of the need for regime change in Iraq when during the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait Iraqi soldiers put Kuwaiti prisoners of war into manholes , closed the covers , poured petrol through the air vents and set them alight .
Few can be unaware of the barbarity of Saddam Hussein 's regime , either towards his own citizens or towards others , and for that reason I applaud the initiative of my friend and colleague , Mr Rutelli , in seeking to establish an international criminal tribunal for Iraq .
Iraq has been under notice from the international community for over a decade and our patience on the issue of disarmament is running very thin .
For Liberals in this House good relations between Europe and the United States of America are of huge importance .
Our commitment to shared values , our commitment to economic and cultural ties reflected in our military alliance are things that we hold dear .
We share America 's pain about the attacks of 11 September , and not just because European citizens were among those so brutally murdered .
But we do not share the US President 's view that war against Iraq is justified at this stage .
The report presented by Hans Blix to the UN Security Council last Friday does not make a case for immediate military action .
On the contrary , he reported substantial disarmament and , while he recognised that cooperation was by no means immediate , he welcomed it as active , even proactive .
His report showed that inspections are delivering tangible results for the weapons inspectors , sufficient to be given the additional months needed to complete Iraqi disarmament .
To pull the rug from under Hans Blix 's feet and resort to war now , would be incomprehensible to moderate opinion around the world .
I would ask our American friends to pause and reflect , if only for a few minutes , on some fundamental questions .
Will a regime change in Iraq help bring to justice Al-Qaeda terrorists ?
Will upheaval in a secular Arab state advance the cause of peace between Israel and Palestine ?
And would not the cost of continued vigilance , resilience and patience be lower than the cost of war and reconstruction ?
We must not underestimate the casualties of war , and not only the human casualties , though they would be many and costly , but the diplomatic casualties of which the collapse of the reconciliation talks in Cyprus is perhaps the first .
As the crisis unfolds we are also approaching a critical moment for the future credibility of the United Nations and a world order based on the rule of law .
The remarkable unity displayed by the international community last November in agreeing unanimously to Resolution 1441 is in danger of falling apart .
We are witnessing the unedifying sight of the pro- and anti-war factions in the Security Council seeking to win over the undecided countries through bullying , bribery and even blackmail .
The dignity and integrity of the United Nations is at stake .
Having gone down the UN route to achieve Iraqi disarmament , a decision which my group warmly welcomed at the time , the United States must stick with the multilateral route .
For the US to disregard a UN decision against early military action would deal a potentially fatal blow to the United Nations .
It does not matter whether this decision is reached because of the failure to muster the required nine votes or because of a French or Russian veto .
A veto one opposes will always be less reasonable than a veto one imposes .
Yet rules are rules , and UN backing for military action must not be circumvented on the grounds that a veto is ' unreasonable ' .
It would be far better for any vote on a new resolution to be postponed until a consensual outcome can be achieved .
The elements of a consensus can be readily identified , if only the artificial demands of a pre-determined military timetable could be set aside .
Mr President-in-Office , you have told us that war can still be avoided .
The gates of the Temple of Janus have been unlocked , if not yet opened .
Hans Blix has set out the disarmament tasks which remain to be achieved and these tasks could be set out in a new resolution as clearly defined benchmarks to be met by Iraq in the coming months .
Recognising that Iraq has only moved as far as it has because of the threat of military force , why not keep up the pressure until the process is completed ?
If Saddam Hussein fails to meet the benchmarks in the resolution , then the diplomatic and inspections options will have been exhausted and the international community would have the moral authority and legitimacy to resort to war .
In conclusion , it is claimed in London , Washington and Madrid that war could be short , swift and successful .
With UN support this could indeed be the case , but without it , in a conflict which divides the international community , we could be on the brink of another Hundred Years War which could bring down regimes well beyond Iraq .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , even though the vote in the Security Council has not yet , as we speak , taken place , we already know that , whatever happens , it will leave only one legal option open , namely the peaceful option of disarming Iraq via the inspections .
Anyone who took it upon themselves to go beyond that mandate and to start a war unilaterally would be defying the whole of the international community .
I hope that they would be calling upon themselves exemplary political penalties exacted by their own peoples .
As for their credibility in the eyes of the world , it would no doubt be adversely affected for a long time .
To show too much of one 's ' hard power ' is to run the risk of ruining one 's ' soft power ' .
Unfortunately , it is the whole of international society that would run the risk of being destabilised by this material breach of the rules which democracies laid down for themselves after the Second World War .
Yet this is precisely what the President of the United States is envisaging quite shamelessly .
It is not only the war on Iraq that should spur us into action , but also the unilateralist - and in our view imperialist - policy that surrounds that war .
When it comes to taking action , we are short of neither trump cards nor allies .
Never , since the end of the cold war , has there been , on a world-wide scale , such a powerful camp clearly in favour of peace and promoting the law and multilateral cooperation .
It is within that camp that the voice of Europe promoting world solidarity must and will have to make itself heard .
Our allies are , first of all , the people of the entire world , starting with those of the European Union , not just the 15 current Member States , but the 25 present and future Member States .
This makes even more legitimate our demand for in-depth discussion between Member States and with our partners , before the ratification of the accession treaties and the vote on the future constitution and on the vision of Europe which we intend to promote together in order to respond to the will expressed by our fellow citizens .
This unprecedented explosion of public opinion has , no doubt , made it easier for a large majority of the governments of the world to take a stand against the war , starting with the governments of the countries of the South , and , in particular , the Non-Aligned Movement , which alone represents two thirds of the United Nations General Assembly .
That is our second trump card .
In that respect , how despicable and crass is the blackmail used by Colin Powell on the most dependent of those countries in order to try to extract from them a vote without any popular support !
We are also supported by all of what the world regards as great moral authorities , such as Pope John Paul II , Nelson Mandela , former President Carter and the Secretary General of the United Nations in person , Kofi Annan , all of whom have committed themselves with passion and dignity to the cause of peace and respect for the United Nations Charter .
Let us also pay homage to all those authorities on international law who teach at Oxford , Cambridge or the London School of Economics and those three hundred eminent Spanish legal authors , who all deny that there is any legal justification for the use of military force against Iraq even before the event .
Another important dimension is the contribution of the weapons inspectors , who have shown great firmness towards Baghdad while , at the same time , standing up to Washington and London , which they have not been slow to accuse of having given them false information .
I should also like to make special mention of those men and women working for the UN agencies , who are often , along with certain European representatives in the region , the only ones to think first and foremost of the people of that region , and of the torment that is being imposed on them in Iraq , in Palestine , and in the Arab world in general .
Thanks are also due to Mr Patten for some of the strong and just words that he spoke on the subject this morning .
Another influential player on the scene today is the Franco-German alliance , which will have held good , even though it means paying the price of political courage in the face of a greater power .
As for other allies , it was on the other side of the Atlantic that we found them .
We , that is to say the diverse delegation of Members of the European Parliament who had already visited Baghdad last month , have just established , at the US Congress , long-term cooperation links with the elected representatives of Washington , Ohio , California and even Texas .
There , you have a United States which does not despise Europe , but which places its hopes in Europe and welcomes its representatives with open arms .
What , then , did our US friends tell us ?
They told us that 126 elected representatives voted against war , notably two thirds of the Democrat representatives ; that 130 US cities , including Washington , Philadelphia and Los Angeles , have adopted resolutions opposing military action , that AFL-CIO , the major group of affiliated trade unions , has declared itself to be of the same opinion , and that the anti-war movement ( United for Peace and Justice , Women for Peace , etc . ) is receiving unprecedented support prior to the start of the conflict .
The New York Times , too , has chosen to say no to war .
This is a far cry from the sacred union that some people have been telling us about .
Congressman Dennis Kucinich , the spokesman for the coalition for peace , echoed these sentiments when he told us , ' George W. Bush has threatened to isolate those Europeans who are resisting his claim to supremacy ; this is a perfect moment to take one another by the hand ' .
Finally , Mr President , may we each have the US friends that we deserve .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are some things that I just cannot understand .
For example , we always defend the Treaties .
Article 19 of the Treaty on European Union says one very simple thing , namely that all the governments represented within the Security Council must uphold the position defined by the European Union .
Spain , the UK , France and Germany must therefore uphold a common position .
The common position defined by the leaders of the European Union , whether we like it or not , does not talk about ultimatums or about the consequences of war .
It says that the work of the inspectors should be continued .
This is precisely the memorandum proposed by France and Germany .
I do not , therefore , see how , in the name of the Treaty , Spain and the UK can fail to uphold that position .
In the final analysis , we must have a decision , within Europe , on the real nature of our Treaties .
Mrs de Palacio del Valle-Lersundi , who has always plagued us with her explanations of the Treaties here in Parliament , should remember that she used to defend the Treaties which she herself is now flouting in her role as Minister for Foreign Affairs .
Frankly , I do not understand why it is necessary to make war when we have won the war already .
Why take military action when we have won without it ?
We have to admit that , without the US , there would not be any inspectors now .
There would be no inspection and no disarmament .
However , since there is disarmament and since there are inspections , it is not necessary to go to war .
Why , therefore , should we shoot and kill , when we can have everything without shooting and killing ?
I do not understand it .
We are criticising ourselves by saying that the situation is as it is thanks to a certain amount of determination , whether we like that determination or not .
We are now being told , and I still do not understand it , that we shall be bringing democracy to Iraq .
That is very good , that is excellent .
What , then , are we doing with Turkey ?
The Turkish parliament is elected . Fine .
It is a democracy . Whether or not we like the people who are elected , that is not our problem .
Then , however , an agreement is concluded with the military , over the heads of the parliament , which consists of democratic representatives , in order to obtain what could not be obtained through democracy , and the Turkish people are told , ' This is how the democracy that we are going to bring you works ' .
I simply do not understand it .
For example , we continue to explain that we are going to liberate the people of Iraq .
We tell the Iraqi Kurds that this will be fantastic , that we are going to liberate them using the Turkish army .
That is precisely the sort of liberation that the Kurds have been dreaming of for a hundred years : finally they will be under the domination of the Turkish army !
Obviously , they will find it fantastic !
Yet there is one key to democracy in the region , and that key lies in Teheran .
There is no question of making war on Iran , and yet the people in Iran are fighting for democracy .
The Iranians are the only people who , at the present time , are rising up against their totalitarian regime .
They are the only people who are staging massive demonstrations , who are voting in favour of democracy .
Yet we are leaving them to fight alone .
We are not helping them , but we then go on to claim that we have brought democracy to other regions .
I believe that we should be doing exactly the opposite .
By helping the Iranian people to liberate themselves , we would be providing the region with two lessons .
The first lesson is that emancipation and democracy are achieved not by the intervention of soldiers from who knows where , but by the will and the determination of the people themselves .
Secondly , if these people manage to emancipate themselves with our help , they will be able to say to all the fundamentalists , to all the terrorists and to all those who are fascinated by totalitarian fundamentalism , ' We know what fundamentalism is ; we have suffered its consequences and we have fought it , and we have emancipated ourselves ' .
That would be an extraordinary lesson for the region , and far more meaningful than the occupation of Iraq by some US general .
Finally , therefore , let us all stop being blind .
Yes , it is necessary to change the regime in Baghdad , just as it is necessary to change the regime in Saudi Arabia , in Tunisia , and in this or that African country , but that cannot be done by means of a military invasion , of whatever kind .
Let us therefore shoulder responsibility for some of the democracies in the world , and let us not say that peace will reign if there is no military intervention in Iraq .
It is not peace , but then war is not the best way of ensuring that the Iraqi people are finally allowed to live in peace .
They have the right to live in peace , without any US general , but also without Saddam Hussein .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the United States of America is a great democracy .
It has contributed much , and if we look at the last 50 years , no one can forget the crucial role that it has played in defending freedom .
This is why I and my group refuse to place ourselves in the awkward position of saying that we are for the US or against the US .
That would be a stupid position .
Having said that , and because we have great esteem and consideration for the United States , we also have the right to tell them that they are wrong , and that the action that they are now taking can only have very serious consequences in the future . We cannot have it both ways .
Either international rules exist and each nation has to obey them , or we believe that we have taken a great step backwards and that , from now on , power takes precedence over law and , as soon as one has power , one is the strongest and has the right to intervene .
In that case , I propose that the United Nations Charter should be amended to the effect that , from now on , the right to interfere should include , for the strongest powers , the right to intervene whenever it seems to them necessary in order to defend their general interests , their vital interests .
The United States has been the victim of a terrible attack .
Thousands of its people have been killed .
No one can forget that .
It therefore has the right to defend itself ; it has the right to respond .
Who , though , was responsible for those attacks ?
It was the Al Qaeda organisation .
Is there any proof of links between Al Qaeda and Iraq ?
The answer is no , there is no proof .
Consequently , the United States , before engaging in this military operation , should tell us what its real reasons are , the deep-seated reasons why it wants to intervene .
If it is a question of changing the map of this part of the world , I can say immediately that this would have immeasurable consequences and would pave the way for the emergence of a new generation of terrorists and for a lasting gulf between the Muslim world and the rest of the world .
That is extremely worrying .
That is why we in our group are agreed that every effort must be made to achieve a solution to this problem by means of disarmament .
From then on , once this principle has been established , the decisions will not be taken in this House .
There is something nice and surreal about our debates .
Nevertheless , we have the right to say what we think and I would say that , as far as the French delegation is concerned including , in particular , myself , although in no way am I dependent on the French Government , it supports the position adopted by the President of the French Republic , namely to oppose , by all possible means , the launching of a military operation .
Mr President , there is a bizarre contradiction in this Iraq debate .
Reports are reaching me from Iraq about contacts between leading representatives of the Ba 'ath regime and the Iraqi opposition .
Saddam 's immediate entourage is evidently preparing itself for the fall of the ' Republic of Fear ' .
As a last resort it is trying to save its own skin by announcing an uprising now in the event of an American military intervention .
What , though , do I perceive within the European Union ?
A number of large Member States are working hard for the political status quo in Iraq .
UN weapons inspections with no clear time limit are supposed to be sufficient to rein in the regime in Baghdad .
On what is this great political credit that they are granting the merciless tyrant Saddam Hussein based ?
This irresponsible attitude taken by a number of European countries is met with manifest and widespread incomprehension on the part of the suffering Iraqi population .
Equally negative is the political cost , for the time being , of the Western conflict with Iraq : serious undermining of transatlantic relations , serious division within the European Union itself and growing discord within the international community in the context of the United Nations .
All because of a murderous megalomaniac who for years has simply been refusing to comply fully with UN resolutions .
Such a scenario must encourage similar dictatorships to go their own way where weapons are concerned .
Is there anything that the Member States of the European Union can still salvage from this divisive conflict over Iraq ?
I believe that there is .
Firstly , they should very soon make out a case for a clear time limit on the UN inspections in Iraq , a limit that takes sufficient account of the option of armed intervention .
When all is said and done , only the present increase in military power in the Gulf region is going to force Saddam Hussein into any kind of cooperation with the UN inspectors .
At the same time the Member States of the European Union should finally show some concern for Iraq 's political and socio-economic future , because there really are alternatives to Saddam 's ' Republic of Fear ' .
I am looking forward to initiatives from the Greek Presidency on both these issues .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the camp of those who are opposed to the unjust pre-emptive war that the UK and the US intends to launch in Iraq is growing in strength from day to day , both in national public opinions , as demonstrated by surveys and demonstrations , and in the United Nations Security Council .
The diplomatic resolve of France , Germany and Russia may give the politicians of the United Kingdom , and even those of the United States , pause for thought .
War is war , but the prelude to war is not war .
At a time when world peace is on the edge of a precipice , it would not be dishonourable - quite the contrary - to refrain , despite the Homeric speeches and the money that has been spent , from an act which is so unjust , so contrary to human rights , and so dangerous .
Should the US not go to war , it would not be unthinkable for the united European Parliament - why not ? - to propose to the parliamentary committee in Oslo that the Nobel Peace Prize be awarded to George W. Bush for having helped to achieve , in Iraq , the objectives set by the United Nations , without shedding blood or tears , that he be credited , on his own account and on behalf of his people , with having gained this great peaceful victory .
If things turn out differently , however , and if the unfortunate people of Iraq , especially the children , are sacrificed to the demons of war , the consequences will be disastrous .
The resulting shake-up of the world would release the forces of evil everywhere .
Then again , what would be the next stage in the promised reshaping of the Middle East ?
Would the next target of the super-power 's army be Iran , Syria , or other countries , for there would then be no limit to the law that the strongest power prevails ?
Mr President , I am sure no one disagrees with the comments made by the President-in-Office of the Council and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece , Mr Papandreou , and by Commissioner Patten .
I just wanted to add that , in this particular instance , the rallying of public opinion and the demonstrations by citizens in Europe and elsewhere are additional political elements which need to be taken into account .
On 11 September 2001 , every nation and government in Europe without exception rallied round the United States of America when it came under terrorist attack .
Today every nation in Europe , although not every government , is against this fruitless , futile war .
To borrow from the ancient description of the crisis in Mesopotamia , a Babel-type policy is being created and it would be a good thing if this Babel-type policy were to end .
The lack of unity between the Fifteen is having a knock-on effect when it comes to dealing with the crisis .
At the same time , as regards the candidate countries , which are somewhat differentiated when it comes to the possibility of a unified stance , Europe needs to take care as it builds its future within the Convention , which is laying down new ground rules in the form of a constitution , that it does not cause internal rifts which do not then close .
We want to unite the Twenty-Five , the Twenty-Eight or however many we are , in a new strategy for a Europe of peace and cooperation , a Europe working for democratic progress throughout the world , the so-called crisis prevention and management policy ; we do not , once the crisis is over , want to have to decide how to deal with the problem of refugees , casualties and so on .
I should like to remind you , and all the pundits agree here , that there are two conflicting strategies in America : there is one strategy for how America lives with the rest of the world and there is another strategy with a theocratic slant , with America trying to determine the course of history on the basis of a subjective evaluation of international interests .
May I remind everyone - and they are many - whose theory is that the UN has pretty much run its course , that the UN reflected the state of play at the end of the Second World War and that new configurations are needed which reflect the new state of play .
We have to realise that international conventions need to reflect the new state of play in a considered manner , using procedures which do not cause rifts .
It is also worth reiterating a few matters of concern to us , the European Union .
We spoke with one voice on the Palestinian problem .
And yet , our united voice went unheeded .
We spoke with one voice on Iraq , on the embargo against the Iraqi people .
And again , our united voice went unheeded .
We therefore have to realise that persistence is needed at times when our policies may be able to bring about practical results which do not in turn foster new crises .
Ladies and gentlemen , we really are at a crucial stage , but I think that every crisis contains in it the germ of a new standard .
We need to tell our American friends that their perception leads to trouble , trouble which is not even in America 's interest .
The sort of approach taken by Donald Rumsfeld , who from what I heard this morning , started to tear the British Prime Minister off a strip for asking for a few more days for the inspectors , is a dangerous approach .
Ladies and gentlemen , Parliament 's message should be that it wants to take a peaceful approach to international problems , that it wants to resolve problems peacefully using procedures that pave the way for democracy throughout the world .
Mr President , what is this war about ?
Knowing the answer to that question is of course the prior condition of being able to prevent it .
As the weapons inspectors become more successful in their work , the purpose of the war is , however , changing .
I now also hear from my esteemed fellow MEP , Mrs Malmström , that what is at issue is removing the dictator in Baghdad .
Excuse me , but I thought the idea was to disarm Iraq and destroy its weapons of mass destruction .
The picture I now have is of the UN 's far exceeding the limits of its powers and replacing regimes we do not like .
We do not like Saddam Hussein .
Being opposed to the war is not the same as being friends with Saddam Hussein ; or with Mr Le Pen for that matter ; or , indeed , with President Chirac .
I am not friendly with any of them , but that only shows of course how broad the anti-war movement is , and how narrow the movement in favour of war is gradually becoming .
If what we are concerned with is a change of regime , may I ask where the EU is when it is a question of receiving refugees from the dictatorship we wish to bring to an end .
Where is the EU when people take flight from the abominable dictator described by my fellow MEP , Mr Evans ?
Why do we throw those refugees back into the hands of the regime we want to change ?
Why , just as my fellow MEP Mr Cohn-Bendit said , do we not support democratic movements in Iran ?
I shall stop there , for I have no more speaking time left .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , over the last ten years , since the Gulf War , the United States has been developing a ' mother of all bombs ' .
Europe in that time has been putting patience and diplomacy to use in an attempt to enlarge the Union .
That is a symbolic and clear difference .
If Parliament and the Commission were to accept ultimate responsibility , the EU could act with authority for the benefit of world peace and an international legal order .
That is unfortunately not the case .
It is not only the values of democracy and human rights that unite the EU , but also the will to guarantee peace and to establish an international order through cooperation .
Has the war against Iraq already started , or not ?
Or has the war against Iraq never really stopped since the first Gulf War and the struggle for hegemony in the Middle East simply entered a new phase ?
History will be the judge .
Following the military defeat of Saddam by the international coalition the regime remained in place , but it was kept in check by a merciless embargo that left the population starving , but the power of the regime over them intact .
The weapons inspectors of the first four years were not effective in disarming Iraq , but acted as an intelligence service for those states that sent and paid their experts and spies .
The United States and Great Britain were subsequently able to bomb in Iraq with greater success .
The new weapons inspections under the direction of Hans Blix and the United Nations , and accompanied by military threats , have however been successful .
We must therefore pursue this path and we must unite the European countries around this position . Thank you .
Mr President , the last thing we would wish to see in these troubled times is the Iraqi regime being able to rejoice in the almost unimaginable disunity in the United Nations , the almost insurmountable difficulties facing NATO , or the absence of any possibility of agreement within the Fifteen on this crisis .
The fact is that after more than ten years and 17 UN resolutions , the Iraqi regime is still delaying destroying its illegal weapons .
This time , however , Saddam Hussein will not be able to continue to defy international law .
I am not being naïve in saying this - I hope that we will still be able to obtain a decision within the UN which , when confronted with the facts , leads Iraq to disarm voluntarily .
I also wish to make it clear , however , that we will not remain neutral in the event of a conflict .
We will always be on the side of democracy and not of tyranny .
We are also on the side of international law , because we want to see immediate and unconditional compliance with the 17 UN resolutions on Iraq 's disarmament .
We are on the side of those who know that collective security comes at a price and that we must not confine ourselves to antagonising those who are paying this price by applying the only weapon of deterrence that Saddam Hussein acknowledges and fears - the more than 200 000 soldiers on the ground .
Lastly , Mr President , and in addition to all of these reasons , we are not remaining neutral because we take the view that it is our duty always to stand shoulder to shoulder with our allies , in good times and bad .
Why ?
It is simple , Mr President .
To ensure that , if we face a direct threat in future , we can count on their solidarity too .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the apparently inevitable choice in this House , as indeed in the United Nations , is between war , with or without the backing of the Security Council , and the weak yet appealing position of those who are asking for more time for the inspections ; those in favour of the latter alternative are relying , it must be said , on the Anglo-American military pressure on Saddam 's regime and are , in fact , making the inspections an end in themselves , although they are well aware that Hans Blix and his men are unlikely to be able to get Saddam to disarm by themselves .
All the same , this very morning , many Members have execrated Saddam 's regime and called for democracy and freedom for the Iraqi people .
We Radicals , together with hundreds of other public figures and members of parliament from very many countries , are convinced that there is still time and space for another scenario : the exile of the dictator of Baghdad as the only real way to avert war .
It is a scenario that a number of Arab governments in the region have been working on for some time and which could be taken up by the European Union in view of the forthcoming Security Council resolution .
Then there is post-Saddam Iraq , which nobody has mentioned today : we are convinced that this scenario should be accompanied by the United Nations taking over provisional administration of Iraq for at least two years .
Only a UN administration can be accepted and help get the country back on the right rails , for it has been under one of the most savage dictatorships ever known .
I hope , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that Europe may once again speak with one and the same voice on this basis .
Mr President , it has been said here that some progress towards disarmament has been made , although the scale of this progress is hard to measure in relative terms , because the obligation to prove that weapons of mass destruction have been destroyed has not been fulfilled .
We must remember that the inspectors are not private investigators - they are not budding Sherlock Holmes - they are simply information gatherers .
We accept , however , that they have made progress .
They have been able to do so simply because of international pressure , the last resort of which is the use of force .
Let us recall that the inspectors did not leave the country in 1998 of their own free will , but were expelled because the regime thought that the danger had passed .
We must also remember the victims , the thousands of people who perished in the rubble of the twin towers , the tens of thousands who have been eliminated in Iraq because they dissent or simply because they belong to a different minority , the hundreds of thousands who have had to go into exile in order to survive .
I assume we all agree that we must do whatever we can to ensure that international terrorist organisations do not gain access to these weapons of mass destruction .
I assume , Commissioner , that there are no doubts about this .
I also wish to point out that , for the moment , everyone , except for Saddam Hussein , has acted with the utmost respect for international law .
If decisions and votes are being postponed in the United Nations Security Council , it is precisely in order to reach an agreement that will enable us to continue to act within international law , laying down concrete conditions for disarmament and precise dates by which this is to be achieved because , as the European Council stated , inspections cannot go on indefinitely .
In this context , unfortunately , the unity of action of the European Union 's Member States remains in disarray and I must ask Mr Papandreou and Commissioner Patten - and I know that this is not an easy task - to continue to seek agreement .
And this agreement , Mr President , must be founded on the Member States ' will to achieve consensus , on respect for the opinions of others , on not attempting to impose on others policies based on faits accomplis and on abandoning strident attitudes .
Simply saying ' never again ' will not get us anywhere .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , first may I thank the Greek Presidency for all its efforts and its successful actions , which had two objectives : to avoid war and to present the European Union with a united front and a united policy .
My sincere congratulations to you , Mr President-in-Office , on your success , your major success in leading the European Union to agreement on a common position in Brussels on 17 February .
It is not the presidency 's fault that , five days later , the Spanish Prime Minister , Mr Aznar or Anzar , as his friend Mr Bush likes to call him , broke this agreement and moved away from the common position of the European Union in order to go off to the American president 's ranch and help prepare the proposal for a Security Council resolution to declare war on Iraq .
You will forgive me , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , if I continue in German .
Mr President , the threat of a punishment must always be so credible that the punishment does not need to be carried out .
The massive military presence around Iraq , and Bush 's rhetoric , have finally had their effect on Saddam .
Suddenly he is cooperating with the inspections and destroying weapons he said he did not have .
It is therefore naive to think that Saddam could have been called to order with diplomatic pleas alone .
Apart from Saddam , Bush himself has unfortunately begun to believe in the military threat to such a degree that he feels he can no longer find a way out of it .
Withdrawing a quarter of a million servicemen from the Iraq region while Saddam is still in charge is a disgrace for the American president that he wants to prevent in whatever way he can .
To this end he is even trying to bribe members of the Security Council , in particular to make possible an attack in the near future .
Bush and Blair have now become the prisoners of their own rhetoric and their diplomatic inability to mobilise sufficient support .
With no green light from the Security Council , all that remains for them is the choice between two evils : to do nothing and consequently lose face or to take military action outside the UN with all the negative consequences that entails .
A unilateral military intervention will lead to unprecedented instability and seriously impede the reconstruction of Iraq .
While Saddam was himself destroying the rockets in Iraq , he was placing a bomb under the UN , NATO and the EU , enabled to do so by Western leaders acting irresponsibly .
Since the fall of the Wall , the EU Member States have above all been pursuing their own interests and prestige and very little has come of a common foreign policy .
European policy must consist of maintaining the pressure on Saddam and certainly there must be no headlong rush to war .
We must be specific about what compliance we are expecting of the tyrant within a timeframe that the inspectors consider reasonable .
Only the UN can ensure that Saddam obeys , and that the punishment does not need to be carried out .
Mr President , Commissioner , the United States thought it could manipulate the United Nations in order to obtain legal cover for its predatory war in Iraq , but the UN stood its ground .
The UN and public opinion worldwide want nothing to do with this war .
Reason and justice refuse to submit to the fanatical fundamentalism which has been holding sway for some time now in Washington .
The Iraqi people are innocent .
Why , when they have been suffering for so long under such a cruel embargo , is it necessary to bomb them as well ?
This war will precipitate a conflict between civilisations .
This time , it is not the Islamic fundamentalists who are pushing for war , but the US administration .
The reactions will be terrible .
They have already begun . Yesterday the Al-Hasar mosque , the Moslem Vatican , called for a holy war against the United States .
In the Security Council , France will use its veto to oppose the war , and so will Russia .
We must preserve peace .
Mr President , I should like , first of all , to thank Commissioner Patten for the high quality of his speech , and also those Members who have argued unambiguously in favour of disarming Iraq by means of inspections and peaceful avenues .
Barbarity cannot be combated with barbarity , and war , whether we like it or not , is a form of barbarity .
It is also an old-fashioned way of settling conflicts .
Over a year ago , the President of the United States described as rogue states a certain number of countries suspected of having at their disposal , for the purposes of conquest , weapons of mass destruction which threatened world peace .
Eliminating weapons of mass destruction is certainly a desirable objective that we should all try to achieve in the context of the United Nations and , in particular , in the context of the non-proliferation treaty .
Yet how can we explain to the people of the countries described as rogue states that weapons of mass destruction are bad when they belong to those countries but that they are good when they belong to so-called ' virtuous ' states ?
These virtuous states lie , in particular , in Europe , but there is also the United States , whose army is ready to use such weapons of mass destruction , in other words tactical nuclear weapons , in the war that they want to launch in Iraq .
This is a complete contradiction and , in terms of international law , it is a further black mark against the US Government .
If I wanted to sustain Mr Bush 's metaphor , I would say that the US State is a super-rogue .
However , I shall not do so , because that would be to insult the American people , and I do not want us to end up insulting one another .
Last week , in fact , we had an opportunity to meet US elected representatives who are openly opposed to the use of force .
They are demonstrating against the war alongside their fellow citizens and they constitute , in my opinion , the great majority of public opinion .
Mr President , all the fine words about Saddam Hussein 's having to be disarmed and about the Iraqi people 's being entitled to freedom ring remarkably hollow in a situation in which we all know that Saddam Hussein has not the slightest intention of disarming or going into exile , let alone of giving the oppressed Iraqi people their freedom .
European history from 1930 to 1939 is the history of a Europe that , step by step , gave in to Hitler 's expansion and aggression .
' There will be peace in our time ' , said Chamberlain when he returned from his meeting with Hitler in Munich in 1938 .
Today , the Chamberlains of our own time say that Saddam Hussein can be disarmed by the weapons inspectors .
If that is the case , why was this not done long ago ?
We also forget that the weapons that threaten the world outside Iraq , and that we wish to remove , are not the same weapons used to oppress the Iraqi people . That is something that is easily achieved using conventional small arms .
The war against Saddam Hussein must be a war of liberation .
It is a question of democratising the Arab countries .
Democracy and economic development are the only protection against terrorists but , in the twelve years since the weapons inspections began , the EU 's efforts have been designed to secure our peaceful coexistence with the dictator .
The EU must think again and be much more active in promoting the freedoms and social development of the Arab peoples .
As long as we only have words to offer , we are powerless .
Mr President , in 1950 the General Assembly adopted Resolution 377 , entitled ' Uniting for Peace ' , which established that when certain conditions are met - for instance failure of the Security Council to discharge its functions - ' the General Assembly shall consider the matter immediately with a view to making appropriate recommendations to Members for collective measures ' .
I would very much like the Greek Presidency to facilitate the urgent convoking of such a special session of the General Assembly by one or more European countries , pursuant to Article 20 of the Charter , in order to make recommendations with respect to maintenance of international peace and security .
If the United States is allowed a unilateral war , we may soon see China invade Taiwan or Russia trying to create another Soviet Union .
Therefore , I ask the Greek Presidency to convoke a General Assembly meeting .
Mr President , the worldwide confrontation on the subject of Iraq between two concepts of international relations is splitting Europe in two .
The crisis is dispelling our illusions and bringing us face to face with reality again .
It is reminding those who had forgotten it that the nation states are still the actors in diplomatic and strategic affairs , that they can , of course , when their interpretations coincide , act effectively together on an inter-governmental basis , and that the European Union is not a political entity .
If Europe has a real presence in this crisis , it is not thanks to the mechanisms of the CFSP , but to the political will of a certain number of European states .
The most determined supporters of the US vision are European , as are its most articulate opponents .
The Convention will therefore have to learn certain lessons from this return to reality .
No-one should continue to imagine that an all-purpose common foreign policy can be imposed by means of majority constraints .
That would be to opt for the alignment of Europe rather than for its independence .
The CFSP must adjust its ambitions to fit the reality . It should assist in harmonising national diplomacies where they are in agreement , and it should let them act separately when that is not the case , and it should never again seek to replace them with artificial and unworkable pseudo-consensus , because that would be acting against the interests of Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the present time makes it possible for us to observe what a misjudgment it is for European states , with their present dimensions , to define their interests solely in national terms , and how impossible it is to get national interests to prevail in global disputes such as these .
We now see this demonstrated by the tragic situation in which the British prime minister finds himself , having been so faithful in his support for the Americans ; his inability to produce the right results means that he may well now be at a disadvantage .
One can also look at this with a certain amount of cynicism , for the one thing that is abundantly clear is that those who act against the interests of the European Union , by failing to seek common positions in accordance with Article 11 of the Treaty of Nice , will not be among the winners in this dispute or in any other , whether they wanted to join in no matter what happened and under any circumstances , or , like the German Federal Chancellor , wanted no part in it whatever .
This is why it is the larger countries that have to understand the fact - of which this crisis is for this reason a helpful demonstration - that the self-interest of a country 's own citizens can be made to prevail only if we find something where all the European states ' interests converge and , together , use that to carry some weight .
It is for this reason that I hope that this crisis , rather than damaging the development of a European foreign and security policy , will serve as a catalyst that will enable us to make the necessary progress on this issue .
If the United States of America declares war unilaterally , we will have great problems persuading our people of that war 's legitimacy .
It will be extremely difficult to restart the transatlantic dialogue , and , above all , to gain our citizens ' support for it .
I believe that it is very much in our common interest that this situation should not be detrimental to transatlantic relations in the long term , and that we must , for this reason , become strong enough to make our visions real and effective in the immediate aftermath of any war in Iraq , - visions that will enable us , quite independently of the security alliance that is NATO , to put transatlantic relations on a new footing in order to make them sustainable in the long term and thereby to gain public support for this relationship on both sides of the Atlantic .
Our plans for the future simply cannot involve the formation of axes with Moscow and Peking , and our choice of role models alienating us from the United States of America , a country with which we have values in common .
I do think , though , that this means that we as the European Union - if we speak with one voice - have to make it clear that , in the fight against dictators like Saddam Hussein and against international terrorism , military action may well be important , but that this war can be won on the global stage only if we possess the capacity for prevention and cultural dialogue , are aware of the concept of social justice , and can work on a large scale in dealing with this subject matter as a whole .
I believe that we have to gain the insight that peace can be brought to the world only if the use of military force does not exclude the use of other means .
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that the applause that greeted your speech simply acknowledged the fact that you have demonstrated , this morning , that a European Commissioner can embody the voice of Europeans and that there is indeed a European line in this crisis .
Thank you .
We are told that a blitzkrieg would make it possible first of all to establish democracy in Iraq and then to dry up the springs of terrorism .
Yet what are we being told about the situation in Afghanistan , where a blitzkrieg has already taken place and where , day after day , in silence , we witness the plight of Afghan women ?
What are we being told about the mobilisation of public opinion , the new super-power ?
Why can we not understand that the public 's determination to take to the streets was based on the conviction that not only would war not dry up the springs of terrorism but also that a unilateral pre-emptive war would give rise to new terrorism ?
It is on the basis of what the demonstrating people of Europe are telling us that we should be acting in the Security Council , and it is unacceptable that , within the United Nations , after we had committed ourselves to disarmament by means of international pressure and after we had found that the process works under the constraints we established together , we should then , in midstream , change the rules and set an ultimatum .
Our hope is that there will be a majority against an ultimatum within the Security Council .
We believe that there will be one .
We believe that war is avoidable .
That will depend to a large extent on Europe .
It will depend to a large extent on you , President-in-Office of the Council , if Mr Blix is to be given the time he tells us he needs in order to finish the job , and he says that that means not weeks or years , but rather months .
It is in this spirit that we believe that the right of veto of certain permanent members of the Security Council should be used if it is not possible to achieve a majority .
However , first of all , let us hope that there will be a majority in the Security Council .
We wanted to have inspections and international legality , and all Europeans agree on that .
The inspectors have carried out their work , and we acknowledge that they have made progress .
The inspectors are asking us for more time , and we must give it to them .
Basically , we know that a new world order is emerging , the one that began , not on 11 September 2001 , but with the fall of the Berlin Wall , which left only one super-power in the world .
In view of this situation , we do not believe that any European country , by itself , can in the long term hold its own against what would effectively be the pax americana .
We are Europeans , in other words we believe in the virtues of debate and conviction , in the uselessness of humiliation and in the need to allow everyone their place on the international scene , and we believe , above all , in international law .
What can Europe do when it is time to make decisions on the Iraqi crisis ?
I say Europe , Mr President , rather than Parliament or the Council or the Commission , and I am thinking of the European people , who are overwhelmingly against a war to disarm Iraq , let alone a war to change the Iraqi regime .
The European Council of 17 February took a stand : war should only be a very last resort and , anyway , there should be no war without a specific United Nations mandate .
Let us remember : Parliament adopted a resolution calling on the Security Council to act against Saddam Hussein because of the terrible crimes he has committed against humanity .
We strongly reaffirm this , because that dictatorship has left an appalling trail of blood in its wake .
That is why Iraq must be disarmed , but only through the UN ; the democratisation of Iraq must be supported , but only through the UN .
Unilateral war will split the UN ; it will split the Atlantic Alliance ; and it will throw Europe into crisis .
We say to some of our European brothers that a vote in the Security Council contrary to the Brussels document , contrary to the will of Parliament and contrary to the Commission 's opinion would strike at the heart of Europe .
Article 19 of the Treaty on European Union lays down that the Member States that are also permanent members of the Security Council should ensure that the positions and interests of the Union are upheld .
What happened in the case of the former Yugoslavia ?
The Security Council could not decide on intervention in Kosovo , but NATO carried it out with the agreement of the European Council .
Also in question are the authority and prestige of our friend and ally , the United States , and also the brotherhood between our peoples , never so close as after 11 September , but today never so threatened on the eve of an unnecessary , unjust and unlawful war .
The United States should realise that the people 's elected representatives meeting here are fighting against anti-Americanism and therefore ask the United States to show more respect for Europe 's ideas and convictions .
Mr President , if Iraq is disarmed without war , it will be a victory for reason , a victory for the UN , and also a victory for the military pressure of the United States and the UK and for the endeavour to oppose unilateralism by France , Germany and Europe .
If there is war , it will be a disaster .
Let us unite , therefore , against the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein and for the freedom of the Iraqi people ; let us keep war away from the young ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , we are on the verge of a disaster announced and desired by the US Government .
It is obvious now that the values upheld by President Bush have nothing to do with democracy , but are values quoted on the stock exchange and values that smell of oil .
Iraq has not yet been crushed under a hail of bombs , yet already the Wall Street Journal of 10 March has announced a USD 900 million invitation to tender by the US Government to five US groups , for the reconstruction of the country .
What an admission that is !
Iraq is only the first country which will be the victim of an offensive to allow US capitalism to globalise its economic , and therefore its military , supremacy , converting people into goods and cannon fodder .
Afghanistan , Colombia , the Philippines , Venezuela , Palestine - no one is to be spared .
Yet , on 15 February , another upheaval occurred .
Thousands of people invaded the streets of our capital cities to say no to war , and they will do so again on 15 March .
Democracy means taking up this challenge , and not a single elected representative or government can escape that fact .
The veto is now on the streets .
Here and in the USA , we all have to decide which side we are on .
Mr President , every day , the advocates of a war in the Middle East resort to ever weaker and ever less credible arguments .
We are obliged to watch as undisguised attempts are made in the Security Council to use economic aid as a bribe to induce African states to consent to war .
Since this House 's last debate on war in Iraq , though , encouraging things have happened .
For the time being , at least , the Turkish parliament has refused to allow the deployment of troops on Turkish territory .
In Great Britain , over two hundred Labour Members of Parliament have expressed their opposition to a war .
They deserve our respect .
Those who oppose the war in Iraq that is being planned are no foes of the United States , but rather defenders of civilisation .
Mr President , will we have to resort to arms in order to make Saddam Hussein give up his programmes for the development , manufacture and stockpiling of weapons of mass destruction once and for all and prove that he has done so ?
I am one of those who still hope that we can avoid doing so and , like Mr Pasqua , I should like to say here and now that I applaud the efforts that France and its government are making to this end .
I also share the opinion of those who maintain that , if we had to envisage this last resort , it could only be with a mandate from the United Nations , the only organisation which is entitled to legitimise such action , and that , Mr Barón Crespo , would betoken a radical change in the behaviour of the international community , which until now has always supported the idea that the use of armed force can only be envisaged in the case of legitimate defence , and therefore in response to an actual attack ?
Ladies and gentlemen , we initiated the reflection on this subject in our previous debates .
Obviously , we have not found a final answer to this question .
However , I should like to remind you that it was on this subject , namely the legitimacy or illegitimacy of any preventive or pre-emptive military action , that our group was unwilling to support the majority position expressed by this House in its last resolution .
In other words , President-in-Office of the Council , how can we stand up to the new challenge posed by international terrorism except by applying , in this field as in any other , the precautionary principle which is now unanimously recognised ?
Personally , I believe that any Head of State or Government who is warned of a serious threat to the lives of thousands of his fellow citizens , and who does not take all measures necessary to protect them from it , will be held guilty in their eyes .
Weapons of mass destruction constitute a real threat to the survival and health of populations .
Every time that the existence of such a threat is confirmed , I believe that it will be the duty of the authorities to remove it , without waiting for it to be implemented , by preventive , diplomatic , economic and political measures and , if those measures are not enough , by the ultimate recourse to the use of military power .
This is what we are all , together , trying to achieve in Iraq , and what it will probably be necessary for us to do tomorrow in North Korea , and it is with that conviction in mind that I would like to repeat , here and now , that our current differences are much more apparent than real .
Mr President , the role of the inspectors appears to be crucial to this debate so perhaps I should spend some time looking at their activities .
Many people have claimed that they have been successful so far ; I have to say that is not my view .
Yes , there has been some success but it really is the tip of the iceberg .
On 7 March UNMOVIC published a document entitled ' Unresolved disarmament issues : Iraq 's proscribed weapons programme ' .
That document is 173 pages long and it lists 29 separate sets of unresolved issues ; these include the strong presumption that 10 000 litres of anthrax still exist .
We also know that a drone has been discovered which is capable of spreading biological and chemical weapons , and we know the cluster bombs have also been discovered .
That is not a success .
The report is a clear indication that Iraq is in breach of Resolution 1441 , it is not fully cooperating with the inspectors , nor is it coming clean .
Indeed on 7 March the Iraqi permanent representative to the UN yet again , despite this evidence , claimed Iraq does not have weapons of mass destruction .
Yet despite this evidence , many people here have said the inspections should continue .
But for how long ?
At what point do we say enough is enough ?
Let us remember that 12 years ago Iraq was given 15 days to disarm .
We know the inspectors have only been allowed in because of military pressure , we know that Saddam Hussein is making concessions in order to drag the process out until the summer when war is impossible .
We know that it will be impossible to maintain the military pressure in those circumstances indefinitely , and we know therefore that once the threat diminishes Saddam Hussein will be back to his old tricks of obstructing the inspectors .
Indeed , only yesterday the U2 spy planes that he gave concessions for were grounded .
Is that not a sign of what is to come ?
Yet we still ask for indefinite inspections , surely that is simply because we do not want to have to make a decision .
Commissioner Patten made a very cogent case setting out the dangers of unilateral action ; there is very little I can disagree with .
What he did not talk about is the future of the UN if we do not take effective action to enforce 12 years of resolutions that have not been followed .
If we cannot take effective action to disarm Iraq then the UN is finished as an effective force and the big countries will be acting unilaterally to the detriment of world peace and stability .
The future of the world is at stake .
We have heard much about ex-presidents , the Pope , academics ; they all have one thing in common , they are totally powerless .
At this time when the future of the world is at stake , we need honesty , courage , determination and nerve to enable the international community to act together .
We must have a second UN resolution , we must have a clear timetable in order to say inspectors can go on for so long but no further .
When that happens , then we must prepare to go to war .
If we do not we are lost .
I am particularly proud of the courage , nerve and clear-sighted vision that have been shown by my party leader and I wish a few more party leaders would do the same .
Mr President , we all know that disarmament , which is making progress , and the removal of Saddam Hussein are merely a pretext .
The real motive , of this there can be no doubt , is the quest of the USA and its allies to control Iraq 's oil fields and geo-strategic position .
It is also a fact that the war , with or without a UN resolution , will have terrible consequences not just for the Iraqi people , but for the region , Europe and the world as a whole .
The question is , will the Greek Presidency and the European Union respond to the massive opposition being voiced by our and the American people and prevent this senseless crime ?
Will they use their 4 votes in the Security Council to do this ?
Will the Greek and other governments stop helping to prepare for war by giving the aggressors every possible assistance ?
At this crucial stage , when the Soviet Union is highly conspicuous by its absence , I make a last appeal to you and all my honourable friends ; we must prevent this war , which will serve as a precedent for more war .
We must bar the road to ruin !
At the same time , let us express our solidarity with the Iraqi people in their fight to overturn this tyrannical regime .
Mr President , the news arriving this morning from New York that they are thinking of extending the ultimatum makes us continue to hope that the Iraqi crisis may be resolved without taking up arms .
The willingness of the United States and the United Kingdom to extend the ultimatum to Saddam Hussein opens up a new glimmer of hope for peace .
These are still the days of politics and diplomacy , and every attempt must be made to avert war : a goal that it is not impossible to achieve .

Above all - and here I agree with Mr Poettering - it is up to Saddam Hussein to destroy the banned weapons without hesitation and without pretence ; it is up to Saddam Hussein to collaborate with the UN inspectors without wasting time ; and the Iraqi dictator still has the option of leaving his country , to release it from an illiberal regime and restore it to democracy : a choice invoked by many of the Members sitting in this House too .

Europe must also make its loud voice heard , however , by avoiding divisions and conflict .
The document adopted on 17 February must be the starting point for action by the Council and the Commission , and it is the primary duty of all the political groups represented in Parliament to act to prevent the credibility of the United Nations being eroded away .
European politics and diplomacy must move to prevent that institution , with which we all identify , from emerging from the international crisis deprived of its role as the protector of the international rule of law , and we must also act to prevent another multilateral body , the Atlantic Alliance , from losing its credibility .
We therefore have the duty , Mr President , of working to preserve the unity of Europe ; there must be a huge effort from everybody to overcome the divisions that have been revealed this week : a weak and divided Europe does not serve the cause of peace .
We must learn from these difficulties so that Europe can , once again , play a leading role on the international stage .
We must not , however , Mr President , forget the relationship and shared values that link us to the United States of America - a country deeply scarred by the attacks of 11 September , attacks that also scarred every one of us , every European - and we must not allow Washington to be left alone .
This is because every act of international diplomacy these days can only be aimed at building a solution to the Iraqi crisis .
The European Union and the United States must find joint initiatives within the framework of the international order .
Mr President , history has taught us that it is almost impossible to work together with dictators , because they do not care if their own people suffer .
That is also the case with the Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein .
The Iraqi people have had to pay dearly for their leader 's unyielding attitude .
Iraq 's leadership has not even wanted to fully exploit the ' oil for food ' programme , but has preferred to allow its citizens to suffer from a lack of adequate nourishment and medicine .
For us Europeans , who work on the assumption that there should be compliance with international agreements and a policy of cooperation , it has been a difficult experience to find that only military pressure has persuaded Saddam Hussein to allow the work of the weapons inspectors to be carried out .
Prior to that the Iraqi leadership had defied the decisions of the UN and not agreed to give up its weapons of mass destruction and weapons programmes .
Although there has been progress with the weapons inspections there are still more than a hundred unanswered questions in the weapons inspectors ' reports .
They concern such matters as unmanned fighter aircraft and the fate of scud missiles and the anthrax solutions .
My country , Finland , strongly emphasises the importance of the UN 's role in finding a solution to the Iraq crisis .
President Halonen said yesterday that Finland will support the Security Council and its decisions and that force without its authorisation was unacceptable .
Halonen also said that Finland supports the continuation of the work of the weapons inspectors as long as it is meaningful and useful .
The Security Council must consider how much time it has got left on the basis of the weapons inspectors ' report .
It is extremely important that the Security Council members use all their skill to achieve unanimity .
The aim should obviously be for Iraq to be disarmed without the use of force .
If this calls for military action it must have the approval of the Security Council .
Purposeful diplomacy must come before public appearances by the Security Council members .
The weapons inspectors must be given enough time to do their work , but that must not mean that Saddam Hussein can play endless games with the international community .
Throngs of people throughout the world have gone onto the streets to demonstrate in favour of a peaceful solution to the Iraq dispute .
There must be a genuine chance for peace , but the precondition for a peaceful solution is that the international community must be certain that Iraq does not have dangerous weapons of mass destruction in its possession or any programmes to develop them .
The role of the UN and its Security Council must come first in resolving the Iraq crisis .
If the UN cannot now act we are in danger of losing the most essential global instrument we have in safeguarding world peace .
The European Union must now take a united stand and use all its powers to shore up the viability of the UN .
Mr President , it has fallen to my country 's government to drink of this bitter cup .
These are difficult times , but we have ability and experience on our side ; the experience of previous Greek presidencies and of the administration of the late Andreas Papandreou , who was firmly in favour of peace and the autonomy of Europe .
We can maintain our alliances , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , including with the USA , but - to quote an historic precedent - it was not America 's friends who told them to drop napalm on Vietnam ; America 's friends told them to stop the war .
We can fight for the unity of the European Union - which has become a laughing stock , with United Kingdom officials running around Cameroon , Angola and Guinea in a bid to drag them into the war - by supporting the principles of the Treaties of the European Union on peace , the founding Charter of the UN and boxing Blair 's and Aznar 's ears .
We can forge a massive alliance with the people of Europe .
No presidency has been in the privileged position of having the people of Europe take to the streets and standing united .
They need a common reference point , not just Mr Schroeder or Mr Chirac ; they also need Mr Simitis , the head of the Greek Presidency .
These are hard times and , like Belgium , we are a small country .
Your heart is in the right place , but we want results .
Commissioner Patten , thank you and congratulations on your speech .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is only 18 months since the tragic events of 11 September and Mr Bush and his chiefs of staff have managed to achieve what one would have thought impossible , even for the frequently clumsy diplomacy of the Americans : they have alienated almost unanimous and unreserved support for the USA and its efforts to combat terrorism and have replaced it with an equally universal and unanimous coalition against the American Government and its war and strategy plans .
This is not due to differences over the depressing , dictatorial regime in Iraq or even the dangers inherent in Saddam Hussein 's possessing weapons of mass destruction , dangers which were confirmed and agreed in Resolution 1441 , which must be applied fully , no one doubts that ; an overwhelming majority of people and governments throughout the world have realised that this crisis goes far beyond Iraq and its leadership and basically has to do with the future order of the world , a world being called on to choose between high-handed unilateralism on the one hand and legitimate collective management of international problems on the other .
In other words , it is being called on to choose between the principles and rules set out in the UN Charter and the material components of Washington 's new strategic dogma , which favours a Weltanschauung of pre-emptive strikes , unilateral violent intervention , undermining of the UN and expedient , supposedly voluntary alliances determined by the military operation of the day , rather than fundamental , procedural privileges in keeping with the international legal order which has applied in the past .
It is precisely against these prospects that we need a firm stand by the European Union and the European Parliament , as the elected representative of its people , who have joined with the American people in a common fight to defend the rule of law which the current American administration seems determined to flout .
Mr President , Commissioner , perhaps we shall succeed in saving Europe , and that would , at least , be something .
It is true that , after a year of uncertainty , of contradiction and of conflict , there are positive signs .
The disarmament of Iraq is underway .
The voice of the people is making itself heard on the streets and it is doing so , as I would remind Mr Titley , along with not only the Pope and the universities , but also with millions of other people .
We have seen , in effect , that even with massive propaganda , neither sarcasm , nor threats , nor portfolio policy have succeeded in stopping the protests .
Moreover , remarkable and intense diplomatic efforts are being made within the UN , and there is also , thank goodness , the work of the Greek Presidency .
The paradox , however , is that war has never been so close , and that , if disarmament is the objective of this war , disarmament is , in fact , taking place .
If the objective is democracy in Iraq , there are ways , other than war , of creating it .
Let us talk about removing the embargo , the International Criminal Court , the civil society which exists in Iraq and which deserves encouragement , but let us not talk about war .
Then again , if the problem is geopolitical and economic , if it is power versus law , then no , no , and no again , and we must oppose it .
Tzvetan Todorov , who studied the totalitarian systems of the twentieth century , had an excellent way of describing this .
He said that democracy is not immunised against the temptation of the good , which may lead it to the worst , in other words the dropping of humanitarian bombs .
Let us not , tomorrow , drop humanitarian bombs on Iraq , on an Iraq which we shall have succeeded in disarming , but not succeeded in protecting .
Mr President , military intervention should only be used as a last resort and to use it now in Iraq would be premature and unjustified , with far-reaching consequences beyond its immediate target .
Furthermore , trading insults across the Atlantic serves no purpose , and only makes matters worse .
It is hurtful to be accused of being anti-American simply because one is opposed to the policy of the current US Administration .
It adds further insult to injury when one is accused of forgetting the US contribution to two world wars .
The reason why the European Union displayed such strong unity and solidarity in the wake of 11 September is because we appreciated that contribution , and value the strong transatlantic alliance .
That does not mean that we should not be able to disagree on occasions , especially when we believe the strategy to be wrong .
Foreign policy hawks in the US Administration would do well to remember that the roots of current world crises relating to Saddam Hussein and Osama Bin Laden are a product of past dubious US foreign policy decisions .
It was the US that provided resources and support to these unsavoury individuals when they were their allies .
Now the whole world - not simply America - is paying the price of these errors of judgement .
The UK and the US should pause and reflect before they embark on a course of action without UN authority .
The UN is the accepted custodian of international law , with unique structures and processes to uphold it .
This means that anyone supporting this principle must abide by its decisions , including the use of veto .
One simply cannot adopt an à la carte approach .
Military action without UN approval will increase antagonisms between the West and the Muslim world ; it will inflame the Middle East and it will deal a devastating blow , not only to the credibility of the UN , but also to the future potential of the European Union Common and Foreign Security Policy .
Mr President , many claim the split over Iraq is between Europe and the USA .
However , in reality it is between France and Germany and 19 other pro-US new European governments .
France and Germany have alienated America , undermined the UN and NATO and exposed the difficulties of achieving the CFSP .
France and Russia will be judged harshly for using their UN veto for cynical , commercial interests in a second resolution , sending all the wrong signals to Baghdad .
There are legitimate differences over the immediacy of the military threat posed by Iraq , but Saddam Hussein continues to defy the credibility of the UN in its pursuit of weapons of mass destruction .
Interestingly , Iraq and North Korea are the only two cases in the world of non-compliance with NPT safeguard agreements and I would not wish to see Iraq in the position that North Korea is in now , possessing nuclear weapons and immune from assault .
Personally , I am convinced of the need for regime change , ideally via Saddam 's exile or , failing that , by military intervention , as the only way to ensure a disarmed and peaceful Iraq .
The allies must install a democratic government to prevent refugee flows or instability in the region , allowing the 200 000 in my constituency , London , to return and guarantee that Iraq 's oil wealth be used for its people and not for arms purchases .
The alternative is to contain Saddam for a while until the world 's attention is focused elsewhere and he can once again rearm .
The Clinton administration appeased North Korea for years , bankrolling the regime while it starved its own people and secretly carried on developing nuclear weapons , contrary to the 1994 agreement .
Perhaps the appeasers in this House could also explain why they embraced a war in Kosovo that involved no weapons of mass destruction or threat to other states without any UN authority and now find it so difficult to take action against an evil , genocidal dictator who has started two wars responsible for the deaths of almost one million people and who has gassed more people in a single day than died in the whole of the Kosovo conflict .
Certainly , once the almost inevitable war is over , the US , through the Quartet , must show resolve for a road map solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict and ensure a viable two-state solution .
In the meantime , let us not be deterred from confronting a dangerous menace when we can .
Mr President , in recent weeks we have witnessed dangerous rifts in the United Nations and in the international institutions of the democracies .
The future European Union is already split between 18 countries which have declared one view and three or four which have declared the opposite .
NATO effectiveness may have been fatally undermined .
Instead of joining America , Britain , Spain , Bulgaria and so many other countries in a display of solidarity and determination , the government of one particular EU Member State has gone to quite extraordinary lengths to protect Saddam Hussein 's regime from the consequences of its activities and to derail the efforts of the international coalition against Saddam .
What possible motive could there be for this ?
Much nonsense is talked about who armed Saddam .
We should be clear that it is Russia and France that armed him .
I am not talking about the Osirak nuclear reactors supplied 30 years ago , which provided the basis for Saddam 's original nuclear weapons programme I am merely making the observation that there are no American F-16s or British Tornadoes in the Iraqi air force , but there is a solid inventory of MiGs , Sukhois and Mirage F1s , as well as the Roland Air Defence System , Pannard armoured personnel carriers , Milan Anti-Tank Guided Weapons Systems and Exocet missiles .
Much nonsense has also been talked about control of Iraqi oil .
We should be aware that Iraq 's policy is to award gas and oil concessions to countries supporting the easing or lifting of UN sanctions .
For example , last October the Deutsche Bank estimated that contracts concerning new oil fields in Iraq , worth USD 38 billion , were signed with oil companies mainly from China , France and Russia .
It is right also not to allow the idea to persist that two or three countries speak for Europe , define its policies and drive them forward , while the views of the rest , many of which attach great importance to the transatlantic alliance , are portrayed as some sort of aberration .
Mr President , this is the second time that I have spoken in a legislative assembly in support of a British Prime Minister contemplating sending British troops into action in Iraq .
I did so 12 years ago when the then Conservative Prime Minister , the then Conservative Government , of which Commissioner Patten was a distinguished Member , committed British troops to repel the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait .
I find myself in the extraordinary position today of supporting a Labour Government , a Labour Prime Minister and a Labour leader of the delegation here in this Parliament in the words that they say and in the actions that they propose .
Twelve years ago we stopped at the gates of Baghdad .
We did so on a commitment by Saddam Hussein that the weapons of mass destruction would be dismantled .
Twelve years later , countless resolutions later , countless promises later , countless inspections later , that commitment has still not been fulfilled .
We are where we are today because of that .
We have a simple choice : either we believe what Saddam Hussein says and believe that he will still go on to disarm in a voluntary way , or we take the hard , difficult decision to commit the lives of our young men and women to enforce the will of the international community .
We may have to do that because , if we do not , we send a message to those who would follow Saddam Hussein that they can get away with it , and we send an even worse message to the great nation of the United States which has stood by this continent in good times and in bad that it is on its own .
As Winston Churchill said 60 years ago : ' We are either with the American people , we are part of them , or we are not ' .
That remains as true today as when it was first said .
Mr President , I speak as the PPE-DE Group spokesman on Islamic affairs and as a longstanding member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
Let us look at the politics .
The failure of the CFSP is our fault .
The Bush administration has never hidden its determination to remove Saddam Hussein by force if necessary .
Congress approved this and Europe largely ignored it .
Instead of seeking common ground and leading the debate , France and Britain - the two countries most responsible for the mess in the Middle East after the First World War - have fallen out again .
I have an interest here , as my kinsman T. E. Lawrence sought and expected Arab autonomy .
Meanwhile , in speech after speech , Washington , with the security of a President in mid-term , has placed a vast army in the region and has explicitly talked about wider regime change .
Indeed , the road map for peace between Israel and Palestine is published - it is on the Palestinian Authority 's website .
We all know that in the democracies public opinion is opposed to conflict .
Who knows , however , what real public opinion is in the Arab countries ?
We can learn something from the comprehensive UNDP report written last year by Arabs , which states : ' Political participation in Arab countries remains weak , as manifested in the lack of genuine representative democracy and restrictions on liberties ' .
At the same time , people 's aspirations for more freedom and greater participation in decision-making , have grown , fuelled by rising incomes , education and information flows .
So speaks the United Nations .
It should be observed that there is nothing inherently intolerant and oppressive in the letter of the Islamic faith and in earlier centuries Islam exercised a culturally progressive and civilising influence .
Our efforts to promote democracy and human rights in the world are founded in the framework of the Democracy and Human Rights Programme .
The core principles of the CFSP - promotion of democracy , human rights , the rule of law and fundamental freedoms - are absolutely crucial here .
Mr President , I too should like to thank everyone for their comments , views and positions , which send out a number of important messages , not just to the Council but to the general public and international players .
As the President said , this is a very interesting debate and I should like to try and respond to 3 or 4 basic questions which all of you have raised in one way or another .
First of all , is there any possibility of resolving the crisis diplomatically in the short time left .
It seems to me that all of you , like the Council of the European Union and the unanimous Security Council , take the same position on disarming Iraq and the need for immediate and unrestricted cooperation with the Security Council on the part of Saddam Hussein .
I think it is important - after all we are a democratic society ; here we are in the European Parliament and we live in a democratic European Union - not to interpret our differences as sending out the wrong message to Saddam Hussein , a message that we are divided on the final objective .
The final objective is quite specific and we are all agreed on it .
The second point is that the summit Council basically instructed the Greek Presidency to take initiatives .
First of all we have to exhaust and make every effort to exhaust diplomatic channels to resolve the Iraqi crisis .
We have , of course , emphasised that Saddam Hussein himself is responsible for any consequences .
However , and this is a personal opinion based on my own experience , after monitoring the Security Council and the General Affairs Council very closely over recent weeks , I believe , as Kofi Annan said , that we too bear a considerable responsibility .
Our responsibility is to remain united , so that we can formulate a common position and speak with one voice here ; our responsibility is to empower the UN with the authority and the resources at our disposal .
That is what will make us more efficient , especially when it comes to resolving the problem peacefully .
The European Union did not discount the possibility of using military force at the summit Council but , as Mr Anderson and Mr Cushnahan and many other members pointed out , this should be the last resort .
We know what the consequences of war are ; they are manifold and unpleasant and the Council has naturally insisted that every initiative should be exhausted .
That is why we took the initiative of ongoing cooperation , conferences and meetings with the Arab world , that is why the Arab League will be making representations to Saddam Hussein over the next few days , in order to send out an important , clear message .

However , the question posed by Mr Watson and , even more insistently by Mr Cohn-Bendit is , I think , a reasonable question .
Mr Cohn-Bendit asked why the United States or the international community could not say that we have succeeded .
Indeed , we did succeed in putting inspectors into Iraq , in getting inspections under way and in making progress with disarmament ; but certain Member States of the European Union take a different view .
And this is one of the problems we face . Whether the glass is half full or half empty .
And when the Arabs ask for clarification as to what message they should send Baghdad , the current discussion in the Security Council about so-called benchmarks is extremely important .
Are there specific targets which would allow us to assess whether Saddam Hussein has taken the strategic decision to disarm at the insistence of the Americans and the British ?
And if there are , how long should this assessment take ?
As Mr Titley pointed out , there comes a point at which enough is enough .
The summit Council has already agreed that there has to be a cut-off point .
Even in the Security Council , the two sides to the debate have already agreed that there has to be a cut-off point , but of course they differ as to where that cut-off point is .
However , that proves that there is room for the two sides to meet half way , if they can agree on the cut-off point and the benchmarks for assessing Saddam Hussein 's credibility .
So I believe that we should not see war as a foregone conclusion .
I would again point out that the European Council 's position is that war is not inevitable and I would emphasise again today that , until the first bomb is dropped , war is not inevitable .
We need to continue in our diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis peacefully .
I also believe that a diplomatic solution is not only feasible , but that , even if we cannot find a diplomatic solution , we still do not need to take unilateral action , as Mr Barón Crespo quite rightly said , and I think the European Union has an important role to play here .
That brings me to the second point I wished to make about a European voice , about a European presence , to quote Mr Poettering , about European unity .
Of course , as Mr Alavanos quite rightly pointed out , the presidency can only act within the framework of the decisions , the unanimous decisions taken by the Council .
However , we do have a common position .
We have common conclusions although we differ in our practical approach .
What happens next ?
In my view , and again it is a personal view based on my own experience over recent weeks , there is the will for rapprochement and unity within the Council and we should build on this momentum over the next few days in order to see if we can find a common stand , including on specific action .
Of course , the final decision as to what we are going to do about Iraq does not rest with the European Union .
It rests with the Security Council .
I should also like to comment on something Chris Patten quite rightly said about the unity of the European Union .
My feeling is that often the larger Member States do not realise that in these times , in the present era of globalisation , even they do not have the weight needed to make a difference on the international political stage on their own .
We can play a part on the political stage if we work hard - large , small and medium-sized countries together , with a strong , united , European voice .
That brings me to the question of Europe 's presence .
I think that the crisis in Iraq has highlighted important questions about what happens the day after the crisis , whenever that may be .
First , in the Convention on the future of Europe , questions such as stepping up the debate about defence and our foreign policy and even , I think , the power of the European institutions , the authority of the European institutions and the democratic credentials of the European institutions , so that they can stand united and with an authority that truly represents the citizens of Europe .
Secondly , the question of our basic decision to develop our defence capabilities , the technological and industrial resources at our disposal and , more importantly , the question of Europe 's credibility , so that it can submit its own proposals for dealing with major issues , such as the issue of weapons of mass destruction , the issue of terrorism and so on .
We have demonstrated our skills over recent years in foreign policy , witness the Balkans .
We have a unified , cohesive , substantive policy which has an influence in the area .
I think that we should take this as an example when deciding what to do next .
Finally , as far as a European voice is concerned , I have a couple of comments to make about enlargement .
It is vital for enlargement to proceed and not to be affected by the present climate and for us to learn from the lessons this experience has taught us .
First of all , we are a community of values which respects differences of opinion - and there are differences - and we want the new countries joining us to join a democratic society .
That is , if you like , the meaning of enlargement .
It means integrating them into a democratic society of values ; at the same time , the message to them is that democracy also means being able to combine these views into a common strategy on numerous issues .
My third point , and this was a question raised by a number of members , concerns the crisis in the United States .
I agree with the numerous speakers who say that ' anti-Americanism ' versus ' pro-American policy ' is a false dilemma .
It would be a big mistake to get tied up in conventions and stereotypes : new Europe versus old Europe , America as the baddies , Europe as the goodies or Europe as the baddies , weak Europe versus strong America .
This would only obscure the real dialogue and the real debate needed .
It is high time we held a detailed debate about practicalities here on earth , about the real problems , as Mr Patten and Mr Pasqua and numerous other speakers said .
What are the threats today ?
How are we going to deal with these issues ?
How are we going to deal with terrorism ?
We understand the scar left by September 11 .
But at the same time , as Mr Patten said , what is the reason for terrorism in Palestine ?
Is a strategic , policing approach the only way to wipe out terrorism ?
Or do we in fact need to win the hearts and minds of the people in the regions in which violence and conflict often foster terrorism ?
This is where Europe has an important part to play .
As Mr Patten said , we invest in humanitarian aid and development aid and we open our markets to regions throughout the world in order to boost their economies .
We deal with problems such as poverty , the environment , equality , ethnic crises and fundamentalism .
These are the issues we should be discussing with the United States , so that we can work out a new policy for dealing with these problems in a new era .
And this is not a weak Europe talking .
It is a Europe of values and experience .
I should like to say here that you , the European Parliament , have a very important part to play .
It is not enough for the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the presidency or Mr Solana or Mr Patten to meet Colin Powell or whoever happens to be the US Secretary of State at the time .
We need to actively involve American society and talk to it and the European Parliament can play a very important role in this dialogue with American society , especially with the American Congress .
I have spoken with the President of Parliament about his initiatives and I think he is in full agreement with this prospect .
Fourthly , I should like to say something about the Arab world .
Many of you emphasised that this crisis must not be a clash of cultures or religions and highlighted a real fear that such might be the outcome of this crisis .
I can tell you from my own experience and from my discussions with the Arab world that the action , role and voice of Europe have helped not only to prevent this but to strengthen our cooperation with the Arab world .
Our partnership with them is very important .
We share a common fate in our region when it comes to security in the region and numerous other issues , such as the economy and political cooperation and , as we have announced repeatedly , we are committed to resolving the Middle East conflict .
We want to put relations between Israel and the European Union on a new footing , we too want to help bring about security in the region , but we feel that there will be a more basic , if you like permanent , guarantee of the security of Israel if the Middle East question is resolved , if a credible , organised , democratic Palestinian state is created and , of course , if the entire region then works with Israel , in accordance with the Arab League initiatives , recognising it and helping to guarantee its security .
So I think our position is very important and the Arabs certainly approve of it .
However , as Mr Brok said , cultural dialogue is the top priority .
The Arab League asked us to set up a cultural dialogue , we accepted this proposal , it is already under way and I personally mentioned to the Arab summit that we need to discuss issues such as terrorism , security , human rights , the involvement of civil society and democracy , the role of women in society and the UNDP report , which is highly instructive on the reforms needed in the Arab world .
Mr Cohn-Bendit spoke about democracy in the Arab world .
We do not disagree ; I agree entirely and have emphasised the fact that democracy , the notion of democracy cannot be imposed .
The word itself tells us that it originates in the public , the people , the citizenry , that it comes from the bottom up .
We therefore have to cultivate democratic institutions .
And here again the European Union has a very important part to play in the Arab world , in a dialogue to assist these very reforms , with respect for the Arab world and with respect for its understandable sensitivities .
We have already decided to start the cultural dialogue at the political level , as well as with religious leaders and other intellectuals , to start a Euro-Arab dialogue and to start a debate on the role of women within the context of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
I should like to thank Mrs Diamantopoulou , who will make a special contribution to the forthcoming debate on the role of women with her report on the role of women to the meeting of Euro-Mediterranean partners .
Finally , here too Parliament has a very important role to play , especially the European Parliament , where we want to formalise the meeting of parliamentarians within the context of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
Before I finish , I should like to comment briefly on a matter which was raised .
Turkey .
Both Mr Watson and Mr Cohn-Bendit asked whether Cyprus and democratic developments in Turkey will be the first victims .
There may indeed be a great deal of fallout from the crisis and we shall have to deal with it , regardless of whether or not there is a war .
We are deeply concerned about Turkey , it is a candidate country and , as the European Union , we have a special responsibility for it because it is a candidate country , we have a responsibility because in 2004 we have an important decision to take about Turkey 's progress towards Europe , a decision about its progress towards integration which , as I said earlier , means integration into a community of values .
And it would , of course , be a double whammy if this very progress towards change and reform in Turkey were to fall foul of the crisis .
I think that the Turkish parliament really is acquiring democratic momentum which we must respect and build on .
Here again the European Parliament has an important role to play .
I think we all need to keep up our efforts to bring about democratic change in Turkey .
We also need to understand why Turkey has a number of serious fears about Iraq , especially the integrity of Iraq .
If Iraq 's integrity cannot be safeguarded , the Kurdish question will blow up in our faces .
The European Union is committed to protecting the democratic and minority rights of the Kurds .
Iraq may perhaps become a federation at a later date .
However , the European Union is against any thought of changing the borders and threatening the territorial integrity of Iraq .
I think this is an important message that needs to be underlined .
( Applause )
This crisis is also causing Turkey serious economic problems , which will be even worse if there is a war and we in the European Union must understand that .
At the same time , Turkey 's progress towards the European Union calls for a solution to the Cyprus question .
On behalf of the presidency , I should like to express our appreciation of all Kofi Annan 's efforts to resolve this problem .
However , these efforts are not finished .
This chapter has not closed and , of course , the Cyprus question will not be sacrificed to Iraq .
I think there is still a great deal of momentum and there will be increasing momentum as Cyprus integrates into the European Union .
We want the Turkish Cypriots with us .
We want them here in this Chamber .
We want them in the Council , we want them in the European institutions .
( Applause )
That means , however , the Cyprus question needs to be resolved .
We want to see the Turkish Cypriot community with us .
That means we also want Turkey 's help to ensure that the Turkish Cypriots do not remain excluded from this big family , this community of values .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have spoken for longer than the Rules of Procedure allow .
My thanks to you and the President for your forbearance but , as I am sure you understand , this is a very important debate .
I just want to finish with a couple of comments .
We are indeed in the middle of a crisis but , as the Chinese say , a crisis is both a threat and an opportunity .
The main opportunity here is to reform our own institutions and operations so that we have a more important voice on the international stage , a united voice .
In turn , unity must be based on the democratic credentials of any new institutions we set up and on our addressing the democratic deficit , because our citizens want this common voice and have already said as much by taking to the streets of the European Union .
Secondly , it is an opportunity to restate our relations with the Arab world , as I said , through cultural dialogue .
It is an opportunity for new relations with the United States , articulated around the issues of security , democracy and multilateral diplomacy .
As Mrs Berès and several other members said about the UN , it is an opportunity to empower this organisation , because the interdependency of developments on the international stage , technological , economic , political and environmental developments , which give rise to interdependent interests , raises the problem of global intergovernmentalism .
And the question of global intergovernmentalism raises the basic issue of what principles this global intergovernmentalism is to be based on , so that we live in a world which will have many problems , but which will resolve its problems peacefully , in a spirit of justice and respect for human beings and our environment .
Europe is a prototype for multilateral cooperation , the like of which the world has never seen .
This teaching power is a decisive factor .
And what we teach is the strength of law , not the law of the strong .
This moral authority must be safeguarded if we want to live in a world of security and freedom .
Ladies and gentlemen , the presidency will make every effort to respond to the demands of the citizens of the European Union , the European Parliament and the Member States .
At the same time , whatever the outcome of the crisis , I should like to call on you to work with us and use this opportunity to ensure that a stronger Europe emerges from this crisis and the voice of our values is heard loud and clear on the international stage , calling for greater democracy and security on our continent .
( Applause )
At his press conference the day before yesterday , the President of the French Republic rightly emphasised the fact that the deployment of UK and US forces on the borders of Iraq was the real cause of the resumption of the inspections and the obtaining of the first tangible results .
It is no paradox to maintain that this deployment has enabled us , so far , to make a little progress , peacefully , towards our common objective , that is to say the disarmament of Iraq .
In today 's debate , however , we have clearly felt , among certain speakers , the beginnings of a slide towards a sort of anti-American exaltation .
The chairman of the Communist Group , for example , was pleased to see the coming together of what he called the largest peace camp seen since the end of the cold war .
This argument reminded us of the old dialectic which we used to hear too much of precisely during the cold war .
Thanks to that argument , the objective of disarming Saddam Hussein , and even sometimes of condemning him , has gradually disappeared behind anti-American jubilation .
For my part , I should like to avoid such distractions , and return to the main question which we are beginning to forget : namely , how to disarm Saddam Hussein without waiting ten years to do it .
The next item is the vote
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , many thanks for that welcome .
This draft regulation on the legal framework within which Eurostat operates is intended to improve comparisons of Member States ' gross domestic products by making them more complete and more reliable . As such it is one that we can all support .
There are , though , two aspects of it to which I would now like to draw attention .
The first thing is that the Council and the Commission are still in dispute about the deadline by which data on aggregate gross national income - please take note that it is no longer called the gross domestic product - has to be forwarded to Eurostat in Luxembourg .
This used to be 30 September ; the Commission proposed that it should be 15 September , and a majority on the Council had already decided in favour of 22 September .
That seems rather like haggling .
As rapporteur , I asked myself whether we should go along with this game , but we decided to leave well alone .
To add to that , the Commission has attempted , by way of comitology - something that certain Members find intensely fascinating - to change the character of the former committee .
We are not joining in this charade either .
There is , though , another peculiarity to which I would like to draw your attention .
One of the recitals states that the GNI data have to be complete , that is to say , they must include not only the data held by the tax authorities or other official bodies , but also those on undeclared activities .
I was then curious enough to ask how the Member States measure such undeclared activities as prostitution , for example .
It appears that there is a rule of thumb for this purpose .
In some Member States , it comes to 1 % , equal to agriculture 's contribution to the GNI ; in the candidate Member States , it is estimated at 2 % .
Work that out if you can .
It also appears that various Member States are very wary about estimating such illegal activities as , for example , the trade in drugs , when returns have to be made to Eurostat .
Why is this so ?
It is known that an ever-increasing share of the EU 's own resources is dependent on the gross domestic product .
It therefore follows that some Member States do not give the full figures , as then they would have to pay more .
On the other hand , they then also have to pay in dribs and drabs , that is to say , by underestimating their GNI .
Then , of course , they would have problems complying with the Maastricht criteria .
I know that the President-in-Office of the Council has spoken for too long , but I wanted to keep you informed , just so that you know what you are about to vote on .
Thank you .
You did not disappoint us .
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0058 / 2003 ) by Diana Wallis , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the Commission Green Paper on alternative dispute resolution in civil and commercial law ( COM ( 2002 ) 196 - C5-0284 / 2002 - 2002 / 2144 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0057 / 2003 ) by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the promotion of the use of biofuels for transport ( 12695 / 1 / 2002 - C5-0585 / 2002 - 2001 / 0265 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : María del Pilar Ayuso González )
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0042 / 2003 ) by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision ( 11212 / 4 / 2002 - C5-0534 / 2002 - 2000 / 0260 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Othmar Karas )
Before the vote :
Mr President , the Karas report was discussed yesterday evening from 11 p.m. until midnight , with low attendance and no journalists .
This is scandalous since this is a very important report , and I believe Parliament is doing itself a disservice by systematically relegating legislative reports to the small hours of the morning .
How can you expect our legislative work to be respected if we do not respect the work of Mr Karas and others , who have put a lot of work into this extremely important directive ?
The group leaders will have noted your comments .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Joint motion for a resolution
Mr President , at the eleventh hour the rapporteur , Mr Thomas Mann , has made some further effort to move some way towards my group 's position .
We very much appreciate this effort .
Nevertheless , the result does not yet entirely meet our expectations .
This is because there are a number of passages concerning SME policy and concerning tax reduction that we cannot wholeheartedly support .
I would therefore like to call on my group to refrain from voting on this report .
. ( PT ) I broadly share the rapporteur 's concerns about the need to adapt companies ' obligations to file information to the digital age .
I believe that the greater speed and transparency resulting from these measures will provide greater certainty and security for companies ' corporate life and for commercial practices , benefiting all those involved , the interested parties in general and , ultimately , end consumers themselves .
In fact , there is an entire range of documents and information detailing the true corporate situation of companies that is not always made available in time either to their shareholders or to their trading partners .
This could lead to clearly unnecessary damage , arising solely from an ignorance of the facts which , in addition to the requirement formally to publish such information , would require genuine and effective publicity . In a borderless area , this will only be possible by using the most up-to-date techniques and information technologies and the voluntary publishing of information in other languages .
The provision that companies ' websites should also contain the minimum particulars laid down in Article 4 of Directive 68 / 151 / EEC is also important .
This directive would also need to be updated with regard to the types of company it covers and with regard to its references to accounting requirements .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of this report because I attach enormous importance to adopting better and swifter measures for dispute resolution in civil and commercial matters .
Establishing such measures is an essential prerequisite for making recourse to the courts and to traditional arbitration mechanisms less frequent , sparing these institutions from having to rule on matters which , being less complex , could be resolved by alternative dispute resolution models .
I am pleased to note and endorse the rapporteur 's recommendation that the Commission should ' be cautious and undertake in-depth studies and wide-ranging consultations before considering proposing any legislative initiatives ' .
Such measures are required by the particular sensitivity of litigious situations and the principle of subsidiarity , which can never be undermined in justice-related issues , particularly in terms of compliance with national legal systems and extra-judicial dispute resolution mechanisms already existing in them .
I also agree with the rapporteur on the need to reduce formalities to a minimum and to eschew legal jargon , whilst not , of course , affecting the right to justice or to legal security and quality , and without undermining parties ' rights to take decisions reached outside the judicial system through the courts .
Mr President , when I voted in favour of the Ayuso González report , I did so as a matter of firm conviction , and in doing so I am in agreement with the overwhelming majority in this House , for the fact that only five Members did not vote in favour of it should be a signal to those elements in the Council who have hitherto sought to prevent or delay favourable treatment for biofuels .
All the arguments speak in favour of biofuels : abandoning excessive dependence , greater benefits for the environment , and an increase in the sources of income available to rural firms .
This makes it incomprehensible that there should be so little awareness on the part of certain elements in the Council , comparable to their ignorance of the promotion of electricity generation from renewable energy sources .
I hope that this solidly united vote by Parliament will , as it is intended to do , stir up the Council to demonstrate some awareness and enable us to benefit the environment , to strengthen agriculture and , above all , to be less dependent on others for energy .
. ( FR ) At first reading , Parliament presented a series of amendments aimed at quite rightly recognising pure plant oil ( PPO ) as a biofuel .
These various amendments have not been taken up in the common position adopted by the Council , and this is why I am voting in favour of Amendment No 7 tabled by the competent committee .
In fact , there is good reason to recognise pure plant oil as a biofuel given its many environmental advantages , but also because the decentralised production of oil in farms would allow the farmers in question to gain added value from their production .
The main criticism made in relation to the use of PPO relates to the need to adapt diesel engines .
However , this need could work in favour of PPO , since an entire economic sector could thereby be established , with all the economic and social benefits that would bring .
Furthermore , adaptations of engines are also necessary for other alternative fuels which do benefit from tax exemption : hydrogen , liquefied natural gas , electricity , etc .
. ( PT ) I congratulate Mrs Ayuso González on the document on which we have voted today in plenary and which I fully support .
I am of the same mind as the rapporteur on the need to establish a legal framework that will enable the use of alternative fuels for road transport to be promoted and developed , not only because of the security that this guarantees for investors but also because of what it represents for the worldwide effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , particularly in the framework of the commitments given in Kyoto .
In this context , I wish to highlight the potential importance of tax incentives for promoting the development of biofuels in contributing , through appropriate tax schemes , to reducing differences in the production costs of fossil fuels .
. ( PT ) Given the forecast of a 50 % increase in greenhouse gases in the transport sector by 2010 , we must make provision for a legal framework that involves promoting public passenger transport , a commitment to the transport of goods by sea and rail , promoting the development of new engines , the introduction of new fuels and taxes on energy and on carbon dioxide emissions .
Promoting biofuels forms part of this framework and is extremely important for the following reasons : it reduces our dependence on oil ; it is good for the environment and offers new income opportunities for farmers .
I am sorry that the Council has removed the mandatory nature of targets for bringing biofuels onto the market and has even allowed Member States to set targets lower than those proposed in the directive .
Mr President , the Karas report regulates supplementary pension funds with a directive .
The Pensioners ' Party is absolutely in favour of this report and , above all , wants Europe to regulate and strengthen pension funds based on capital formation , which are surely better than pay-as-you-go funds , which individual governments have not known how to manage properly .
I regret , however , Mr President , that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , in which we discussed it , did not accept a Fatuzzo amendment calling on Member States to intervene in the event of the collapse or insolvency of pension funds .
I hope it will be successful in the next version of the directive .
Mr President , I welcome the Karas report and the compromise amendments which we agreed .
I was particularly pleased that the amendments seeking to abolish the lump sum payments that are very common in British pension funds were dropped .
There are an awful lot of people in our countries today who are very concerned about their pensions .
They feel that their pensions are under threat and insecure .
Two of my constituents interrupted their holiday to come and see me last week in the European Parliament because they were concerned that what we would vote through would jeopardise long-held pension plans that they had made in the last 10 years or so .
European legislation should not be adding to the uncertainty that people feel about their retirement .
Extra products should enhance pension security , not undermine it .
The compromises we reach today will go some way towards doing that and make sure that everyone in our countries retires on a decent pension .
. ( FR ) In the vote on the Karas report on institutions for occupational retirement provision , the French Socialist delegation voted in favour of the motion for rejection tabled by the GUE / NGL Group .
We believe that the funding of retirement pensions should be based on the principle of contributory schemes .
Furthermore , the text submitted to us at second reading is not acceptable and the subsequent proposals of Commissioner Bolkestein and the amendments voted for by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs do not sufficiently improve the balance of the text .
Institutions for occupational retirement provision cannot be treated as mere financial instruments - they should be thought of as a form of social protection .
It is not a question of encroaching on the prerogatives of the Member States in the social field , but of the will of the European Parliament , the body representing the citizens , to stress the social importance of the text .
Since the first reading , we have fought to have the basic principles of biometric risk , regular information for participants and control of these institutions integrated into the text .
Today , on the sole pretext of avoiding having to go to the conciliation stage , the rapporteur , with the complicity of the Commissioner , is prohibiting this House , a co-legislator , from defending the interests of the citizens .
We reject this forced takeover .
. ( PT ) As we all know , given the demographic changes that have taken place in the countries of the Union , it was decided , at the Lisbon Council , and in the wake of the action plan for financial services , to create a Europe-wide internal market for occupational pensions , and the utmost priority was attached to this issue .
On the basis of the principle that ' particularly where a major part of retirement provision is already provided by a pay-as-you-go system it is necessary to encourage additional contributions to retirement provision based on capital formation ' , the proposal for a directive is intended to facilitate the further expansion of occupational pensions as the second pillar of retirement provision , a Europe-wide organised internal market , which must contribute to greater efficiency , transparency and security within the second pillar .
Although the report tends to interfere with the labour and social legislation of the Member States , by proposing the regulation of pension funds at European level , not only for the capitals market but also for the social security systems of their beneficiaries , I have in the final analysis supported it , since it expresses the correct options for this field which , incidentally , are being adopted by the Portuguese Government .
. ( DE ) I mistakenly voted against Amendment No 38 , tabled by the GUE / NGL Group .
I am , however , in favour of rejecting the common position on the grounds that it is completely unsatisfactory .
The markets being shared out within the WTO between the monopolies and the heavyweights are not restricted to industrial and agricultural products ; they also encompass services .
Discussions on the conditions for allowing foreign capital to move into transport , telecommunications , energy , banking services , water distribution , health , education and culture are drawing to a close , in a total lack of transparency , in complete keeping with the principle that everything can be bought and sold .
The target : the less developed countries , which the multinationals are ready to bleed dry and the necessary precondition : the privatisation and liberalisation of any remaining public sectors .
The Communist Party of Greece is radically opposed to this process .
We condemn the greed of the monopolies , the plundering of national wealth , the savage exploitation of the workers , with miserable working conditions and attacks on social benefits .
We also condemn the hypocrisy of all those proclaiming that the liberalisation of trade , the opening up of the markets and the abolition of all obstacles to the unaccountability of big business will lead to development .
We defend public ownership and administration of the basic sectors of the economy , both in our own country and in every country of the world , and we are fighting for a quality public health service and state education and for the unimpeded development of civilisation , with respect for each nation 's individual characteristics .
Is the WTO an organisation for dismantling public services ?
That is the impression given by the General Agreement on Trade in Services ( GATS ) .
Although Article 16 of the EC Treaty clearly defines the role they play in the social and territorial cohesion of the Union , public services are being sold off at a cheap price .
Postal services , energy , railways , this is happening to all of them .
And when will culture , education and health services be subjected to competition ?
I would like the mandate given to Pascal Lamy , the Union 's negotiator , to be clear and extremely well-defined .
Because we are talking here about the common principles and values to be defended - equality of opportunities and equality of access - and not a mere commercial negotiation .
The mandate given to the Commission should be decided unanimously by the Member States , and not by a qualified majority .
It should also be public .
Nobody has been able to see its content , not even the national parliaments , who have not been able to debate it . And it is they who have voted for the creation of public services .
Only a few MEPs have been allowed access to the mandate document , in a room especially prepared for that purpose , with note-taking formally prohibited .
This is a wonderful example of the democratic deficit .
We have voted against Parliament 's resolution which gives the Commission a mandate to negotiate a liberalisation of the trade in services , within the so-called GATS round .
This mandate has been agreed on a far too vague a basis , the Commission will exploit it widely as usual , and the people will be rendered a little more helpless by those same people who claim to make them ' stronger ' .
Our fears are all the greater when we see that the Convention presided over by Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing intends to include trade policy amongst the exclusive competences of the Union , dealt with by means of a qualified majority , and to remove the exceptions ( cultural and audiovisual services , education , social services and health services ) which Article 133 ( 6 ) of the EC Treaty stated should be dealt with by means of unanimity .
We believe such a development would make GATS even more of a trap for us .
It is also noted with some amusement that the French Government has protested and has called for unanimity on these ' very sensitive ' issues to be maintained .
However , should these areas be considered more sensitive than others , than the production of water or nuclear engineering , for example ?
If unanimity really ensures such good protection , why is it demonised in all European affairs ?
.
( FR ) The trade agreements advocating deregulation and the liberalisation of international trade mean that an increasing number of areas of public services are being handed over to the market , to competition , in other words , to satisfy the appetites of private interests .
This is a disastrous development for the vast majority of society .
It is a real attack on the working classes .
It should be emphasised , however , that this is taking place with the agreement of the governments , and even at their instigation , even when they pretend to stand apart from the WTO or other similar bodies .
The problem is not only the preservation of cultural diversity , even though it can legitimately be stated that culture should not be a commodity .
How can we accept , however , that health care and education , which are essential social areas , should be placed in the hands of stupid market and competition laws ?
How can we accept this for water , electricity , postal or rail services and other socially important sectors ?
We want to speak out against this entire development and we oppose any opening up of public services to competition and the quest for profit .
We oppose any attack on employees in these sectors and any job losses .
The liberals and conservatives of all kinds ( and colours ) who have signed a joint resolution have caused the failure of all the attempts to defend cultural diversity and reject the commoditisation of culture .
All the amendments of the GUE / NGL Group in this regard were rejected .
That is why , like the members of my delegation of the republican , radical , pro-citizen left , the GUE / NGL Group and a very few other socialist MEPs , I voted against this ' PPE-PSE-Liberals ' resolution .
This type of Europe is not the European Europe for which I have fought for 40 years .
I am sorry that , on a subject which is so important for the future of European citizens , we have to be content with a resolution procedure .
A Commissioner should only speak on behalf of the European Union after having negotiated their mandate with the elected representatives .
The Constitution should take account of this democratic deficit if it is to succeed in bringing Europe closer to its citizens .
As the amendments proposing a new political direction for the text have been rejected , I am voting against the resolution .
Public services should not be part of negotiations .
A moratorium suspending any new agreement would allow for a genuine impact assessment with regard to the other market services .
Some claim that the developing countries have asked for these agreements .
They have no choice but to privatise their public services , as the level of their debt prevents them from receiving any loans intended for the development of public services , in particular , water .
The WTO should no longer be the Trojan horse of a form of liberalism that has proved its limitations and its inability to improve the quality of life of the majority of the world 's citizens .
Trade at international level is essential , but it must be conditional on adoption of and compliance with environmental and social rules .
. ( FR ) As is often the case in the European Parliament , the joint resolution tabled on GATS by the right ( PPE-DE ) , the liberals ( ELDR ) and the socialists ( PSE ) is a mixture of positive and negative proposals ( public negotiations , defence of cultural diversity , etc ) .
The general line of the project is clear , however : to pursue the liberalisation of services and strengthen the role of the WTO within the framework of unequal globalisation .
The joint resolution defends the theory , which is contradicted by the facts , that the process of opening up market services is beneficial to everyone and states in recitals A and C that its objective is to convince poor nations that the success of the WTO is essential for the economy of every country , rich or poor .
Instead of calling for the suspension of the round that began in Doha and a moratorium on GATS negotiations - conservative measures without which it would be impossible to exercise democracy - it advocates greater liberalisation in a number of sectors , including telecommunications and maritime transport ( Articles 3 and 8 ) .
The authors of the joint resolution are aware of the general concern caused by GATS .
However , nominal precautions cannot conceal the fact that the adoption of this resolution would represent one more step towards the commoditisation of services .
We voted against it .
.
( FR ) Services and , in particular , public services , are the key issue , not only because they represent two-thirds of European GDP , but also because they affect the very heart of the identity of a people and their culture .
So should we privatise and commoditise the world 's public goods such as health , literacy , knowledge and water ?
According to the WTO , the answer is yes .
Everything is a commodity .
According to the European Commission , the answer is also yes , but a whispered yes , because , ideologically , Brussels subscribes to the philosophy of the ' libertarians ' who believe in selling everything , even the police , the army and humanitarian affairs , through ECHO .
People pretend that they want to preserve cultural diversity .
It seems that culture and audio-visual media cannot be treated as commodities , while agriculture , which is the foundation of civilisation , has been in the hands of the market since the Uruguay Round .
It has also been said that no liberalisation offer has been made by Europe in the fields of health , education or audio-visual media .
However , US intellectual ' fast food ' chains are already buying a university in Madrid .
The audio-visual media of Berlusconi , Bouygues and Murdoch are a commodity .
There is also water , which the former Director-General of the IMF , Mr Camdessus , says is a major factor in corruption , particularly in France with Lyonnaise des Eaux .
The confidential nature of the negotiations , the uncertainty regarding the services concerned and the hair-splitting regarding the distinction between globalised trade and nationalised regulation makes GATS an agreement made behind the backs of the people .
The explanation that Commissioner Lamy gave on Monday 10 March at the beginning of the debate on the commitment of the EU to the GATS negotiations sounded reassuring .
The European socio-economic model must be retained , government monopolies remain possible , it is not a question of compulsory privatisation or liberalisation and all the commitments that the EU enters into are temporary , so that they do not have a permanent influence on internal political considerations .
The reason for regulating such matters in the World Trade Organisation context is that bilateral contracts outside this organisation lead to more arbitrariness , uncontrollability and circumstances beyond one 's control .
In spite of this explanation the fear being articulated by the US and by the developing world is that the position of the EU is quite a different one .
The EU is said to want to give companies from its own Member States access to activities such as water distribution and possibly even water collection that within the EU are still predominantly in the hands of publicly owned enterprises .
The availability of drinking water for the poor is said to be under threat .
Can we now speak of the EU being much tougher on the outside world than on its own Member States and inhabitants ?
The concluding response from Mr Lamy sounded less reassuring than his beginning .
For me this is a reason for putting supplementary questions to the European Commission shortly .
If all the amendments from the Left are rejected , I will vote against .
Mr President , it was a matter of huge satisfaction , I am sure to yourself as well as to myself , that the resolution on the crisis in the fishing sector was carried by such a vast majority as 508 to 7 , with 27 abstentions .
That really does represent a ringing endorsement by the European Parliament of the need to take decisive steps to give assistance to an industry which is in crisis and nowhere more so , as you well know , than in Scotland at the present time .
I recently visited Eyemouth in the south of Scotland and will shortly visit both Oban and Campbeltown on the west coast .
These are communities gravely affected by this crisis , but even worse is the situation in the north of Scotland .
If we cannot do things adequately to help that industry it will collapse .
Thus even when the cod stocks are restored , there will be no viable industry to go out and catch them .
This is a vital part of a sustainable diet for Europeans in the future .
We must have an adequate fishing industry .
We must support it properly and , if we put up the money , our government in the United Kingdom must take it up .
It has been said that they will not go cap in hand to the Commission looking for money .
This is not cap in hand .
The money is willingly being offered .
Let it be taken up .
. ( FR ) Once again , fishermen disagree with the Commission .
The Commission seems to be using cod as a guinea pig to test the new tool that it has managed to impose on the Council as part of its regeneration plans for endangered species : limiting fishing .
The use of this tool is , of course , likely to be extended : there is already talk about hake and sole in the Bay of Biscay .
The Commission 's proposal on cod is based , as ever , on the most recent opinions of the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea , which is made up of several partners outside Europe and which has taken up many controversial positions in the past .
It is indisputable that some stocks of cod are , in many areas , in a vulnerable situation .
However , by holding fishing solely responsible for that situation , the Commission risks condemning fishermen without replenishing the resources .
The reason that we are abstaining on the Stevenson resolution is solely because it advocates applying codecision to the CFP , which , in our opinion , does not need further uncertainty and unpredictability .
Apart from this , we do , of course , support this resolution .
Mr President , this document deals with employment strategy and social policy .
I voted for it , naturally , but I should still like to make a point .
I often hear it said by certain enlightened and important economists that employment strategy cannot be divorced from pensions strategy .
If one talks about increasing employment in Europe , one should also be talking about reforming pensions for those in work .
I must emphasise , however , Mr President , that one should call a spade a spade and say what one thinks .
When people talk about a European employment strategy , they are trying to increase the number of jobs in Europe , but when they talk about a European pensions strategy , unfortunately , they are talking about reducing and cutting pensions .
It is time people explained what they actually mean by what they say !
Unfortunately , recent employment statistics for the European Union paint a very black picture .
Employment rates are dropping in both Greece and Germany .
Substantial measures must be taken at once to increase employment .
First , if war in Iraq is averted , this will stimulate investment both globally and in the European Union , where it will impact on employment .
Secondly , relaxing the Stability Pact will encourage government intervention to foster growth and employment .
Thirdly , employment indicators need to be set so that , as with economic indicators , the Member States ' unemployment policies can be monitored and reinforced .
Fourthly , measures are needed to coordinate taxes on SMEs and combat social exclusion and undeclared employment , none of which alone will suffice , at least not in the restrictive sense referred to in the motion for a resolution which I voted against .
. ( PT ) We welcome the fact that the report , with the proposals for amendments appended to it by the PPE-DE and Liberal Groups , has been rejected .
We contributed to its rejection by voting against not only the most negative amendments but also against the final resolution .
We thereby prevented the adoption specifically of the proposals that insisted on :
greater flexibility in current legislation in the labour field , which would lead to those seeking employment being offered various types of employment contracts and working time regulations ;
criticising the fact that the provisions relating to the internal market have not been fully transposed in all Member States , which explains why there is a lack of adequate competition .
As you can see from these few examples , the report 's approach was to insist on speeding up the implementation of neoliberal policies . I am therefore happy that Parliament has rejected it .
On behalf of the European Parliamentary Labour Party , we voted for those parts of the Mann report which encourage entrepreneurship , and we believe in supporting the work of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) which on some estimates account for up to 70 % of all employment in the EU .
Our vote is in line with the need for those running SMEs not to endure unnecessary tax burdens or inappropriate regulation .
I fully support the report in saying that the innovation and information society will play a key role in making the EU competitive and more research should be channelled into these areas .
Efforts are being made to resolve the problem of unemployment by stepping up the neo-liberal monetarist policies and persisting with the financial prudence which were responsible for the current recession and high unemployment in the first place .
Under the misleading heading of ' sustainable development and full employment ' coined in Lisbon and despite increasing inequalities , the Member States are being called on to complete structural reforms which share out unemployment , make flexible forms of work the norm , create uncertainty and job insecurity and reduce wage costs in order to safeguard sustained growth in profits for big business .
Widespread long-term unemployment which , at over 10 % , has been the scourge of the working classes for years , is now twinned with widespread temporary and limited forms of employment .
Demographic change and the sustainability of the funds are being used as an excuse for proposing that people work into later life , as part of an ' active ageing ' policy , and for subverting the insurance and pension system .
Increasing investment will not solve the problem as most investment is in technological equipment which cuts rather than creates jobs .
We are opposed to EU policies in keeping with the Stability Pact and the Lisbon process because they do not meet the needs of workers , farmers and small and medium-sized businesses , they are designed to undermine workers ' rights and they dance to the tune called by big business .
. ( PT ) Unfortunately , this report has not been approved .
I would say that , through trying to reach a balance between so many conflicting points of view , the report ended up losing its own balance ...
I myself felt obliged to abstain from the final vote , because I felt that it went too far on fiscal policy , running the risk of placing harmonization in conflict with the autonomy of the Member States .
Nevertheless , I must praise the intense work and efforts made by Mr Mann and I fully support the idea of promoting new initiatives for the strategy for employment and social policy in the European Union , in line with the Lisbon Strategy .
The rapporteur suggests approaches that deserve to be supported and followed up .
I fully support the emphasis he gives to family protection , to set as guidelines for employment compatibility between work and family , pursuing a policy that is more favourable to children and families , or to make work more attractive to older people .
I would also reiterate my position on the greater speed with which initiatives must be implemented in the fields of vocational training , lifelong learning , and in Community incentives in the field of research , where success stories in the various Member States should be more widely shared .
. ( PT ) Given the current situation of employment , caused in particular by the relocation of undertakings whose priority is profit , without any consideration for the importance of the ' function of work ' to social development , to the mental wellbeing of workers and their extended families , the European Parliament as the institution representing the people of Europe , absolutely must adopt a strong stance on a global strategy to promote employment and its corresponding social policy in the European Union .
We are in favour of a European social policy that runs through all other development and growth policies pursued by the Union .
Mr President , even in the broad economic policy guidelines , which talk especially of balancing the budgets of the individual countries of the European Union , there is no mention - and although I voted for the report I am concerned about this - of what should be done to remedy a country 's budget whenever a budget is said to be weighed down , scuttled or ruined by the large number of pensioners whose pensions are paid out of the country 's budget .
I ask you , then , Mr President , although I am specifically addressing the Heads of Government and the Council : do we want first to set how much pension we should pay citizens and then spend what we have left , or do we want first to spend the whole State budget and then , if we have anything left - I repeat , if we have anything left - throw the scraps to the pensioners ?
.
( FR ) While stressing the importance of respecting the provisions of the Stability Pact and stepping up the reforms adopted in Lisbon , the García-Margallo report remains deaf to the criticisms and strong disagreements that are being heard increasingly loudly from public opinion .
It remains blind to the increase in unemployment , mass redundancies and sudden closures of companies .
What crime have the employees of Metaleurope committed ?
What sort of ' stability ' are we talking about when lives are shattered for the sake of being ' consistent with monetary policy ' ?
We always hear the same old thing : liberalisation of the markets requires sacrifices !
Instead of this , I would have liked the EU to aim for a genuine pact for employment and growth , based on satisfying the needs of the people , increasing salaries , a real policy to create jobs and wealth .
I can therefore only oppose the report 's approach of ' not calling into question macro-economic stability ' , which means that employers receive public funds and can shut companies down , without being accountable for it .
I cannot support the invitation to ' further liberalise services of general interest ( ... ) namely postal services , telecommunications , gas and electricity , rail and air transport , and broadcasting ' .
. ( PT ) This report does not address the fundamental issue of the problem of demand in the EU and makes no assessment of the economic and employment guidelines that addresses the current economic crisis and the increase in unemployment .
The cause it suggests is the ' rigidity of the European economy ' , which prevents it from ' reacting swiftly to external shocks ' .
The problem lies in what rigidity we are talking about .
We do not use the word ' rigid ' of current monetary policy , which sets the same requirements for interest and exchange rates for countries with differing needs and different levels of inflation , thereby reducing regions ' ability to react to asymmetric economic events . This ability is further weakened by the Community budget , which does not make up the shortfall in Member States ' redistribution and solidarity needs .
We do not call the budgetary policy contained in the Stability Pact ' rigid ' , even though this determines levels of public investment , including the application of the structural funds , and endangers crucial public services and areas that are vital to innovation and productivity , such as investment in education , health and research and development .
The report insists on greater flexibility in pay and in the labour market , which contributes to pay disputes and to job instability .
It wishes to see greater flexibility in the products market , in particular by pursuing the approach of privatising , liberalising and deregulating the markets .
Hence our vote against the report .
This report adopts the anti-grass roots policies of the ? U , which subvert the rights of the workers for the benefit of the monopolies .
It fully supports the application of the Stability Pact , speedier structural reform of the job market , reduced wages , an increase in the retirement age , full liberalisation of services of public interest , especially postal services , telecommunications , energy , transport and radio and television broadcasting and calls for lower taxes on businessmen .
It openly maintains that the slump on the job market and the failure to fully apply flexible forms of work are one of the main causes of unemployment .
For the sake of balancing the budget , which is the alibi used for constant cuts in social spending and the privatisation of public utilities , big business is being empowered and called on to complete the dismantling of insurance and pension systems .
The clouds of war are gathering , imperialist infighting is getting worse and an end to the recession is nowhere in sight ( the Commission is forecasting practically zero growth of -0.1 % to 0.5 % for 2003 ) , and yet the main concern is to strengthen the competitiveness and profitability of the European monopolies .
We are opposed to these anti-grass roots policies and we stand by the workers in their fight to reverse them .
. ( PT ) I acknowledge the importance and the timeliness of this own-initiative report by the Committee of Economic and Monetary Affairs , both because of the troubled current geopolitical context ( which requires a clarification of objectives and of the direction to take ) , and because of the debate that needs to be launched on vital issues such as the low levels of public and private investment , low productivity growth , the trend of falling rates of employment and the ageing of the population .
Furthermore , it is important , in this context , that we all give due consideration to the impact of issues such as the excessive indebtedness of individuals and undertakings , our over-dependency in energy and the impact of China and India 's entry into the world of industrial production .
Although the report does not refer to these aspects , they are nonetheless medium and long-term concerns , for which Europe 's citizens are calling for ' bold measures from the EU 's decision-makers ' .
Lastly , because I do not share the unreserved devotion to the politically federalist and boundlessly liberal vision of the European Union which underlies the rapporteur 's analysis , I decided to abstain from the final overall vote .
. ( PT ) I congratulate Mr Trentin on his excellent and timely report on the annual assessment of the implementation of the stability and convergence programmes , which I fully support , especially with regard to the need in the current context to review the criteria for monetary and budgetary rigidity imposed by the Stability and Growth Pact and by the stability and convergence programmes , because this rigidity has stifled economic growth in the European Union , has failed to provide a response to the high levels of unemployment and inequality and has not ensured sustainable development .
I also wish to highlight the need , whilst meeting the objectives of reducing the budgetary deficit and public debts , to include certain indicators in the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact that can be adapted to the differing national situations , especially to those of the cohesion countries .
This report is faithful to monetarist and federalist doctrine and defends an even more rigid interpretation of the Stability and Growth Pact , which does not at all live up to its name .
This is not so much about learning from what is happening before our eyes but about taking action against those Member States who are guilty of not submitting to the obligations of a text that now constitutes a vice that is holding back economic revival in an unsustainable way .
Above all , it is clear that the absolutisation of the Stability Pact is not only motivated by purely economic considerations , but is now a truly political aim .
Surely we can all see that budgetary balance is not simply seen as an economically commendable objective , which is simply common sense , but has been raised to the status of a dogma that no one should go against , on pain of endangering an entire structure ( EMU ) built for primarily political motives ( establishing the first genuinely federalist European structure ) ?
This is why the rapporteur , rather than analysing the current economic situation , insists on placing more emphasis on the strictness of the Stability Pact , particularly by increasing the Commission 's autonomy in monitoring the Member States .
That approach is unacceptable .
. ( PT ) Following up the observation that ' two years of disappointing economic performance have triggered a slack in the proactive policies pursued in reacting to the threat of recession and the upsurge in unemployment ' , it is actually important to look at the mechanisms available to us in order to respond effectively to the requirements arising , as a matter of fact , from the commitments that have been given , in particular under the Lisbon Strategy .
I also think that we must take the opportunity to include amongst the criteria and objectives approved in the Stability and Growth Pact certain indicators facilitating the more flexible governance of this Pact , adapting it to the various specific national situations and at the same time upholding the objectives of reducing the budgetary deficit and public debt .
Achieving these objectives , and I am also referring here to the dos Santos report , is of enormous importance , because these establish a new degree of responsibility , which is an extremely important message to send to economic operators .
I have consequently voted in favour of this report .
Mr President , we are talking about the finances of the countries that have adopted the euro .
I voted in favour , I am for the euro , but - today , now , before I wish everyone , including you , Mr President , the interpreters and the ushers , ' Bon appétit ' - I should like to highlight something .
It would be good if the governments of the countries that have adopted the euro took care - something they have not done so far - that unscrupulous traders , profiteers who only think of themselves , do not raise the prices of consumer products that are bought by citizens , workers and pensioners , that is , people on fixed incomes .
Indeed , taking advantage of the fact that in the changeover from the national currency to the European currency , the euro , people are not yet used to the value of the new money , as is certainly the case in Italy and I believe also in other countries in the European Union , there has been a disproportionate rise in the cost of products that are mainly bought by the least well-off , especially pensioners and citizens with what is , I regret to say , a modest income .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , page 17 of the Minutes details what was said and done in yesterday 's Question Time , which was announced on the screens only after it had begun three-quarters of an hour late .
It should have been my turn half an hour after the beginning of Question Time , and , although I ran down here straight away , my question had already been dropped , as none of those down to put questions in the first half-hour had been there .
I then asked that my question should be allowed anyway , as it was the question immediately following it that was being dealt with , but the President stuck to the rules with extreme rigour .
I would just like to say that you should either stick strictly to the rules - which means that you start Question Time punctually - or else , if you are going to be sloppy anyway , you have to exercise some liberality in these matters .
That is the first thing I wanted to say , and I ask you to see to it that I do not get the standard reminder telling me that I should have been present at Question Time , for , if I do , I will have to reply to it in somewhat personal terms .
Now for the second point that I wanted to mention in this context : Mr Puerta , who was presiding yesterday , promised me and Mr Salafranca , who had the same problem , that we would get written answers - which represents a deviation from customary practice - and I would ask you to ensure that this promise , at any rate , is kept to .

Thank you , Mr Posselt , for your comment , which has been noted so that the necessary action can be taken .
( ? he Minutes were approved )
The next item is the statement by the Council and the Commission on the military mission of the Union in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
The President-in-Office of the Council and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece , Mr Papandreou , has the floor .
Ladies and gentlemen , I shall begin this statement , if I may , with a few words about a good friend of mine , Zoran Djindjic , the prime minister of Serbia , who sadly has been assassinated .
This is a shocking incident because we have lost a friend , we have lost a European ally , we have lost someone who was fighting for democracy and stability in the region , the region of south-eastern Europe and the Balkans .


I should like to convey my personal condolences to his family , his wife and children and , of course , the Serbian nation as a whole .
We share their pain . ? his tragic incident today has not only shocked us , it has reminded us that we , the European Union , remain committed to efforts to bring about stability , efforts to bring about peace and efforts to bring about progress in this region of Europe , a region which has been through hard times over recent years , with endless upheavals and ethnic conflicts , a region in which democracy has taken root in every country but is still in its infancy , a region in which , thanks to cooperation between the European Union , the international community , the UN , the United States , Russia and numerous others , spearheaded by Europe , we have managed to set stability and development in motion .
However , this incident shows that we still have a long way to go .
As President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to point out that the operation we are discussing in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia highlights our role in and our commitment to this region , our commitment to helping this region move towards Europe and , above all , our commitment to stability and peace in the region .
This operation is important on several counts .
First , it will help to pave the way for long-term security and stability in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and safeguard its sovereignty and territorial integrity and the inviolability of its internationally recognised borders .
Secondly , this operation will help enhance the role and profile of the European Union in this country .
It will , if you like , reinforce this country 's progress towards European integration within the context of the Stabilisation and Association Process .
It will facilitate the application of the framework agreement .
Thirdly , it will be the first practical test of the European military crisis management mechanism and the second step , following the policing mission in Bosnia , in putting the European Union 's operational capability into practice .
Consequently , preparations and the operation itself need to be completed with the utmost care .
Our credibility , the credibility of the European Union , hangs in the balance .
Fourthly , this is the first practical application of cooperation between the European Union and NATO in the crisis management sector and implementation of the related permanent arrangements , which we expect to be completed very quickly .
The European Union has taken over this operation subject to two basic preconditions .
First , permanent arrangements between the European Union and NATO must be completed and concluded and , secondly , a request must be submitted by the official authorities in the country in question .
As far as the first precondition is concerned , permanent arrangements are nearing completion .
Almost all the relevant draft texts have already been agreed by ? ? ? ? and transmitted to the European Union .
We shall make any comments or observations needed on our part and expect to have the texts ready for signing by the two organisations very shortly , in all events before the month is out .
As far as the second precondition is concerned , we already have an official request from the government of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia asking the European Union to take over this mission and all the parties involved have welcomed the initiative in question .
The Greek Presidency has included the takeover of this mission in its basic priorities in the ESDP area and is therefore making every effort along these lines .
We should also point out that our taking over this specific mission and possibly other missions in the Balkans , such as the SForce operation in Bosnia , does not mean that the involvement and presence of ? ? ? ? and / or the United States has come to an end .
On the contrary , we shall continue to work in close cooperation and we need to make it clear to all sides that this cooperation is continuing and that we shall be working together for the stability and security of the region .
Similarly , as we shall be taking over from ? ? ? ? , rather than starting a new operation , we shall need to work closely with the alliance in order to ensure there is a seamless takeover and continuity .
We shall , of course , need to take over within the specific permanent arrangements agreed , in order to safeguard the autonomy of both organisations .
As far as progress is concerned in the light of what I have just said , I should like to comment briefly on the main milestones so far in preparing for this mission .
The Council adopted the general idea of the operation on 23 January and the related joint action on 27 January .
The institutional framework for the operation and , more importantly , the funding arrangements , are in place .
The Political and Security Committee decided which third countries would be invited to participate on 4 February .
They are the Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Poland , Slovakia , Slovenia , Bulgaria , Romania , Iceland , Norway , Turkey and Canada .
On 7 February , the Deputy Supreme Allied Commander for Europe was appointed as operation commander .
It was decided that operational headquarters would be at S ? ? ? ? .
The French force commander was also appointed , given that France has been elected to act as framework nation .
On the same day , the initial military guideline was issued to the operation commander .
The operation commander has submitted a draft operational plan , including the rules of engagement administration and control structure and a statement of resource requirements , to the Military Committee .
On 18 February , the Political and Security Committee therefore decided to set up a Contributions Committee .
Finally , the conference to set up the force was held on 20 February and the conference to appoint the force staff was held on 25 February .

A number of outstanding issues have yet to be completed ; the permanent European Union / ? ? ? ? arrangements I referred to earlier have to be officially concluded , especially the agreement needed in order to release the NATO assets and capabilities which will be supplied to the European Union so that it can carry out this mission , the operational plan has to be approved and adopted , staffing arrangements have to be completed , the operational budget has to be approved , an agreement has to be concluded with third participating countries , correspondence on the operation needs to be exchanged with the former Yugoslav Republic , an agreement on the status of the forces has to be concluded with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , exemption agreements between the Member States involved in the operation have to be concluded , correspondence needs to be exchanged with the OSCE about relations with its observers , ? ? ? ? has to pass a decision ending the ' Allied Harmony ' operation and the Council has to pass a decision inaugurating the operation .
This decision will set the exact date on which the operation is taken over .
It is expected to start officially before the end of the month , as soon as the outstanding issues I mentioned have been taken care of .
Before closing , I should like , if I may , to comment on the objective , duration , size of the force and command of the operation .
The objective is to maintain the international military presence in order to prepare the ground for a stable security environment which will allow the government of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to apply the Ohrid framework agreement .
It is expected to last about six months .
The end of the operation will depend on when the basic objective is achieved .
The force numbers 487 men , including 212 staff positions .
The structure and control of the operation are vital to the command of the operation .
The Deputy Supreme Allied Commander for Europe , Admiral Feist , who will head the European operation in the FYROM , recently reported on this in detail to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
I do not want to bore you with the details ; however , I would simply like to mention that it has been decided that the operation in FYROM will be carried out using NATO assets and capabilities ; consequently , the planning will be as decided in Nice .
The Deputy Supreme Allied Commander for Europe has been appointed as operation commander , and the European Union operational headquarters will be at S ? ? ? ? .
As I mentioned , the operational plan has already been drawn up and submitted to the Military Committee of the European Union , and S ? ? ? ? and the Military Staff of the European Union are working in close cooperation .
In order to ensure optimum coordination of activities between the European Union and ? ? ? ? , and especially between the forces of the European Union in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and ? ? ? ? forces , which will mainly be stationed in Kosovo , a command base has been set up in the European Union , at the NATO base in Naples in Italy .
As I said , France has been elected as the framework nation for the operation and will have the lead role in directing the operation .
Brigadier-General Maral has therefore been appointed as force commander .
However , ? ? ? ? will keep a supreme military representative at allied headquarters in Skopje and the two staffs will therefore work in close collaboration .
I should like to close this briefing on a note of optimism ; I trust that , despite the difficulties , which were only to be expected , the European security and defence policy has now come of age .
And now that it has come of age , the crisis management mechanism built up over the last four years can be implemented .
This first operation is , I think , particularly important .
We welcome this initiative on the part of the European Union , because the presidency was able to overcome obstacles to cooperation between the ESDP and NATO during the previous six months of the ESDP .
We are looking forward both to the positive implementation of these decisions and to really being able to bring peace and stability to this region of south-eastern Europe , especially in the wake of incidents such as today 's tragic incident .
Mr President , I wish to begin by associating myself wholeheartedly with all that the Foreign Minister has just said about the murder of Prime Minister Djindjic .
I should like to extend my sympathy and , I am sure , the sympathy of the House to his family and friends and to all democrats in Serbia .
Clearly we must not allow this assassination to set back the remarkable progress which has been made by Serbia in rejoining the European family , not least thanks to the bravery of men and women like Mr Djindjic .
In about one and a half hours I am supposed to be flying to Croatia .
This means I shall miss the end of the next debate , which will be left in the capable hands of Commissioner Bolkestein .
Tomorrow evening I had planned to fly to Belgrade .
Obviously , if it is still convenient for the authorities , I would like to do that and to express the solidarity of Parliament , the Commission and the Union as a whole with the government and people of Serbia in what is an extremely worrying time for them .
The first European Union military operation is , as the Foreign Minister has said , about to start operations in the Balkans .
It is an historic step for the European Security and Defence Policy .
After the Copenhagen decisions we are now moving towards a wide-ranging set of arrangements with NATO - described by the Foreign Minister - which will enable our strategic partnership with them to go hand in hand with the entry into operation of the ESDP .
The decision taken by the Council in January to embark on a joint action opened a new chapter in the history of our integration , and it is not surprising that this chapter will have its first lines written in the Balkans .
This historic dimension justifies fully the debate we are having today on the basis of the motion for a resolution by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
All of us remember the tragic events which took place in south-east Europe at the beginning of the nineties .
Faced with a situation no one would have thought possible in our continent , the European Union had to develop new tools to strengthen its capacity to prevent and , if necessary , deal with any similar crises which could potentially endanger our security and which certainly offend our deepest values .
It is therefore not by chance that the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is to be the setting for this new step forward by the European Union .
The context of this operation is no longer the imperative to put an end to the civil conflict and to separate the fighters .
It is rather the continuation of the build-up of a closer relationship between the Union and a country which is moving towards the European Union and which needs our support to consolidate the stability without which it will not be able to progress along this path .
I would like here to remind the House that only two years ago the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia was on the edge of a civil conflict , but thankfully turned its back on war when an agreement was reached between the conflicting parties .
During my first two years or so as a Commissioner I visited FYROM much more than any other place .
In one period of just over a year I was in Macedonia almost ten times .
A substantial and sustained commitment by the European Union - political as well as financial - supported the process .
Thus we offered both a European perspective to the country through the Stabilisation and Association Process and through increased financial support .
A few figures can illustrate how substantial our financial assistance package has been .
More than EUR 30 million was allocated in 2001 through the CARDS programme and the Rapid Reaction Mechanism , while nearly EUR 7 million was delivered in humanitarian assistance .
These funds have been focused on de-mining , housing reconstruction , local infrastructure rehabilitation , confidence-building measures and institutional reforms required under the Framework Agreement .
This effort was quickly followed up by the adoption of a multiannual programme which , under CARDS , earmarked EUR 130.5 million for democracy , the rule of law , justice and home affairs , and economic and social development .
These efforts have been paying off .
The last few months have shown that political life is returning to normal , based on the implementation of the Framework Agreement and on the Stabilisation and Association Process .
It is true that the security situation is still fragile .
Last week 's incident , which tragically cost the lives of two Polish NATO officers , has been a further illustration that a continued international security presence is needed for the coming months in order to consolidate peace and security in the country and to underpin the implementation of the Lake Ohrid Agreement .
This assessment is shared by the government , the President , the main political parties and international players .
Here I would like to address some of the concerns which may have emerged regarding the scope and the objective of the European Union military mission .
Even if the European Union operation will only be of limited size , let me state clearly that I do not consider that this has ever been a useful criterion against which to evaluate its worth .
It will be a visible sign of our commitment to safeguarding stability in this country .
Secondly , we do not need to have second thoughts .
Our objectives are clear .
As rightly pointed out in the motion for a resolution , the planned European Union takeover of the NATO military mission will be a further demonstration of the European Union 's commitment to peace and stability in the country and in the region .
It is fully consistent with our policy to contribute to the long-term security of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Let me just remind the House of the comprehensive package of financial assistance given by the Community in the security sector , under the justice and home affairs heading .
Between 2002 and 2004 EUR 31.2 million have been earmarked for this purpose .
This encompasses two crucial elements in particular .
The first is support for the country to manage its borders through a comprehensive integrated border management programme , which includes creating an effective border police corps .
The process of improving border security and management has a strong component of regional cooperation , and so the European Union is currently working closely with NATO and the OSCE to support the efforts which the countries in the region have started to make themselves .
The second element is support for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in developing a comprehensive strategy for the reform of its police service , to make it a well-trained , multi-ethnic and community-based public service .
In the view of the Commission , the European Union operation in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will contribute to consolidating a stable environment conducive to the implementation of reforms that will facilitate its future integration with the European Union .
In this perspective , I have no doubt that a limited and focused EU military intervention can only reinforce progress towards full civilian and democratic control of the reforms under way .
This morning , we spent some time dwelling on an area of foreign and security policy where - I shall be diplomatic - we have not made as much progress as we would have liked .
However , we have to recognise that in some parts of the world - most notably in the Balkans - Europe has in the last few years got its act together .
You only have to compare the humiliations and bloody mayhem of the early 1990s , when Europe was unable to deal with awful problems on its own doorstep , with our success in the last few years in shaping policy and in helping to lead the countries of the Balkans towards the European family .
We know the journey is not an easy one and today 's tragedy reminds us how much work there still is for us to do .
As I have said in this House before , it would be a terrible mistake if we were to think that the problems in the Balkans , or in Afghanistan for that matter , were done and dusted .
We still have to focus , concentrate and be generous with our time , assistance and experience in helping those countries down the road towards eventual membership of the European Union .
Whatever the tragic setbacks , I am sure that they will attain that objective in the years ahead .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I too would like to express my sorrow at the murder of Mr Djindji ? .
Whatever disputes and disagreements we may have had with him in individual cases , I do believe that he stood for greater democracy in his country and for a courageous policy in times that made such a thing very dangerous , and that he earned our profound respect by doing so .
We should also see this as imposing on us the obligation of making an ongoing contribution to stability and democracy in the region .
I believe that what we are discussing today is one of the steps to that end .
This morning , we demonstrated what a poor position Europe is in when it comes to issues of war and peace .
In the Balkans , we have learned from the mistakes of the past , and the European Union has taken on greater responsibilities .
Our taking over , for the first time , a military operation in that region in the name of the European Union - small though the operation may be - shows that the European Union is going down a new path and indicates how our capacity to act will develop in this , admittedly small , area .
I believe we should take this as a favourable assessment , and so I would like to thank those who have been involved in making it possible .
The members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy are , however , keen to see this debate on plenary 's agenda , because we take the view that it is not acceptable for the European Union to decide on a military operation in the name of the European Union without formal consultation with the European Parliament , which is the directly-elected forum for Europe 's peoples .
As you said , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy have received information , but it has been received through invitations we have extended and requests we have made . Nothing has been done , though , to accede to Parliament 's requests for a proper information procedure , on which basis Parliament might be provided with the information that would facilitate its involvement .
Even though the operation in Macedonia involves only a small contingent of some 300 troops , it is the very first military operation in the history of the European Union , and it marks an important precedent .
Right now , the European Union is planning a substantially larger operation for 2004 , which will involve taking over NATO 's SFOR missions in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
We therefore have a fundamental demand to make of the Council , which is that it should inform and consult Parliament about the mandates for future Petersberg missions before they are mounted . This would be in the spirit of Article 21 of the Treaty and of the joint statement on the financing of the CFSP , adopted as recently as last December by the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
Military operations by the European Union , such as are currently planned for the Balkans , differ in one very important respect from missions undertaken by NATO .
NATO is a military alliance pure and simple , whereas the European Union is not .
Petersberg missions by the European Union will always be mounted in tandem with the EU 's involvement in the region affected by a crisis , whether such involvement be political and diplomatic , or economic and financial .
Cooperation between civilians and the armed forces under the flag of the European Union will always be an important dimension of the overall mission .
That is why it betrays a lack of thought for the Council to believe that it can dispense with Parliament 's formal involvement when intergovernmental military operations of this sort are mounted , and that is why we demand that we be involved and informed at an early stage , and in a completely transparent way .
Item 6 of our resolution lists the questions that we could discuss at an early stage of such missions , such as , for example , with what mandate and with what objectives the mission is being undertaken ; what relationship exists between the troops in the regions under EU and NATO command respectively ; how they cooperate with other organisations active in the region , such as the UN and the OSCE ; how these missions in Macedonia and , next year , in Bosnia and Herzegovina fit into the overall framework of the stability and association process in the Balkans , and within what framework the joint costs are expected to be incurred .



Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the answers given today by both of you to the questions in most of these areas have been extensive , but , as I have said , that is not the correct form or the most suitable way ; this should have been done already , through other channels , on the initiative of others , and at another time . In saying this , it is not my intention to criticise what you have said today , but to take a critical view of the procedure , of the time , and of the place .
In the future , EU missions will always have the marked character of being both civil and military , and they will operate in crisis-hit regions in which the European Union has already made political or humanitarian commitments , or in which , once a crisis operation is over , it will be involving itself in reconstruction and development .
Now that we are beginning , cautiously , to take on responsibilities in military areas too , that is what is special about the European Union - and what sets us apart from a purely military alliance .
This first mission in Macedonia sees us - even Parliament - breaking new ground .
It is for that reason that the Committee on Foreign Affairs ' resolution proposes that we should , in the coming months , send a fact-finding delegation to the theatre of operations , in order to enable us MEPs to get our own picture of how the European Union 's first military mission works .
Even if the Council has not officially consulted us , we in the European Parliament will not divest ourselves of our responsibility for giving the soldiers from our Member States the parliamentary support that is their due and , in so far as we are able to do so , supporting the mission as a whole .
Thank you very much Mr President .
I would of course like to associate myself with the President-in-Office of the Council 's remarks , Commissioner Patten 's , and also Mr Brok 's , about the tragic events that took place in Belgrade this morning and I support all the expressions of sympathy to Mr Djindjic 's family and of course to all Serbs who are undoubtedly very shocked by what has happened there this morning .
Let me also express the hope that this will not lead to disruption of the efforts towards greater stability in Serbia and in the former Yugoslavia as well .
Let us return to the matter we are debating today .
While the Iraq issue is putting the European Union under great pressure and the discord appears great , the European Union will shortly be beginning its first military operation under its own flag in FYROM .
And within the wider Europe the Union is now itself taking direct responsibility for an important peacekeeping operation .
That this is happening in Macedonia is logical because of the great political efforts of the European Union in recent times , which have led to better relations within the country itself , in particular with the Albanian minority , and which have therefore also led to greater political stability .
The military mission must of course help make these positive developments permanent .
It has taken a while to conclude the mandate of the mission because the European Union cannot of course undertake this mission without the support of NATO and cooperation with it .
It was therefore a question of finding the right formula with regard to the independent nature of the operation .
This experience shows that we have to keep working on improving the European Union 's own capacities so that there will come a time when the European Union can handle such an operation on its own .
The step that is now being taken is in itself important for the country in question , but as has already been said , it is also a first exercise for the European Union and the lessons from it will be learned .
In this case it is a matter in particular of practical cooperation with NATO , but also of a future larger-scale operation , in Bosnia-Herzegovina for example .
Conflict prevention is one of the most important basic principles of European security and defence policy .
It is now being put into practice ' militarily ' for the first time by an operation according to the rules .
It is part of a broader package of political and economic measures in support of the stabilisation process in the region in question .
It is therefore important that the requisite publicity be given to the mission .
It is after all an important step in the development of a common security policy about which the public should be better informed , by such means as , for instance , the work of this Parliament of ours .
I hope that a successful mission will also provide a stimulus to maintaining the necessary tempo in setting up the rapid reaction force and in the development and implementation of a more coordinated arms procurement policy .
The resolution rightly focuses considerable attention on the question of democratic legitimacy or rather the absence of it .
It is indeed disappointing to learn that in this unique instance Parliament has not really been consulted .
This could be better organised in future .
The European Parliament is after all one of the European platforms for the monitoring and assessment of such peacekeeping operations .
Mr President , progress towards stability in Macedonia is a real example of how cooperation between NATO , the EU and the US can have very beneficial effects .
Commissioner Patten is absolutely right to say that the European Union has got its act together to a considerable extent in the Balkans .
I also congratulate the coalition government in place since last September .
Let us hope that Macedonia has indeed turned a corner and that the Ohrid Agreement will be fully implemented .
A military presence is still necessary to deliver a secure atmosphere and the EU mission can and should carry out tasks such as weapons collection and training .
For the EU to undertake its first military operation is a truly significant and historic milestone .
Mr Brok is quite right to insist that it should not happen without consultation with the European Parliament .
The fact that the finalisation of the details has been held up by wrangling over intelligence sharing between NATO and the EU is said to be purely a technical issue .
It is illustrative of the interdependence between the two and what we have at stake in making this agreement work .
It is right for the EU to take over from NATO and a convincing demonstration that we are serious about playing a larger security role .
The internal problems facing Macedonia are not limited to military security threats , there are many policing challenges and the cancer of corruption and criminality , often violent criminality , is undermining the state .
There are murky links between organised criminals and political extremists and in a neighbouring country , as we have just heard , the murder of Prime Minister Djindjic may be evidence of those links .
There can be no economic progress or investment while lawlessness is rife .
The Prime Minister of Macedonia wondered who would invest , build and hire new people in a country with constant shootings , a country in one third of whose territory travel after dark is not recommended .
He is absolutely right : there is a very close link between security and the growth of the economy .
I would like to mention again the problem of the name .
The President-in-Office and the Commissioner use the formulation of FYROM - the former Yugoslavia Republic of Macedonia .
I refuse to do that .
I wish these negotiations over the name could get somewhere - they seem to drag on .
Finally , I would like to urge those Member States that have not yet ratified the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , to get on with it .
This would send a very good signal to Macedonia .
Mr President , in the shadow of the debate about a looming war in Iraq and in the light of the growing scepticism about the prospect of any kind of common European foreign policy at all , there is a danger that many people are going to lose sight of what the European Union has actually managed to achieve in Macedonia .
I mention the traditional means : diplomacy , the prevention of conflicts and , when that succeeded , investment in the reconstruction of both infrastructure and institutions .
From today or from very soon the European Union , is going , at last , I would say , to be able to add a third means to this and that is the sending of servicemen under the EU flag .
In the whole debate about the possibility and desirability of a European foreign policy the mission in Macedonia is often dismissed as insignificant , a mission that means nothing and from which we must not draw undue conclusions .
I do not agree with this viewpoint or with this dismissive gesture .
I think that the Macedonian model , where the European Union has been able to deploy all its diplomatic , financial and military capabilities , can be an example worthy of imitation in many countries of the world .
Of course it was only a small-scale conflict .
Of course it is only a limited military presence , but the fact that the EU is now able to use the whole range of options is a symbolic big step forward which - once again , in the shadow of the present debates about Iraq - we are in danger of forfeiting at our peril .
In addition to the fine words about what can be done , two warnings .
These have already been referred to by my fellow Members .
We in the European Union cannot continue in future to send servicemen without any parliamentary control whatever being exercised .
All of us present here know that it is impossible either for national parliaments or for this Parliament to influence the mandate and the progress of this mission , or of future missions .
We cannot go on this way .
Let us be honest , it is and it will be a hugely difficult point .
I would therefore in any event like to ask Mr Papandreou , on behalf of the Council , to pursue the widely shared view here in Parliament that this is certainly a good start , but will only be a good start if it is followed by greater parliamentary control , preferably by the European Parliament .
If that succeeds , if a start is made on that and if that is accompanied by a better financial policy and better control of the means for such operations , then that really will be a breakthrough , my fellow Members , without parallel .
Then the European Union will finally be able to intervene with a wide range of options , preferably to prevent conflicts and if necessary to manage crises .
Allow me to conclude with a few words about the dreadful murder of Prime Minister Djindjic in Serbia .
This murder clearly shows that the problems there are still far from being resolved and also makes clear that the efforts of the European Union are still needed on Serbia 's tortuous , oh so tortuous , path to democracy .
I therefore fervently hope that the Commissioner will be able to go to Serbia to put to the Serbian Parliament his message of solidarity with the democratic forces in Serbia .
Let us actually hope that in Serbia the traditional means , that is diplomacy and reconstruction , will suffice and that we do not need to move to the use of this new means the EU has at its disposal .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , this operation in Macedonia has just been presented as an historic phase in the commitment of the European Union .
I think that we need to set our sights slightly lower than this ambitious presentation .
First of all because , in terms of quantity , it is relatively small .
It is a mission involving , if we have rightly understood , 500 men , including those in command .
Then , because we have not been able to reach an agreement on extremely precise objectives .
We are not even capable of agreeing on the name of this country , and I am pleased to be speaking before the Greek Foreign Minister .
I would ask why we do not allow the country to use the name that it had when it was a Federal Republic as part of Yugoslavia , as it is clearly understood that the name would not imply any territorial claim or alteration of the borders .
Finally , and most importantly , there is no real clear goal for the presence of our forces and we have not been told under what circumstances the mission would come to an end , because the causes of conflict are always there , in particular the gradual Albanianisation of an area that was previously largely populated by Slavs .
In short , contrary to what the Committee on Foreign Affairs purports , the mission is not really taking over from NATO .
It will be led by the supreme command of the Allied forces in Europe from its headquarters , SHAPE .
It is using NATO resources .
It seems that , as the United States need their troops in the Middle East , they are sub-contracting this operation , which is now of secondary importance , to their European vassals .
I do not think that this is really something we should welcome .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my own group , too , I would like to express our profound sense of bewilderment at the death of Mr Djindji ? and to take this opportunity to say that events such as these always forcefully bring us back to the question of whether the establishment of peace in this region really has advanced as far as we hoped it had .
Apart from that , Mr Gollnisch , I take the view that our taking over from NATO responsibility for the mission in Macedonia is an historic event .
Even though the unit involved is a very small one , this still creates a precedent , in that structures and possibilities are being created on which we will later be able to build .
It is for that reason that I believe this to be an important step on the road that leads to a European defence policy .
For the first time , the EU is taking on responsibility for the military side of peacekeeping in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
What functions do parliaments have to perform in operations of this kind ?
It is one of the principles of democratic politics that military operations may be mounted only with the mandate of a directly elected parliament .
For Macedonia , these mandates were provided by the national parliaments .
If European defence policy is to develop further , mandates will in future have to be given by the European Parliament , and so , our primary expectation of the Council is that it should do what has already been demanded of it and , this very day , meet this need by providing truly comprehensive information and , secondly , we expect the Convention to give parliamentary control a clear , unambiguous and permanent place in the future constitutional treaty .
Those in positions of political leadership must ensure that the troops on the ground are not exposed to unnecessary dangers - and what gives rise to these ?
They come about as a result of the wrong orders being given or of inadequate leadership and equipment .
This consideration leads me to put a number of questions to the Council , and also to the Commission .
For a start , what difference will it make that American troops are no longer to be deployed in Macedonia ?
Might not the loss of certain capacities expose our soldiers to danger ?
My second question concerns the way in which decisions are implemented .
Are you confident that the decisions taken by the Council will then be implemented by way of NATO , and that , when decisions have to be implemented without delay on the ground , these lines of command really do function as quickly as will be required of them ?
Thirdly , I turn to costs , on which I have questions about both the civilian and military sides of this mission .
It is my view that both the Convention and the new constitutional treaty will , in future , have to make it possible for the military costs of the mission , as well as the civilian ones , to be borne by the Budget of the European Union .
I would like to conclude by saying that we have seen in this morning 's debate on Iraq just how inadequate the European Union 's foreign and security policy can still be at the present time , but , at the same time , I would like to give voice to the hope that , at any rate in the European Union 's immediate vicinity , where the essence and heart of Europe - of which the Balkans are part - are at stake , we may continue to demonstrate the European Union 's capacity to contribute to the maintenance of peace .
Mr President , I too am utterly at a loss to understand the murder of Mr Djindji ? , the prime minister of Serbia .
Only a few months ago , I was able to have a long conversation with him in his official residence in Belgrade .
Despite all the criticisms that could be levelled at him - as they can at any statesman - he was a symbol of economic progress , political reform and also of cooperation with the tribunal in The Hague .
He took significant steps to bring Serbia closer to Western fundamental values , not only in terms of its political system , but also of its society .
Whatever it is in Serbia and Montenegro that lies behind this assassination , this demonstrates how precarious the situation there is .
In Macedonia , too , the position remains unstable , as , indeed , we saw at the time of its elections , even though the new coalition , with its collaboration between the Albanian and Macedonian Slav forces - it is always difficult to find a way to express that - has so far proved to be thoroughly durable .
Even former combatants - whose inclusion I had strongly criticised - are , at least for the time being , very convincing in their declarations of willingness to work together , at least in theory , and to play a part in parliamentary life .
There is also a precarious situation in the surrounding areas , as the killings in the Presevo valley remind us .
Peace has not yet been established .
The assassination of Mr Djindji ? has yet again made that abundantly clear to us .
I also very much endorse the progressive Europeanisation - yes , let us call it that - of current security policy and of the military intervention in the Balkans .
Whilst there are a number of things of which we are right to accuse America - some other charges laid against them may be misguided , but many are justified - we must ourselves take on responsibilities in our own backyard .
That is why I regard this course of action as absolutely right and crucial , trivial though it may at present appear to be .
It is also advantageous that this is being done in a country in which there is no crisis at present , one where there may be sporadic conflicts , but where it is also possible to make a good job of the task in hand .
I would like to follow on from what Mr von Wogau said by again emphasising that those in command locally must have sufficient flexibility for their operations , as this is not just about a military unit coming into the situation , but about that unit supporting the population and helping them to coexist with one another and resolve disputes peacefully , without their degenerating into conflict and certainly not by resorting to force of arms .
For my final point , there is something of which I feel I must remind you : foreign policy also presupposes that we possess good and effective instruments with the appropriate capacity .
Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , you are aware of that .
Let me just list the ways in which the European Union is currently represented in Macedonia , which is a small country : it is represented by the Presidency , by a representative of the Commission , by a High Representative , by the Agency for Reconstruction , and now also by a military unit .
If these all work well together , then that is a good thing , but I really do ask that you should consider how we might tighten up our instruments somewhat in order , instead of giving a small country the impression that we do not ourselves know where we are going , to be able to get our foreign policy accepted by using one shared European language and shared European resources .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , no European security and defence policy existed until 1999 , when it was one of the fruits of the lessons we learned in the Balkans .
There , we had the experience , in 1999 , during the Kosovo conflict , of being able to speak with one voice after a decade of discord ; if , though , the United States of America had said that this was a European matter that we had to deal with ourselves , we would not have been in a position to do so .
That is why this joint response force has to be built up by 2003 , and the fact that we will then be making a start , albeit with a small mission , is , I believe , an important step in terms of European integration policy , whilst underlining at the same time the fact that it is being taken in cooperation with the Americans and with NATO , rather than in opposition to them .
It will , during this stage , be increasingly important to have due regard to the European Union 's institutions and to remain within the bounds of its institutional structures .
In was with this in mind that , on 25 November 2002 , in the course of the Budget procedure , Parliament and the Council agreed on a statement on the financing of the common foreign and security policy , which statement , firstly , stresses the point that Parliament is to be informed about all basic options under the common foreign and security policy and their financial implications .
To this day , the Council has not once complied with that requirement , but this is to be done in future , with a summary being presented , in its own dossier , to Parliament by 15 June .
Another point is , though , that the Council is not only to do this once a year , but is to promptly state the amount of the prospective costs involved in any and every specific decision in the field of the common foreign and security policy entailing expenditure .
This is a new measure agreed on in November .
After some hesitation , we are glad that the Greek Presidency , during the most recent consultation with Parliament , undertook to make available to Parliament all the information that had initially been withheld , including that on costs and personnel .
I see this as an important decision and as complementing that on the political principle of involving Parliament .
We are well aware that , even though the Western European Union has since been integrated into the European Union , its Parliamentary Assembly continues to exist , the argument for this being that the national parliaments have to keep on meeting together on a regular basis , as the European Parliament does not yet possess rights of control .
This example shows how we are already involved in this area .
Building on this and , in the event of future missions , such as the taking over of the SFOR mandate , informing this Parliament in due time , is an important step , and what Mr von Wogau said about giving this its own firm place in the European constitution is something I can unreservedly endorse .
Mr President , Commissioner , the first military mission of the European Union coincides with an historic moment and , I regret to say , possible further destabilisation in the Balkans , which shows just how fragile the fabric is .
The Serbian leaders have recently been surrounding themselves with high-level security , in the knowledge that the greatest danger is just when steps towards normalisation start speeding up .
Sadly , it has not worked .
The murder of Zoran Djindjic has , amongst other things , implications for the tabling of certain amendments to the resolution we are about to put to the vote .
I think the two-month period requested for the European Community for initial monitoring of the results of the mission is too short .
In another context , this morning , when speaking about the European Union action , Commissioner Patten said that military and political intergovernmentalism is ineffectual , and he added more or less that it produces incoherent initiatives .
That is clearly the case and we should take it into account .
Now , however , we have gone into Macedonia and , for better or for worse , we must clarify certain points and discuss them in this House .
We have learnt something during the last hour and perhaps we shall learn something later on that we do not yet know .
I should like to know , for instance , how the command structures work , from the base up to Brussels , the relations between departments in NATO and in the European Union , how costs are shared and , naturally , to what extent collaboration with the Macedonian Government and army has been thought out and put into practice .
Military expenditure is the responsibility of the national parliaments , but the European Union should manage the financial operations on joint bases and Parliament should then perform its monitoring role .
Mr President , when I spoke this morning in the Iraq debate I drew attention to the self-interested agenda of France , a nation for which I have great affection , but whose foreign policy has some very dangerous elements .
One of its key aims is to remove American involvement in European security .
The primary instrument of this policy is ESDP which otherwise sensible European states have been hoodwinked into supporting .
They have been given a false prospectus .
Ironically I blame Mr Blair just as much for this because it was he who gave the green light to EU defence policy at St Malo in 1998 , and a month ago he compounded his error at Le Touquet .
The existence of this separate ESDP has undoubtedly been a factor in weakening the coherence of the NATO alliance , contributing to the recent very damaging disagreements .
Now , and without adequate consultation with the United States , the European Union is preparing to take over the NATO mission in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and apparently plans to assume the military responsibilities in Bosnia .
It is predicated on the bizarre idea that if we set up separate EU decision-making structures , distract NATO 's Deputy Commander by giving him two sets of political masters to serve , and stick different flashes on the arms of the same troops in the Balkans , NATO 's capabilities are somehow reinforced .
By the way , for Mr Gollnisch 's information , there are only 30 American personnel in the Macedonian force , and none of them are combat troops .
To add to this charade , in order for the European Union to raise its flag on a military operation it has to rely on NATO for its operational planning and for reinforcement or extraction if the relatively soft operation in Macedonia should turn into something more dangerous .
But the tragic events of today underline how very combustible the situation in the Balkans remains .
Having created an unnecessary and artificial military divide , the EU and NATO have had to spend two years on negotiating and arrangements to enable the European Union and NATO to find a way of working together .
The fact is that the EU 's Ruritanian takeover of the NATO operation in FYROM will not contribute any additional military assets .
It merely opens the opportunity for political division between European and North American allies at the very time when they should all be sitting around the same table .
How much simpler if France were merely to rejoin the integrated military structure of the alliance and then everyone would be happy .
Instead of building divisions into the western alliance , both the North Americans and like-minded Europeans must make the necessary political and material commitments to revitalise NATO as the primary instrument of western security .
We need to bring Europe 's military contribution back into the NATO fold and start rebuilding the common western strategic culture before it is too late .
My thanks to the honourable Members for their comments and opinions .
I should like to start by saying that , as far as procedure is concerned , the Council fully respects its obligations under the Treaty to inform and involve Parliament in CFSP issues .
We believe in the important role of the European Parliament and in transparent , informative relations .
That is precisely why I am here today as President-in-Office of the Council and why Commissioner Patten is here today ; to report in detail to Parliament on the planned operation in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , before we take up our duties .
I should like to address Mr Brok , whose comments I have taken on board , and assure him that we shall examine every possibility under the provisions of the Treaty for more efficient and more appropriate briefings to Parliament and of course , for responsible briefings to the citizens of Europe via Parliament .
I agree with Mr Wiersma that the political and military operation we are undertaking will be an important test for the European Union , which is precisely why we are taking every precaution to ensure it is both credible and successful .
In reply to Baroness Ludford , I agree with much of what she said ; the problems in the Balkans are not at an end and , as Mr Patten said , the European Union has indeed managed to formulate a strong , single policy for the region .
There are no differences between us , between the Member States or the other basic institutions of the European Union , as regards the strategy or , I think , the application of that strategy .
I think this shows that our common foreign policy has come of age , in this region at least , and will be important as we develop it further .
I should also like to emphasise that the problems in the Balkans are very complicated .
The issue of organised crime , to which Baroness Ludford referred , cooperation with the ? C ? ? , the rule of law , corruption , regional cooperation , the necessary networks , transport , energy , IT ; all these are vital to the stability and development of the region and to the region 's common progress towards the European Union .
Both the Commission and the presidency are organising the Thessalonika Summit along these lines , precisely with the objective of continuing and furthering progress in these countries towards integration into the European family and generating new momentum , a new contract between us , if you like , whereby we require them to make stable progress and to focus on European preconditions and real progress , with specific measures , specific reforms and specific changes and , as Baroness Ludford said , to address problems such as organised crime and can , for our part , confirm the prospects we offered them at a number of summit Councils of becoming members of the European Union at some point in the future .
I should also like to say something in my capacity as Greek Minister for Foreign Affairs .
As far as the name is concerned , none of us is happy with the name the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
However , what I would say is that this name is the product of compromise and negotiation within the UN and the UN has adopted this as the official name of this country and international organisations have adopted this as a temporary name .
This name does , of course , need to be finalised as quickly as possible and negotiations are in fact under way at the UN .
I quite agree and would like to say that we are ready and willing to continue and step up negotiations with the other side , in order to satisfy sensitivities on both sides and find a solution which , as I said , satisfies both sides .
In reply to Mr Gollnisch , however , who said something that is not wholly accurate , that the name does not imply any territorial claim , I would say that , unfortunately , the whole problem is that historically , the name was used for territorial claims .
Unfortunately the idea of ' Great Macedonia ' existed until recently and hence the term ' Macedonia ' had clear connotations of changing borders and assimilating territory from neighbouring countries .
Fortunately , this has been dealt with ; we have gone beyond this historical aspect at least .
More importantly , there has been a spectacular improvement in bilateral relations between Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia over recent years .
We invest more than anyone else in FYROM and we have consistently supported its territorial integrity , prosperity and progress towards Europe during every difficult stage it has been through over recent months and years .


I agree with Mr Swoboda that Mr Djindjic took courageous decisions as regards both the ? C ? ? and democratic reform and , recently , as regards Kosovo ; discussions were due to begin not on the final status of Kosovo , but on important practical arrangements between Belgrade and Pristina , between Mr Djindjic and the leadership in Kosovo .
I think that , following his death , we should make a commitment to continue to support the forces of reform , the forces of democracy in Yugoslavia , Serbia and Montenegro and help them move towards Europe .
I should also like to point out , in response to Mr Swoboda , that luckily an example is being set in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia of proper cooperation between the institutions of the European Union .
There is proper coordination between us , as I am sure Mr Patten will agree , and not only between our internal institutions , but also between the European Union and the United States and other organisations such as the ? SCE and the Council of Europe .
This proves there is a need for multilateral cooperation , for close cooperation in dealing with crisis at international level .
Where we have this sort of cooperation , this sort of coordination , we are , I think , more efficient .
I have taken Mr Laschet 's comments on the parliamentary assembly of the Western European Union on board .
I too am in contact with the upper echelons of the Western European Union and these are issues that will be discussed during the debate on the future of Europe .
I should also like to comment on two or three questions raised by Mr Laschet , Mr von Wogau and Mr Van Orden about our cooperation with the United States and European Union / NATO decision-making mechanisms and the danger of operations .
First of all , the European Union 's decision-making mechanism , the ESD ? mechanism , is being tested for the first time , especially as regards military operations .
However , we have every faith in the efficacy of our agreed procedures and the fact that this first operation will be carried out using NATO assets and capabilities has helped to speed up the decision taking , as has the fact that one Member State - France - has been selected as the framework nation , thereby safeguarding the unity and command structure of the operation .
As regards the military operation and any dangers inherent in it , naturally unavoidable dangers are inherent in any military operation .
However , as far as this specific operation is concerned , as I said in my statement , we shall continue to cooperate with ? ? ? ? and there are plans to use NATO reserves if the situation deteriorates .
The ? ? ? ? staff in Skopje will continue to operate , as will KFOR Rear .
This being the case , and given the assessments made so far , we consider the risk to be relatively low .
Finally , to the funding of the mission .
As you know , spending on defence is not covered by the Community budget and the operation in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will therefore be funded by the Member States .
Of course , it would be useful if future operations under the ESDP could be funded from the Union budget , but that requires institutional reform .
On that note , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank you for listening .
Rest assured that I am at your disposal , time permitting , and I fully intend to keep you abreast of any procedures , decisions or developments in this area .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have received a motion for resolution on this issue ( ? 5-0157 / 2003 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , in accordance with Rule 37 of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the Commission statement on the transfer of personal data by airlines to the US immigration service .
Mr President , if you agree , as indicated on the board , this Commissioner - who is less knowledgeable than his colleague - could begin the debate and then my colleague Commissioner Bolkestein will continue , as this issue touches on both our competences .
I repeat what I said at the outset of the previous debate , and offer my apologies to Parliament that I will have to leave early , though my distinguished colleague will be here until the end of the debate .
I explained in the last debate that I am due to fly to Croatia and Belgrade later this afternoon and , not least because of the tragic events today , I know that Parliament will understand that .
Let me now turn to the business in hand .
The Aviation and Security Act , passed by the US Congress on 19 November 2001 , is one of a series of laws introduced in the United States after 11 September 2001 , with one overriding aim : to enhance national security , in particular through transport security measures .
The basic aim is to prevent terrorist acts by detecting potential perpetrators before they enter the country .
In this context , the United States Congress has required that carriers make passenger name record information available to US Customs upon request .
The Commission shares the security concerns of the United States .
Nevertheless , the United States measures have raised concern with regard to the respect of Community and Member States ' laws on data protection .
Airlines operating flights across the Atlantic risked being caught between two sets of incompatible measures and suffering severe losses as a result of penalties the United States threatened to impose , including fines and even the withdrawal of landing rights .
Passengers - between 10 and 11 million a year - would have also suffered from the disrupted air traffic and from the time-consuming ' secondary ' checks that the United States planned to introduce at point of entry .
Moreover , airlines not in compliance risked being seen as higher security risks , with potential consequences for significant falls in passenger numbers .
The stakes , therefore , were very high and the consequences of not acting would have been extremely serious .
We had to ensure , as far as we could , that the important interests of European Union citizens in preserving their right to privacy was balanced against the need to protect many thousands of jobs in our airlines and associated industries like travel agencies .
I want to assure this House that , right from the outset , the European Commission has done its utmost to try to engage the United States in a discussion on how to find a solution compatible with both sets of legislation and one that would ensure legal certainty for all concerned .
The European Commission has assumed its responsibilities and in recent weeks undertook difficult discussions to overcome a stalemate created by the United States initially taking our concerns lightly and not responding to our questions .
In fact , the European Commission had raised this issue with the United States on numerous occasions , with particular emphasis since the US Customs Service issued its interim rule of 19 June 2002 , containing the concrete implementation methods .
As a result of these efforts by the Commission , the United States first postponed the entry into force of the new requirements until 5 February and then agreed to waive the imposition of penalties on non-complying airlines until 5 March .
Following a high-level meeting on 17 and 18 February on access to personal data contained in passenger name records , both sides issued a joint statement which sets out the steps that need to be taken to reach a mutually satisfactory and legally certain solution to this issue .
Further talks took place on 4 March , as a result of which the United States has given additional undertakings with respect to the handling and protection of sensitive data .
I am also aware that questions have been raised as to the legal basis for the action undertaken so far by the Commission .
This , as my colleague Commissioner Bolkestein will explain in more detail , seems to be founded on a misunderstanding .
There has been no ' agreement ' and no ' decision ' so far .
Instead , we have engaged with the United States authorities in an intensive dialogue aimed at obtaining the necessary guarantees regarding the proper handling and use of the data concerned by the US side .
Both sides are now committed to continuing their discussions in order to find a more legally secure solution .
The possibility of such discussions is provided for in the Data Protection Directive , as the initial and necessary steps towards the adequacy finding provided for in its Article 25 ( 6 ) .
Following comitology procedures , the draft Commission decision will then have to be discussed by this House before being finalised .
In the interim , we have obtained from the United States a provisional set of undertakings on how they will protect the personal data they access and a specific commitment not to make use of any sensitive data for profiling purposes .
Before passing the debate to my distinguished colleague to provide honourable Members with further details on this issue , I would like to ask this House to recognise the considerable efforts made by the Commission and the positive results we have achieved so far - even if these still have to be finalised - and I hope Parliament will join forces with us in obtaining from the United States the necessary data protection guarantees for European citizens so that a permanent solution to the problem can be achieved .
I should like to make one final personal remark .
The whole House recognises how the events of 11 September produced a real feeling of vulnerability and shock in the United States .
The House will recognise the concern in the United States to put in place measures to ensure that further terrorist attacks are less , rather than more , likely in the future .
Like a number of honourable Members , I come from a country which has also had to take steps to deal with terrorist threats .
That said , I hope that we can engage the United States at a much earlier stage in the policy-making process in discussing these security issues .
If we can have a dialogue earlier in the process , it will be easier to avoid the sort of political difficulties that we have had from time to time over the last year .
There should be no difference between us at all on the importance of putting in place security measures which are recognised as being reasonable by both sides .
It would be easier to do that if we could talk more openly and earlier about these sorts of measures .
Commissioner , I would like to take this opportunity to assure you that it was not the intention of the Chair to exclude you from taking the floor .
However , we were informed that owing to constraints of time you had to leave earlier .
Mr President , I should like to add the following to what Commissioner Patten has just said .
The new American law requiring airlines operating flights to , from or through the United States to grant electronic access to their passenger name records raises a number of policy issues : firstly , the fight against terrorism ; secondly , the right to privacy ; thirdly , the ability of our airlines to compete ; fourthly , the security and convenience of legitimate air travellers ; fifthly , the relationship between Europe and the United States in general .
It is necessary to pull all these strands together and to strike an appropriate balance .
It is also necessary to be practical and not theoretical .
My first message is that we should work together for an outcome that achieves the best possible results , responding to the need to combat terrorism while respecting data protection in practice , without damaging the commercial interests of our airlines and without inconvenience for legitimate air travellers .
The Commission very much welcomes the opportunity to address Parliament on this matter .
Underlying the technical issues are some fundamental questions about security and civil liberties which all democracies have to ask themselves .
Discussions amongst elected parliamentarians on such issues is essential .
The motion for a resolution before Parliament criticises the Commission for not informing and consulting Parliament sooner .
The Commission accepts this reprimand .
It had no intention to conceal .
It was more a question of when to bring this matter to the attention of Parliament and in what form .
We only have a short time .
Rather than making a lengthy factual statement I will draw the attention of Parliament to two documents which the Commission has made available .
The first document is the joint statement which is the agreed account of the outcome of talks between senior officials of the Commission and US Customs on 17 and 18 February 2003 .
The second document is the statement by US Customs of 4 March which gives undertakings as regards the handling of sensitive data .
It is necessary to correct a misunderstanding .
As my distinguished colleague Commissioner Patten has just said , many reports referred to an agreement or a decision .
I stress that there is no agreement , there is no decision .
It follows that , at this moment , there is no legal basis .
There have been discussions and the US side has given certain assurances .
This is the first step in the process .
Both sides are committed to finding a more legally secure solution in due course .
These discussions are necessary .
Why are they necessary ?
Because of information received about new US requirements , the Commission found it necessary last November to inform EU airlines and the related reservation systems that it was not clear whether they could provide the information required by US law without being in breach of their data protection obligations under EU law .
In order to answer that question , it was necessary to obtain information from the US side , in particular as regards the use of the data and the conditions under which they would be processed .
Unfortunately the American side was very slow to respond to these requests for information and they only started to take our concerns seriously in December 2002 .
In the absence of discussions with the United States , the airlines - as Commissioner Patten has already explained - would have been left in an impossible situation .
They would have faced a whole range of penalties , starting with the practice of secondary inspections of arriving passengers .
That indeed had already started .
That meant very long delays at arrival points for hundreds , if not thousands , of legitimate travellers .
That is an option , but is it what we really want ?
It is certainly not what the airlines wanted , and there was every likelihood that these airlines would have complied with American requirements anyway .
I strongly agree with Members who expressed the view in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on Monday that the American way of proceeding by unilateral action and threats of penalties is unacceptable .
But not having discussions with the American side would have left them with the data and no means for the European Union side to influence their handling of it .
It would have left the airlines open to either US or Member States ' enforcement action when they - the airlines - are the wrong target .
If we want to bring pressure to bear it should be on those who can deliver a solution - and that is not the airlines .
Our aim has thus been to open up a process of dialogue through which we can influence US practices and obtain assurances from them that will ensure that data is adequately protected .
The Commission considers that the outcome of the February talks was positive for data protection for the following two reasons . Firstly , we secured US agreement on the further steps to be taken to reach a mutually satisfactory solution that would and can provide legal certainty to all concerned .
The second reason is that the United States made a number of significant , unilateral undertakings of immediate application .
For example they made undertakings on what data they would not use and how they would handle the data they do use .
They confirmed in particular that their data gathering would be limited to flights to , from or through the US .
Clearly we need more time and information from the United States before we can say that we have a solution .
We can only be satisfied when we have an arrangement which provides a maximum amount of legal security for all concerned .
There are in the meantime transfers of data .
Are such transfers legal ?
Only the courts can answer that question in a definitive way , but I would like to make two points in this respect .
Firstly , the airlines have to meet their obligations as data controllers and they must inform passengers fully , in line with Article 10 of the Directive , and obtain their consent for the processing of sensitive data in line with Article 8 .
Secondly , legality has to be examined from the angle of the need for adequate protection for data that is transferred to a third country .
Transfers may however benefit from one of the exceptions in Article 26 ( 1 ) of the Directive .
For example , certain transfers may be necessary in order to fulfil a contract with a data subject - in other words the contract to fly the passenger to the United States .
Since such an exception could be challenged , however , this solution lacks legal security .
Moreover , although exceptions may be legal for specific transfers , they offer no guarantees that the data will subsequently be protected .
Article 25 ( 6 ) of the Directive , on the other hand , provides for a finding by the Commission that a third country ensures adequate protection for transfers of personal data from the European Union .
An Article 25 ( 6 ) decision by the Commission is therefore much to be preferred to relying on the exceptions to the adequacy rule because it means that the data go on being protected .
The prospect of such a decision and the legal security that it brings allow the Commission to engage the third country concerned in discussions about the protection provided , and hold it to ensuring a high standard .
Moreover , Article 25 ( 6 ) decisions always contain safeguard clauses which can be triggered if protection does not in practice match up to the standards expected .
They can also be unilaterally abrogated if necessary .
Finally , an Article 25 ( 6 ) decision is a Community procedure , producing a result that is binding on all Member States .
It is very much to be preferred to leaving Member States to act in dispersed order .
It is worth mentioning that one or two Member States have or are planning measures very similar to those in place in the United States .
On my own behalf and also on behalf of my colleague Mr Patten , I should like to invite the House to take a positive view of the Commission 's actions of 17 and 18 February .
The American side has committed itself to a process which recognises our legitimate interest in their data protection practices , under which they subject their arrangements to our scrutiny according to our standards .
That I think is a major step forward .
Of course the United States still must provide the elements needed for the Commission to make such an adequacy finding .
As a comitology decision , an adequacy finding under Article 25 ( 6 ) is always brought to Parliament before being finalised , as was also explained by Mr Patten .
I certainly look forward to discussing this further with Members of Parliament on a future occasion .
Mr President , I wish to thank the two Commissioners for their statements and say to Commissioner Bolkestein that his acceptance of the reprimand that , as he himself says , we gave the Commission , does him credit .
The fact remains , however , that the debate we are now holding should have taken place long before 5 March , the date of the entry into force of the measures adopted by the United States making airlines that schedule flights from the European Union to that country fulfil the obligations imposed by US legislation to transfer passengers ' personal data to the immigration services , as has been said , with these airlines facing stiff financial penalties if they fail to comply .
Commissioner Patten , we share the concern of the United States following the events of 11 September , but we also wish to say that we have an obligation to demand compliance with European legislation , specifically Directive 95 / 46 / EC , which protects the transfer and use of personal data - in this case , of around 11 million passengers who make transatlantic flights every year .
Article 25 ( 6 ) of this directive even lays down a specific procedure for the transfer of data to third countries and , on this occasion , Commissioners , we believe that this procedure has not been adhered to .
We also have a duty , of course , to protect the interests of the airlines , which have to comply , on the one hand , with the obligations imposed by US legislation and , on the other , with the principles of Community legislation .
In the current situation , the airlines are facing considerable uncertainty .
I therefore wish , Commissioner , first of all to convey to you this Parliament 's unease at your belated - from my committee 's point of view - reaction to this issue , which also leads us to doubt the legality of the actions referred to in the joint statement issued by senior officials of the European Union and the United States Customs Service on 17 and 18 February .
This statement , Mr President , Commissioners , even provides for - and I find this most surprising - an exception to be made to the application of our legislation in light of the United States ' wishes .
I wonder how this is possible .
On the other hand , the Union 's national data protection authorities now have their hands tied because , if passengers complain , they must apply the European directives in force and are obliged to impose penalties on the airlines .
We will , therefore , have to find a quick way out of this situation of uncertainty , by defining a clear framework for action and by reconciling the legitimate demands of the United States with respect for European legislation .
For this reason , the dialogue that has taken place to date within the administrations ' services must be conveyed urgently , given the transparency required , to the institutions ' political representatives and formulas must be quickly found for enabling the data that must be transferred , and the conditions in which they will be processed by the United States ' agencies , to be clearly defined .
It is absolutely essential , at the same time , to inform the citizens that their data might be transferred and should this happen , to obtain their consent because , Commissioners , this is what Community legislation requires .
The ideal situation would be for the US authorities to be able swiftly to define their data protection standards , the adoption of which is already provided for in US legislation , and for the Commission to be able then to state that the necessary data can be transferred under the conditions laid down by Community legislation . This is also a requirement laid down in Article 7 of our Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I therefore call on the Commissioners responsible to make up for lost time and I rely - also on behalf of the committee which I have the honour to chair - on the Commission 's willingness to study with all due attention and urgency the texts that have been submitted to us on the basis of Directive 95 / 46 / EC .
We should also like to be informed , starting from today , of all meetings and of every stage in negotiations on this matter , not when the decision is about to be adopted , to ensure that we can cooperate and work together with the Commission , as we have been asked to do .
Mr President , Commissioner Bolkestein invited us to take a positive view of the Commission 's action in the 17 February joint statement .
I am sure the Commission was motivated by a genuine desire to rescue European airlines from being stuck between a rock and a hard place , in that if they complied with Community law on data protection they would be grounded and refused US landing rights , whereas if they gave into US demands they would fall foul of data protection authorities .
However , the Commission made the wrong call , not least in consulting neither the European Parliament nor , previously , the National Data Protection Commissioners ' Article 29 Working Party .
It is disingenuous to try to claim that it is not an agreement .
It is called a joint statement and it is also referred to in the text as an understanding of both sides which will be implemented .
That , in plain English , is surely an agreement .
However , it does not deliver legal certainty and the Chairman of the Article 29 Working Party has contested the assertion by the Commission that EU data protection authorities may not find it necessary to take enforcement actions - that is for breaches of the Data Protection Directive - against airlines complying with the US requirements .
This is a stunning rebuff to the Commission .
He said in essence that National Data Protection Commissioners and courts were not free to suspend application of relevant laws just on the say-so of the Commission .
That must be right .
It is a reminder to the Commission that if it will not be the guardian of Community law , then others have to be .
The political groups are in wide agreement on this matter .
The only point of contention is the amendment calling for the Commission to secure suspension of the US demands until there is a decision on compatibility with the Data Protection Directive , which means an Article 25 ( 6 ) decision .
The PPE-DE Group has not signed this amendment , and I understand they believe it would leave the airlines exposed .
However , the Article 29 Working Party has stated that they are exposed anyway to sanction for breach of data protection legislation .
Therefore it is academic .
The text of the statement makes it quite clear that the Data Protection Directive applies , because it states that US customs will access the data in the territory of the Community .
The basic problem is that the US has no data protection laws .
This is a problem for the Europol Agreement and the EU-US Mutual Legal Assistance Agreement .
There is huge concern about the balance between security and civil liberties being tipped too far towards security in the United States .
In the light of various apparent miscarriages of justice recently in the US , the lack of control on use of data by other law enforcement agencies is of great concern .
We need an Article 25 ( 6 ) decision after consultation of this House .
The Commission may have tried its best , but it did the wrong thing .
Mr President , I wish to tell the House that , 10 days ago , Professor Venios Angelopoulos of the Athens Polytechnic travelled to JFK airport in the United States and disappeared .
He disappeared for five hours because he was being interrogated by the FBI .
They grabbed him with no explanation whatsoever and they let him go with no explanation whatsoever .
There was an outcry in Greece about the how , why and wherefore until the citizens of the European Union , the Member States of the European Union and parliamentarians gradually found out that the European Commission and the United States had already come to an agreement on the transfer of personal data on people travelling to the United States .
And that is not all .
The United States are allowed to access data systems , passenger files recording the date the seat was booked , the travel agency , ticketing information , credit card number and expiry date , itinerary , previous files on the passenger containing details of previous trips , religious or ethnic information based on their choice of meal etc . , who they accompanied , where they stayed , how they communicated with other people and their medical data , as well as frequent flyer programmes , which also contain a wealth of data .
How can this be ?
Who do the United States think they are ?
The international police ?
And where does this leave the European Union ?
Why does the European Union have data protection laws ?
How can we stand by while the United States imposes fines on airlines for wanting to apply the laws of the European Union ?
How humiliating is that ?
The European Parliament calls on the Commission in its motions - and the Commissioner said nothing about this - to put an end to this , pending harmonisation with the laws of the European Union .
I think we should apply Rule 91 of the Rules of Procedure , as we have had no response from the Commission , and institute proceedings before the Court of Justice .
Mr President , the right to privacy is not sacrosanct , it is a basic right but it can be violated if there are important issues at stake , if it is effective , if it is proportional and if there are guarantees against misuse .
I can tell the Commission now that as far as I am concerned blackmail by a third country or long waiting times for air travel do not count as important issues .
This will really have to be solved another way .
Privacy is not an obstacle , but an essential part of security .
Dealing carelessly with the privacy of our citizens jeopardises the basic trust of the people in their government and in the constitutional state and then we are worse off .
For my group it is logical that the United States wants to know who is setting foot on its territory and in this context we can of course talk about the exchange of data .
But then agreements must also be made about what data we exchange , which authorities have access to them and how long they may be retained .
US Customs may pass the data on to other authorities that are concerned with combating terrorism .
The interest on the American side in the personal data of aircraft passengers cannot , however , be seen separately from their efforts to bring about a Global Computer Surveillance System .
The United States , as my colleague Mr Alavanos has just said , wants to track the travel patterns of citizens , their credit card purchases , and so on , worldwide .
Now the Commission is really pleased because the Americans have made a solemn undertaking not to use data about religion and health .
What does that mean ?
Does it mean that while they do have access to these data , they have simply undertaken not to do anything with them ?
Do you really believe , Commissioner , that if the American authorities have these data and if they think that it is useful for their system , they are really not going to use them ?
Even meal preferences can say something about a person .
I myself have been vegetarian for years and years , even on aircraft .
Now , all of this is going to be recorded and analysed .
For people who do not like this , a European Commission spokesman had good advice .
' The choice is clear , ' he said , ' either you do not go to the United States , or you go for the sandwich option . '
Do you , Commissioner , endorse this advice , and do you also think it so enormously funny ?
In itself it fits in well with your liberal remark of a few moments ago that passengers must in particular be well informed about sensitive information that is gathered about them .
Now the small print on an aircraft ticket is one thing , but do passengers really have any other option ?
I would like to hear what you have to say on that as well .
Mr President , I would otherwise like to associate myself with the many comments of my fellow Members about the precise technical and legal problems with this .
We for our part say that the exchange of data must stop immediately .
European rules apply here on the European continent and if we are going to make agreements about changing these rules , then the partner with whom we are making these agreements must also respect our rules , our basic principles .
This is how it works in a partnership between well-meaning countries .
Commissioner , I will focus on procedure first : you say it is not a question of a legislative act , a Community act .
The problem is that it seems to us at least possible that that act , those joint statements - first the February ones and then the March ones - give rise to legal effects , actions , exchanges of data and information that have taken place because of those meetings and those statements .
The joint statement issued by the two parties in February already mentions the fact that the most sensitive data should be - and are - processed in accordance with European Union legislation .
This statement is also an assessment of the data transfer procedures , a conclusive assessment ; it has legislative force and , indeed , serves to legitimise an exchange of data that already exists .
The same is true of Paragraph 4 of the Commission recommendation to the national data protection authorities , according to which it is not necessary to take enforcement measures against airlines that are not complying with the United States ' requests .
This is another recommendation that has legislative force and effect : the Commission is saying ' Do not intervene ! ' regarding those airlines that are transferring data in compliance with US legislation .
I therefore believe that there is at least the possibility and the suspicion that this act should be considered a legislative act , against which Parliament can appeal to the Court of Justice .
I also believe this procedure might help the Commission and the European Union themselves to strengthen their own position in a dialogue that should be conducted on equal terms , between parties of equal rank , between a market of 250 million people and a market of 350 million people , because we have to consider very seriously the fact that , right now , collecting these data and transferring them to the United States cannot be in compliance with Community law .
Contrary to what the Commission said in the joint statements , the collecting of data that is intended for commercial purposes and the subsequent use thereof for security or intelligence purposes constitutes in itself a breach of the principle of necessity and the principle of proportionality laid down by Community law .
This , in fact , creates a situation of so-called generalised surveillance , which is definitely against Community law , and not just might be or something we must check up on to see whether it contravenes the law .
What is needed , then , is to open formal , official negotiations to see what agreement , what compromise can be found , but it is not possible to resolve the issue pre-emptively by thus attributing de facto legitimacy to a transfer of data that has already begun .
This is why Parliament must continue down this road , and I also believe it will strengthen the Commission and the Community institutions .
Mr President , this is an unfortunate situation , of that there can be no doubt .
Sensitive personal data on citizens of the European Union can be transferred to the authorities in the United States , with no guarantees whatsoever , and our citizens are clearly concerned about this .
At the same time , the United States have taken a threatening stand .
They are threatening to take measures against our airlines if they fail to do as they are told , which is hardly what one expects from friends and allies .
This is just the latest in a series of incidents over recent years , especially lately , incidents which often have what might well be seen as comic-tragic overtones .
For example , as we have seen in the case of Iraq , numerous European countries are now at the point where they have more in common with powers such as China and Russia than with the United States , with which we basically share the same values .
Consequently , at some point , both sides will have to sit down , we and the Americans , and talk seriously and on an equal footing about where this relationship is going and what we can do to save it before it implodes completely .
Now , on this particular issue , criticism is being levied at the Commission which I endorse in large part , although I must say that , in my personal opinion , I do not believe that there was any intention on the part of the Commission to support the Americans .
Its intention was to take certain steps in order to deal with a difficult situation it was facing .
In all events , what I want to see is this problem resolved as quickly as possible in a way that is , first , legally correct and , secondly , legally secure with respect to the rights of the citizens of the European Union .
I think that this approach , Mr President , is far preferable to the immediate suspension of the interim agreement between the Commission and the American authorities that several political groups have called for in their proposed amendment .
If we automatically suspend the agreement with immediate effect , I think that we will be doing ourselves more harm than good , to tell you the truth , not to mention European airlines , which will be denied landing rights in the United States .
So let us find a legally secure solution as quickly as possible , let the Commission act along these lines , even at this late stage , perhaps by correcting any mistakes made , and let us leave it at that .
Mr President , Commissioners , this Parliament has reacted after the attention of President Prodi , President Simitis and Mr Hernández Mollar was drawn to the matter by a source as authoritative as the chairman of the Article 29 committee .
The Commission , on the other hand , tells us that these are simply misunderstandings .
I must say that , now that these misunderstandings have been cleared up , I am even more concerned .
I come from a Member State which knows that measures to combat terrorism must be established , but which also knows - only too well - that this must be done within strict respect for legality and for the law unless we wish to hand final victory to the terrorists .
You tell us that the airlines are being pressured by the action of the United States Administration , which is forcing them to breach European legislation .
If this is the case , the airlines have the right to claim protection from their authorities , as do , it goes without saying , the Union 's citizens .
The Commissioner says that no agreement or decision has been reached and that , therefore , there is no legal basis for such action .
Commissioner , this is precisely what we are complaining about ; this is precisely the question we are asking : what has been done to give the United States the idea that they can undertake unilateral action ?
What have we done to allow this to happen ?
You ask us to take a positive view of the Commission 's actions by saying that data protection - a right recognised in the Charter of Fundamental Rights - and the loss of jobs or the penalties that airlines might suffer must be seen in a balanced way .
I genuinely believe that this is an acceptance of blackmail and I find this situation surprising .
Is the European Union unable to respond in a reciprocal way , to say that some things are not acceptable and might face countermeasures ?
I have the impression that what we are seeing reflects the attitude of a female character from a Spanish novel who , convinced that she lives under the absolute authority of her husband , is happy because he beats her ' no more than usual ' .
In my view , this is unacceptable and this attitude must change .
As most of the groups in this House are calling for , we must stop implementing decisions that have been taken , either by the Union together with the United States or by the United States alone , and attempt this time to conclude , with the means of pressure available to us and with our legislation - which must prevail - an agreement that ensures the secure processing of our data and correctly inform Parliament and , above all , our citizens , of this agreement .
Mr President , the Commissioner has said that there is no agreement and no decision , but there is an interim rule .
My question therefore is how long can such an interim rule be valid and how must we view it ?
Protection of personal data is a fundamental right under Article 7 of the EU 's Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is probably also going to form part of our European constitution .
So this is a very serious matter .
All this is also laid down in our directives and in particular Directive 95 / 46 / EEC .
It also contains exceptions that we could meet .
But as far as I have read these exceptions , I have to say that the transfer of data to the US is systematic and does not fall under the exception of Article 13 of that directive .
It is also the case that the data in question are so all-embracing that you cannot say that they are not relevant and not excessive and therefore cannot fall under Article 6 of that directive .
In addition , Directive 95 / 46 / EEC says in general that the transfer of personal data to a third country may only take place if that third country offers an adequate level of protection .
In my opinion this has not been satisfied either .
I have listened carefully to the Commissioner , who has said that he has done his best to find a balance between maintaining privacy and protecting the airlines .
I have some sympathy for that , but I nonetheless believe that he has gone the wrong way about it .
There is no democratic legitimacy and agreements have been concluded that could not be tested by the representative body .
That is totally wrong .
At the moment my position is that the measures in their present form must be suspended .
The Commission 's representative - Mr Bolkestein , I believe - mentioned at one point the issue of whether Parliament might not take a positive view of the Commission 's actions .
I am just as incapable as my fellow MEPs of expressing such a positive view .
The idea of doing so strikes me as being something of a bad joke , since such energetic kow-towing to unreasonable demands on the part of the American authorities has rarely been seen .
The big picture in this matter is , of course , specifically the United States ' relations with the surrounding world .
What we are discussing here and now bears no direct relation to the use of military technology to kill other peoples , but it is all part of the same picture .
The demands put forward by the American Government are clearly inconsistent with the legal requirements derived from current legislation , first and foremost Directive 95 / 46 / EC on the principles of data protection .
As is apparent from quite a few of the statements put forward by the Article 29 Group , the heart of the matter is that this data is not merely to be used in the interests of air safety , but for the purposes of what is referred to in the United States as public order , that is to say as a component part of the United States ' war against terrorism conducted under the banner of the end justifying the means .
There are , however , a number of legal principles involved here that we cannot dispense with , and the Commission 's efforts to uphold these legal principles are pitiful .
What is described in the paper from the Article 29 Group is certainly alarming .
Data is passed on not merely to immigration authorities but to other federal bureaux .
It is , then , no longer specifically protected , as it ought to be according to American legislation .
I might add one question and one answer .
The question , raised by the Commissioner , was as to whether this matter could be sorted out using a comitology procedure .
That would be absurd .
In my view , the matter necessarily revolves around an agreement pursuant to Article 24 - cf. also Article 38 - of the Treaty on European Union , which unfortunately means that Parliament is made redundant since it has no influence upon decisions of this kind .
All the more reason , then , for informing the public in advance .
Mr President , Commissioner , there can be no denying that especially since the events of 11 September stronger measures have been needed to combat terrorism , but it should equally go without saying that any measures that we implement need to have a legal basis .
The United States on 5 March enacted a law that has indisputable consequences for the citizens of the European Union , for data protection and for EU legislation .
The US enacted this law without concluding the necessary bilateral or multilateral negotiations and without entering into an agreement with the Union .
This - as you yourself indicated , Commissioner - has led to a problem with the airlines , which are caught in a double bind .
If they do not pass on any data , they have difficulties over landing rights , leading to business problems .
But if they do pass on the data as required , they run the danger of infringing EU law and being taken to court .
So a horrendous problem has arisen here .
This procedure is quite simply unacceptable .
The Commission is not , however , immune from criticism here , because it has been aware of this issue for 15 months and has had ample time to tackle this problem , to consult Parliament and to seek appropriate solutions .
An opportunity has been missed here - yesterday was the first time we were informed of this .
We now find ourselves in the position of debating something that has been in force for some time now and which involves data on our citizens being transferred to the United States without our having any real guarantees about how this data is used in practice .
Something else I am critical of is the fact that the negotiations have not been held at political level but that officials have been given the remit of reaching agreement on this , and that this has then virtually been presented to us as the legal basis for all these processes , and the citizens of the European Union have been expected to put up with this .
This too is totally unacceptable .
What we expect and indeed demand is that those responsible should be held to account for allowing a situation in which data is now being passed on from the European Union without any legal basis .
We in the PPE-DE Group are also calling for the scope for an action in the European Court of Justice to be investigated , and we are demanding in particular , and with immediate effect , that anything that has been illegally enacted and is now in force should be rectified .
However , we also expect that cooperation with the United Nations in the fight against terror should continue , but on a proper legal footing .
We all know that we can only win the war on terror by means of international cooperation .
We are therefore committed to cooperation with the United States , but let me make this clear once more - only if our rights are defended !
Mr President , Commissioner , I am pleased that we have witnesses here today to hear us - their visit to the European Parliament will have served a useful purpose .
All the citizens who are listening to us today are taxpayers and in the final analysis they are the ones who finance officials ' salaries and some of them are following our debates with a certain sense of irony .
And , Commissioner , it is the Commission 's third-tier officials in particular who ought to be aware that they bear an enormous responsibility in Brussels , and that they also have to protect the interests of Europe 's citizens .
It is already clear that we need to fight terrorism .
I myself am each year the budget rapporteur of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , and we give Commissioner Vitorino everything he needs for the war on terror .
None of us will refuse if the measures proposed are reasonable .
Especially since 11 September we have been aware of the need for vigilance on our planet and the need to take appropriate measures at any given time .
On the other hand - and I say this as someone from Germany - data protection is not just something that you can surrender if you consider it important that the European Union should not become like America .
It is our task as Members , as representatives of the people , to take our electors ' and our citizens ' interests seriously and to defend them .
We are not just talking about the airlines ' interests here .
We are talking about the interests of people who will soon find - without their knowing anything about it - that every detail of their lives has been handed over to the American security services , without ever having approved that and without knowing how this data will be used .
Up to now they have always assumed that constitutional arrangements apply in the European Union and that data about them is sacrosanct .
What I would now like to know is this : how will we be able to convince these citizens in the future if the American authorities , who are giving no guarantees at all , are in a position to use or abuse their data as they wish ?
Mr President , Commissioner , once again I wish to contradict the previous speaker .
He needs to get a sense of proportion .
Germany 's airlines and those of other countries are informing the public about the new situation , and telling them that if they wish to fly to the USA , they need to agree that this data should be passed on .
Nothing is being hushed up here , the public is being told about this .
Yes , it is evident that that is not enough , but you are acting as if the public were being deceived by the airlines , and that is simply not the case .
I shall try to look at this whole issue from the standpoint of the airlines and their passengers for once .
Because of the general recession , Europe 's airlines were already in trouble before 11 September .
The events of 11 September and the period that followed caused enormous problems not only for all European airlines but also for airlines in the US .
As you will have read over the last few days , even American Airlines may have to file for Chapter 11 protection .
So the airlines find themselves in an extremely difficult situation .
This will also have an impact on airports and on employment .
It therefore has to be said that there is no point in disrupting air traffic between the USA and Europe over the next few weeks because of arguments of principle .
We need to ensure that we can find a constitutional and practical solution to this problem .
Nor can I allow to go unchallenged the insinuation made by some Members that the US authorities will willingly misuse data on European and other citizens that comes into their possession .
You need to bear in mind that before data protection was introduced in Europe , the Americans already had far more stringent data protection arrangements than we have , combined with strict rules about passing on data to third parties .
So to that extent the allegation that the Americans would regularly misuse data passed to them is quite simply mistaken .
What we do of course need , Mr Bolkestein , is clear answers from you .
How do you intend to achieve legal certainty that the US authorities will only receive data needed to fight terrorism and no other data ?
How do you intend to ensure that the Americans - and this also applies to company data - are only given the data they need , as opposed to data they can use to outmanoeuvre our businesses , our airlines and so on ?
You need to guarantee that by means of unambiguous agreements with the Americans .
That is the reason for my two other questions about the extent to which you are prepared to negotiate with the Americans . Which of the two possible legal solutions you have identified do you actually intend to pursue now , and how long will that take ?
I believe that in the present difficult situation faced by the airlines we cannot afford effectively to provoke an interruption of air traffic between the US and Europe .
Mr President , the fight against terrorism is necessary , but not all means are permitted .
That is a very simple basic principle .
You cannot play games with democratic legitimacy and the credibility of politics .
If under the guise of the fight against terrorism the European Union were to permit excessive violation of citizens ' rights , we would be sliding towards the breakdown of the rule of law .
If , as the previous speaker appears to be advocating , we lean too far in our sympathies for the airlines ' difficulties , then we shall also be seriously off beam .
This is the way things would go if Parliament were to acquiesce in the agreement between the Commission and the United States .
That according to Commissioner Bolkestein it should now all of a sudden not be allowed to be called an agreement does not make things any better .
After all , the European Commission has overstepped the mark in this dossier and that is especially disappointing of Commissioner Bolkestein , who this very week has very cheerfully announced his candidacy as member of the European Commission for a second term - remarkable .
The European Commission , as I said , has overstepped the mark .
In the first place it has failed to keep to its own plan to test its own action in advance against Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
In addition , as guardian of the Treaties , the Commission is under an obligation to uphold existing European legislation , in respect of data protection in this case .
As earlier speakers have already explained in detail I shall not repeat it everything is inconsistent with everything else .
Instead of performing its duties properly , the Commission has acted like a mayor in time of war , yielding to American pressure - also known as blackmail - in order , supposedly , to prevent something worse happening .
This action lacks any legal foundation , is completely non-transparent and uncontrollable .
If the Commission had demonstrated greater political courage and had brought in Parliament in good time , a decent debate could have taken place regarding the scope within the fight against terrorism and the limits of data transfer .
The Commission must therefore retrace its steps and take action to defer the agreement 's entry into force .
If the agreements are properly tested against the European rules , a proper agreement can be concluded rather than this half-baked effort that jeopardises legal security .
I am therefore especially pleased that in the resolution we shall be voting on tomorrow we shall also be opening up the route to the European Court , because it is not the first time that the Commission has tried to sidetrack Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are living in times in which the United States of America persists in adopting undesirable unilateral initiatives .
It is unacceptable for that country to impose measures on airlines unilaterally and on pain of severe sanctions .
As a matter of fact , I think that the Commission and the Council must take a careful look at whether this type of measure is entirely compatible with international agreements and conventions on air traffic and transport .
As various speakers have emphasised , primarily the committee chairman , Mr Hernández Mollar , our airlines are facing a dilemma , which is on the one hand that they are obliged to comply with Union data protection rules , specifically Directive 9546 and , on the other , they are obliged , due to this US legislation , to forward this data on passengers flying to , from or within the United States , in the knowledge that if they fail to do so or do so incorrectly or incompletely , they will be hit with severe sanctions , which could range from losing landing rights to having to pay substantial fines .
I agree with all the speakers who have emphasised that something is wrong in the relationship between the Commission and Parliament .
It took fifteen months for the Commission to submit the matter to Parliament . It is also clear that the joint declaration by officials of 18 February does not establish a derogation for Community law and therefore does not provide a legal basis for airlines to authorise access to their data .
Consequently , airlines face a real risk of being taken to court , as a result of complaints from passengers whose personal details have been forwarded to the US authorities .
The directive on data protection lays down that personal data can only be forwarded to third countries if adequate protection is in place .
Have the United States given us sufficient guarantees that this data will be protected ?
Guarantees must be provided for a definition of the reasons , for restrictions on the use of these data , for the conditions and restrictions on forwarding and sharing data , for protecting data from unauthorised access , for the duration and conditions of storage , for national measures for the protection of sensitive data , for passengers ' means of recourse to review and correct data kept by the US authorities and , finally , for conditions of reciprocity .
I hope that this matter will not be omitted from the next EU-US summit , due to take place on 25 June and that the European Union will adopt a forceful stance on this .
Mr President , we all reject and condemn terrorism and its criminal acts .
We support the US objective of preventing and combating terrorism and we roundly condemn the appalling acts of 11 September 2001 .
These acts were intolerable for their blind violence and because they affected innocent citizens .
We do not believe , however , that the end justifies the means .
As Mr Pirker and Mrs Terrón i Cusí have said , in waging the fight against crime , the rule of law must be upheld and citizens ' rights must not be called into question .
Our respect for US law must be based on mutual respect for our own legal system .
Our fight for security cannot and must not call freedom into question .
Mr President , Commissioner , in spite of everything , I am one of those who are still trying to understand the underlying reasons that have driven the United States to adopt this measure - we know what they are : 11 September , the climate of fear , the preparations for war and the latent threat of attack - but I am certainly also one of those who are prepared to declare openly that they can in no way accept that an ally government , notwithstanding all these reasons , should breach international agreements based above all , as in this case , on the EU Treaty .
We all know - we have already been reminded , but I shall repeat it to refresh our memories at the end of the debate - that the most serious and controversial point is that referred to in recital B of the resolution , which states that at first the United States had just asked for these data to be made available .
In Italy there is a proverb that says , ' It is fair enough to ask , but it is a courtesy to answer ' ; except that the United States did not have the courtesy to wait for our decision but went straight to the second stage of their action .
They immediately appropriated the data , even threatening companies that did not provide the information with a fine of EUR 1000 per person .
And what information , Commissioner , Mr President ! Not just passengers ' full names and details of the flight in question , but even all their credit card details , information on other trips they had made , data , for instance , that could lead back to descriptions of passengers ' ethnic and religious backgrounds , medical data , addresses of all kinds , their occupation , membership of certain groups , and so forth .
The Commission has justified this measure by saying that the airlines did not want to have the burden of creating filters and therefore gave immediate access , as they were afraid of the EUR 1000 fine , amongst other things .
The Commission has also said that this would have prevented long queues for passengers arriving at the various destinations in the United States .
Really , this explanation seems rather childish , to say the least : justifications that are not acceptable in that there is a complete breach - as has also been mentioned already - of Article 8 of Directive 95 / 46 / EC , and the Commission 's role above all is to enforce the directives and hence Community law .
Another point of disagreement is this : as has been mentioned , the Commission knew a good 15 months ago that the United States was going to bring this measure into force on 5 March .
Well , the Commission 's duty would have been promptly to inform the citizens of Europe and the European Parliament , which would automatically have acted as a sounding board .
The United States Congress does not seem to have had much respect for democracy either : it never discussed this measure ; it simply interpreted the legislation broadly , it is said , and then moved on to action .
I would say that this too is a moment of serious discourtesy .
The only point of contact is the well-known high-level agreement of 19 February , which , however , is not a written agreement and has no validity , certainly not enough for us to take to the Court of Justice .
We ask the Commission what the legal basis is for this agreement and what European interests are safeguarded in this case .
In order to clarify this and other points , the European Parliament has now convened a public hearing and , perhaps , after this hearing we shall first of all know a little more about how it was possible for all this to have come about and , secondly , have a rather clearer idea especially about what it would be best to do now , while avoiding emotional schizophrenia and agreeing on joint , coherent standards to be enforced in future .
I have received a motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) , of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I shall do my best to answer the most important questions and remarks addressed to me .
It is difficult to be brief as this is a complicated and important subject .
So far we have achieved two things : first , we secured American agreement on the further steps to be taken to reach a mutually satisfactory solution that can provide legal certainty to all concerned .
I should like to stress that this seems mutually satisfactory to the Commission , the European Parliament and the European side .
I say this in particular to Mrs Buitenweg , who insisted that our norms should be the touchstone for the acceptability of any agreement that might be achieved in future .
It must be a mutually satisfactory solution .
The American side has accepted that .
Secondly , the American side has given a number of significant unilateral undertakings of immediate application .
For example , they gave undertakings on what data they would not use and how they would handle the day-to-day ' do use ' .
In particular , data gathering would be limited to flights to , from or through the United States .
Our discussions so far have yielded this result .
We have not yet reached the end of the road - far from it .
We have not yet achieved an agreement .
The discussions with the United States will continue , I hope as quickly and as energetically as possible .
It is premature to say that the Commission has failed and that it should have achieved more than it has .
On behalf of Commissioner Patten and Commissioner de Palacio , who deals with transport , I must reject those criticisms .
That is not to say that there is not more to do .
It has been pointed out that , although there is no agreement as yet , the effect is nonetheless that data is being accessed where it was not accessed before .
That is true .
It is clear that in the absence of discussions the airlines would have provided the data anyway .
The airlines know that the US airlines and US-based reservations systems are already doing this .
That is a very important point which may have been overlooked in the heat of the debate .
It is not simply a question of letting the data be transferred or preventing this , much of it is flowing anyway .
Therefore it seems to me that the suggestion which has been made that we should take the airlines to the European Court of Justice is not a very productive suggestion .
It is happening now .
The airlines are , as Baroness Ludford said , between a rock and a hard place .
They know that the American side is serious about imposing penalties , including some that could put their transatlantic traffic at risk .
The counterbalancing threat - namely that the Commission would start infringement proceedings , legal action for breaches of the data protection rules - was a serious concern for the airlines .
However , some of them have said that is not life-threatening , whereas the American threats are .
I would beg Members to understand the very difficult position in which the airlines find themselves , which will have an effect on transatlantic traffic of 10 to 11 million passengers a year , as Commissioner Patten has explained .
A number of speakers have mentioned the supply of information to European Union citizens .
Under data protection law , as I am sure Members know , the first duty to inform data subjects lies with data controllers .
In this case that is the airlines and possibly travel agents .
On Friday 14 March there will be a meeting to ensure that they understand their obligations to inform passengers and aircraft crews about what will happen to their data and why .
A duty of information also lies with the American Government .
Most of us would find it hard to argue that a country such as the United States does not have the right to determine the conditions under which it allows people to enter the country .
They also have a duty to inform the public so that potential travellers can make an informed choice .
Baroness Ludford made a very pertinent point about the data systems that would be based in the European Union and the way in which the United States would access those data systems .
It concerns the direct application of the Directive to US Customs that give the European Directive a clear extraterritorial effect .
The Commission is at present undertaking a thorough legal analysis of the various implications of that question , for example with regard to the scope of the Directive and to the exercise of state power by US Customs within the territory of Member States .
The judgment is awaited from the European courts in a case that may throw some light on the Directive 's precise scope but no date has yet been fixed by the courts .
In any event this question only arises when US Customs have direct access to the airlines ' databases .
It would not arise if the airlines were to send the data to US Customs and this method of transfer , that is the push method , is certainly much to be preferred if it can be organised from a technical point of view .
Furthermore , the question has been raised in particular by Mrs Buitenweg and also by other Members of Parliament about meals taken on aircraft .
It is important to realise that the US screening process does not use data such as meal orders , but those data are in passenger name records and they are downloaded with the rest .
That is bad practice in terms of data protection .
The fact is that the United States neither requires airlines to change their data collection practices nor asks them to separate relevant data from irrelevant data , which makes the exercise less costly for the airlines .
Mr Santini and Mr Jarzembowski referred to this aspect of the case .
Even our Directive says that certain efforts are not mandatory where they are disproportionate to the results they achieve for data protection .
We shall certainly pursue our talks with the airlines with the view to their installing filters that separate US flights from the rest and possibly also filters that separate sensitive data from other data which the US side say they do not need or use .
These are some of the more substantial points which were raised by Members of Parliament .
In addition to these points , with respect to a suggestion made by Mrs Paciotti , the possibility of using 25 ( 6 ) , i.e. a finding of adequacy , is of course available .
If the Commission should come to the conclusion that there is adequacy in this area it will and it must inform Parliament and a proper discussion can then take place on the basis of this finding of the Commission .
A question has also been raised about discussions to be held at political level .
I am sensitive to that suggestion and I shall certainly discuss it with Commissioner Patten - who begs to be excused for the reasons that he mentioned - and Commissioner de Palacio , since she , for obvious reasons , is very much involved .
On the other hand I would like to say that it is not always the political input that provides a solution .
After all , the staff - certainly in the case of the services that work under my supervision - are extremely able people .
There is no reason to suppose that they can achieve less than Commissioners at political level , but the possibility cannot be excluded and I am therefore sensitive to this suggestion .
Various Members of Parliament have spoken about the suspension of the American measures .
I am sorry , but in view of what I said earlier and also what Mr Jarzembowski said , we cannot afford , especially in these days of political uncertainty and economic downturn , to stop air traffic to the United States or seriously put it in jeopardy .
After all it concerns millions of passengers per year and we cannot afford to put that in jeopardy .
Mr Jarzembowski has said that we must have a practical solution , with a proper legal basis , in cooperation with the United States .
I agree entirely with him and the Commission will make every effort to achieve that practical solution , firmly based on the law .
I hope to be able to discuss further developments in this area with Parliament as appropriate .
Mr President , I wish to ask a question and , depending on the answer , perhaps lodge a complaint .
Who is responsible , in Question Time , for determining the order in which questions are answered ?
The person with ultimate responsibility is Parliament 's President .
If you will allow me , Mr President , I wish to make a complaint .
During the February part-session , it was decided to cancel Question Time .
My question to Council was tabled as No 3 .
When it was announced that Question Time was to be cancelled , we were told that these questions would be answered in March .
It is now March and my question , which was then No 3 , is now No 22 .
This is discrimination .
I wish to protest to you , Mr President , and I wish to ask you for your help .
It is hard for the President of a sitting to help in these situations .
You will receive a letter from the Secretary-General giving a detailed explanation .
I would ask Members to show some solidarity with those who are scheduled to speak in Question Time because , otherwise , some of them will not be able to receive an answer .

In any event , Mr Ortuondo , Mr Nogueira , I would ask you to keep your points of order brief .
I have already received an answer from the Secretary-General , but it does not answer my question .
All I want is an answer .
Why should a question that was listed as No 3 in February become No 22 in March ?

I promise that I shall do everything within my power to ensure that you receive an answer .
Mr President , I am one of a group of Members who have tabled questions to the Council .
I can state that one question - which for me personally is extremely important - on the conflict that I believe exists between the Commission and the Council with regard to legislation on maritime traffic , tabled on 30 January , according to the document currently before us , is being answered much later than questions tabled in February .
We naturally attempt to receive answers here in plenary and we fail to understand what criterion is used .
Should we not be told the political criterion so that we can act accordingly ?
I would ask you to write to the services responsible for this Question Time if you wish to receive a detailed answer . This will not affect the right of Members to receive answers now .
Questions Nos 1 and 3 will not be answered because the subjects they address already appear on the agenda for this part-session .
Mr Posselt has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , Question No 2 has not been dealt with today .
Kosovo has got nothing at all to do with Macedonia and Iraq .
I have now been sitting here for half an hour , and I have waited from 5.30 p.m. to 6 p.m. until Question Time ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Posselt , I said Questions Nos 1 and 3 , not Question No 2 .

You are entirely within your rights to ask the question and the Council , which is represented today by the Greek Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Papandreou , to whom we extend a most cordial welcome , will therefore reply immediately .
Question No 2 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0070 / 03 ) :
Subject : Status of Kosovo
If gradual steps are not taken to clarify Kosovo 's future status it may prove difficult to stabilise society in and secure investment for the region .
What thoughts does the Council Presidency have on this matter ?
Mr President , I would first like to apologise .
The interpretation referred to Questions Nos 1 to 3 , which is why I asked to speak .
So the reason was an error in the interpreting .
Please accept my apology .
But I would now like to put my question to the President-in-Office , whom I wish to thank for his very concrete and helpful reply .
I have two short supplementary questions .
The first is to ask what you think of the idea of simply setting up a working group to consider the options for the future of Kosovo .
That would give us a preventive role and stop us from once again reacting only when it was too late .
The second question is this : as far as I am aware , the preamble of the new constitution of Serbia and Montenegro includes a claim by Serbia that Kosovo should in future be a part of the Yugoslavian sub-state of Serbia .
I would like to ask whether the European Union or the United Nations have protested against this .
I ask because this would prejudice the chances of keeping open the future status of Kosovo .

As far as your first question is concerned , as I said , discussions have not yet opened on the final status of Kosovo , Of course , various groups could be set up if necessary , as you suggest .
What we have been trying to do is to get Belgrade and Pristina to talk about matters of common interest , such as the return of refugees , security issues , energy and other networks and so on , where by definition cooperation is needed if greater trust is to be generated between the two sides before moving on to the next stage , which is the discussion on final status .
So irrespective of what the constitution of Yugoslavia or the new state of Serbia-Montenegro says , there has been no discussion on final status and , when there is , it will be , as I said , on the basis of the UN resolution .
We all know which UN resolution I mean , so there is no need for me to refer to it at this point .
It is Security Council Resolution 1244 .
Minister , you tell us that we need to wait .
We have just learnt of the assassination in Belgrade of Prime Minister Djindjic .
Many European capitals felt we had to wait for the arrest of the war criminals Mladic and Karadzic .
We can see what has happened .
In Kosovo , the situation has certainly not improved ; relations between the Serb minority and the Kosovo-Albanian majority are not improving .
Could we not , as we did with the Cyprus issue , begin to look calmly at scenarios such as those indicated by Mr Posselt ?
I have the impression , and I would like you to confirm this if possible , that the High Representative , Mr Solana , is working on the scenarios mentioned by Mr Posselt .
Do you have more precise information on this subject ?

I should just like to say that , during the earlier debate on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , I and the Commission , the Council and numerous members referred to Kosovo and the assassination of Mr. Djindjic , a tragic incident ; as you know , Mr Djindjic was a stabilising , democratising factor who was trying to help resolve the important , difficult problem of Kosovo .

As you yourself pointed out , there are problems with relations between the ethnic groups in Kosovo , there are problems with the return of refugees , there are problems with keeping Kosovo on an even keel on a day-to-day basis , there are problems with a whole series of issues which have a great deal to do with what we call European values , European rules , which is precisely why Mr Steiner pointed out , on behalf of the UN - and we agree and support this position - that standards need to be improved .
That is why we talk of standards before status .
I should like to point out , if I may , that if all sides act to establish these standards , trust between the various ethnic groups will improve , which is vital to a substantive debate about the future status of Kosovo .
If it does not , the situation may become explosive .
This outcome has also been discussed , but both the European Union and the international community believe that this approach is probably the best way of tackling the problem of Kosovo .
Question No 4 by Sarah Ludford ( H-0073 / 03 ) :
Subject : Guantanamo Bay
How can there be sufficient mutual trust between the United States and the EU on law enforcement and upholding of fundamental rights - such as to justify agreement on exchange of information , mutual legal assistance and extradition - whilst European citizens are interned without charge , in breach of international law , in Camp Delta at Guantanamo Bay ?
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for that reply , but is it not a fact that our trust in American civil liberties guarantees is being severely shaken and that it is a tragedy that in the United States , under the Bush administration , standards of fairness and due process are being sacrificed ?
Just two days ago a federal appeals court rejected attempts to clarify the legal situation of some Guantanamo Bay detainees , including two Britons .
The court , in a decision that could leave the detainees in legal limbo indefinitely , said that foreigners had no rights under the US Constitution and could not invoke the jurisdiction of US courts to test the legality of restraints on their liberty .
This shocking situation , which contrasts with what will be the case when the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights becomes binding - under which foreigners as well as EU citizens will have their basic rights guaranteed - comes hot on the heels of other miscarriages of justice such as the case of a Briton who was executed when a Texas judge refused to look at DNA evidence and another Briton held for three weeks in prison in South Africa because of FBI incompetence .
In these circumstances , how can we trust the American criminal justice and law enforcement system ?
Should you not be consulting the European Parliament before making the agreements that the Council intends to make ?

First of all , may I say that I appreciate your question as both a question and a stand ; I have taken due note of it in my capacity as representative of the Council and I shall pass your thoughts on to the Council .
Secondly , I should like to point out that a dialogue has opened with the United States on a series of human rights issues , such as the death penalty .
I think that the European Union has every reason to defend what it considers are basic rights and it will do so with every partner and every country , especially the United States , with which we share common values and common objectives .
I should also like to confirm that , as I said , we have issued detailed instructions for an agreement to be negotiated between the European Union and the United States and I am therefore confident that all these issues will be covered in the negotiations , which are still under way , meaning that it would be premature to comment on their progress .
Question No 5 by Mrs Riitta Myller ( H-0076 / 03 ) :
Subject : Maritime transport
The Commission has asked the Council for a mandate to negotiate on behalf of all 15 Member States in order to ensure that the candidate countries and those neighbouring countries which play a part in the transportation of heavy fuel oil in EU waters apply the same principles to maritime transport as are in force within the EU .
What has the Council done to ensure that the Commission has adequate powers of negotiation in this regard ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for your answer .
It is very important that we ensure , for example , that double hulls are used with shipments of oil , but that is not enough in all situations .
When it is a matter of the icy conditions to be found in the north still more is needed , and this has been made very apparent this year because it has been a very cold winter and there has been thick ice in the Baltic Sea and particularly in the Gulf of Finland , which is very vulnerable .
It is approximately 30 metres deep on average and conditions are very difficult .
I would therefore like to ask you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , if you agree with the Finnish initiative proposing the amendment of the Regulation on double hulls so that in the future a Member State could insist that vessels coming into dock should be adequately strengthened to withstand the pressure of ice .
In other words , what is adequate in such a situation would be determined by the Member State whose port the vessel is entering .
Should this not also be extended to neighbouring regions , for example - as we are talking about the Gulf of Finland here - to vessels bound for or coming from Russia ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , as you know , following the 1989 accident involving the oil-tanker Exxon Valdez , the United States proclaimed a law called the ' Oil Pollution Act ' , which sought to provide an effective remedy to this type of problem .
To give an example , vessels sailing in US waters are required to provide a security of USD one billion and , in the event of an accident , a sum of USD five billion is required as indemnity .
Only EUR 180 million have been set aside for clearing up the Prestige disaster , to be divided between Galicia ( the most badly affected country , which is my country - my nation ) , other communities in the Spanish State and France .
I believe that we need to draft a law similar to the US Oil Pollution Act , so that , through this European initiative , we can modify the legislation of the International Maritime Organisation .
What is the Presidency 's view on this matter ?
What initiative does it intend to take ?
Why does it not establish compulsory rules for maritime traffic , such as those that exist for air and land traffic ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I heartily support the Council 's attempts to promote the safety of sea transport in the International Maritime Organisation .
It is important to ensure that if dangerous vessels such as these which do not meet the required standards are banned from European territorial waters they do not then move on to a third country 's territorial waters and cause problems there .
It is important to move forward via the international community .
My question , however , actually concerns whether it would be possible to raise this issue of fuel shipments , particularly in the Baltic , at the next EU-Russia summit .
It is vital that such matters be given the highest possible profile and , in my opinion , this is such an important question that it should be taken up at the highest political level with the Russian leadership .
Is this possible ?
Question No 6 by Sylviane H. Ainardi ( H-0084 / 03 ) :
Subject : Flags of convenience
In its resolution of 19 December 2002 on the sinking of the Prestige and its consequences , the European Parliament called in particular for ' flags of convenience to be prohibited in EU territorial waters ' .
What measures will the Council propose for this EP recommendation to be implemented as quickly as possible ?
Thank you , Mr President , for everything that you have said , but allow me to also stress my point because Parliament has also followed all the Commission and Council initiatives to speed up the implementation of the ERIKA I and ERIKA II packages .
You referred to the fresh measures taken regarding the IMO , but the reason why Parliament has proposed that flags of convenience be banned is that we are all well aware , in the debates that we have had following maritime disasters , that the nature of flags of convenience is that in the event of problems , it is incredibly difficult to locate those responsible .
We are well aware that , throughout the chain that links the flag , the State , the captain of the boat and the various crews , it is no longer possible to determine in the end who we are going to ask to be held criminally and financially responsible , which is the reason for Parliament 's proposal .
I must stress this .
It is true that the Commission should take the initiative , but I would like to know how , as President-in-Office of the Council , you are going to support this proposal by Parliament .
Mr President , the President-in-Office is quite right that we have to work on IMO relationships if we are going to get a reasonable agreement with other countries , but in fact the main thrust of the Council 's requirements from the Commission following the Prestige accident has been to come forward with new regulations at EU level , which are essentially based on the double hull requirement for all tankers carrying heavy fuel oils .
Is the President aware that there are about 4 000 vessels of this type under 5 000 tonnes in the world , and less than 200 of them have double hulls ?
How does he imagine we are going to replace those several thousand vessels in order that we can continue to provide Europe with its heavy fuel oils ?
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I agree with you when you state that the laws of the International Maritime Organisation must be changed .
What we must do now , however , is seek an appropriate strategy with which to do this .
We already have the US Oil Pollution Act , which is a step in the right direction .
The best strategy for amending , for changing international legislation is to pass a specific European law .
The rest will follow as an inevitable consequence .
Why not give this a try ?
Could it perhaps be because some Member States such as the United Kingdom , the Netherlands and Greece are opposed , as happened at the Copenhagen Council ?
We must bear in mind that there have been no accidents in the United States in the last fifteen years , but there have been in Galicia and in Brittany .
There have been accidents in the European Union .
Question No 7 by Marialiese Flemming ( H-0078 / 03 ) :
Subject : Poisoning of stray dogs and cats in Greece
Just a few days before Greece took over the Council Presidency , most recently on 30 December 2002 , large numbers of stray dogs and cats were poisoned in Athens .
A similar incident occurred shortly before the start of the last Greek Presidency .
These systematic poisonings give rise to the suspicion that the sight of stray animals is to be erased from Athens ' image when Greece holds the Council Presidency .
On 30 January 2003 the Greek NGO umbrella organisation CIDAG ( Coalition in Defence of Animals in Greece ) handed the Greek Embassy in Brussels a petition bearing 47 000 signatures calling for these deplorable events to be investigated and brought to an end as soon as possible .
Will the Greek Presidency launch an urgent investigation to find out who is responsible for these criminal acts and work towards an immediate solution to the problem ?
Mr President-in-Office , you really have my admiration today when I consider the range of subjects you have had to address , ranging from the Iraq crisis to stray dogs in Athens .
I admit that is asking a lot of you .
I believe that this is relevant to the Council - I did in fact also put this question to the Commission but it did not reach it yesterday - because the umbrella organisation for all Greece 's animal protection organisations has told us that the Council wanted Athens ' cleansed ' so that the EU would not have to put up with seeing stray dogs there .
Please accept that I love Athens , which I regard as the cradle of our culture and the birthplace of everything that we think and feel .
But I always sleep very badly in Athens because it simply upsets me so much to hear these stray dogs barking .
The point I wish to make is this , and neither the dogs nor I will mind if you address this as a member of the public or as a member of a government . There are animal protection organisations in Greece , and I know that they catch dogs and that they put down the old and sick dogs that are beyond help , and that they seek good homes for the healthy ones , and that the remainder are neutered and then released again .
I believe that these organisations need money and the support of members of the public .
If a particular member of the public also happened to be a minister , that would do no harm at all .
I would remind honourable Members that this part of the sitting is to be used for asking questions ; I realise that you sometimes take the opportunity to make statements , but in order not to set a precedent , please confine yourselves to asking questions .
Question No 8 by Manuel Medina Ortega ( H-0086 / 03 ) :
Subject : ULYSSES programme for controls at the Member States ' sea borders
In the wake of the launching , in the eastern Mediterranean and on an experimental basis , of the ULYSSES programme for cooperation between a number of Member States in the area of controls at the Union 's sea borders with a view to containing illegal immigration , and given the plans to extend it shortly to the Atlantic islands ( the Azores , Madeira and the Canaries ) , can the Council state exactly when it is expected that protection under this programme will be extended to those islands ?
Thank you very much , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , for the information you have just given me .
To date , some information on the programme 's efficiency has been published .
It appears that , despite the existence of the programme , 300 immigrants have been found in the straits zone since its entry into force , which means that it is not being particularly effective .
The real problem , however , is that , at the same time , there has been an increase in illegal immigration to the Atlantic islands , which are in a similar position : they are like a receptacle full of liquid from which , if one hole is stopped up , the liquid leaks out of another , with greater force .
I wish to ask the Presidency whether it is aware that if the Ulysses programme is effective in stopping illegal immigration in the Mediterranean , it will increase illegal immigration via the Atlantic islands and , therefore , whether the Council is aware of the urgent need to implement the Ulysses programme in the Atlantic territory , as soon as possible , if it wishes its actions to be at all effective .
I thank the honourable Member for his comments , which I shall pass on to the Council .
As I said , this is a pilot programme because , basically , this is the first time there has been such extensive collaboration between the Member States on this sort of operation .
What we are trying to do is to see where we can improve our border protection against illegal immigration .
The problem of illegal immigration is , of course , a complicated problem because there is not just the question of protecting our borders ; other factors come into play , such as hotbeds of war , hotbeds of poverty , environmental , political and other crises .
All these are factors which affect the rise and fall in immigration and the choice of crossing point and encourage illegal immigration .
I agree that the results of this operation are by no means guaranteed .
This is a pilot programme and it will need to be evaluated , as will numerous other measures we need to take in connection with other Union policies , such as justice and home affairs , development cooperation and bilateral relations with numerous countries , measures that we trust will also have positive results .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I rise to ask if the Council has already considered including the Galileo satellite navigation project in the Odysseus programme and to what extent plans for this have progressed .
Mr President , following the terrible accident involving the Prestige and its repercussions for people and for the environment , we wish to suggest that a Community coastguard service be created , which would be responsible for preventing vessels that are not in a fit condition to sail from doing so .
With regard to this point , I wish to ask the Council a question : is this matter that we are now addressing not precisely one more reason for creating this European coastguard service , not aimed specifically at suppressing what you defined as the ' fight against illegal immigration ' , but which would also save the lives of many individuals who , on rafts or by other means , attempt to reach Europe 's coasts and who often fail ?
Question No 9 by Olivier Dupuis ( H-0087 / 03 ) :
Subject : Enlargement
One of the priorities of the Greek Presidency is the strengthening of relations between the EU and those European countries which are still not on the list of applicant states . This is clear from the recent visit ( 13-15 January 2003 ) of the Greek minister Mr Papandreou to the western Balkans , during which he met the region 's national leaders .
For obvious reasons , relating both to clearly understood mutual interests and to the EU 's political and historical obligations towards those countries , it is now incumbent on the Union to recognise , formally and without delay , the legitimate aspirations to full membership of the European family of Albania , Armenia , Azerbaijan , Bosnia-Herzegovina , Croatia , Georgia , Kosovo , Macedonia ( FYROM ) , Moldova and Serbia-Montenegro .
In this connection , does the Greek Presidency intend to use the occasion of the Thessaloniki European Council , in June 2003 , to add those ten countries to the list of applicant states , while making it clear that the opening of accession negotiations will depend on the political , institutional and economic progress made by each of those countries vis-à-vis the Copenhagen criteria , as well as on their degree of incorporation of the acquis communautaire , and that the accession negotiations will only be concluded following the closure of the various negotiation chapters in the light of the real reforms made by the candidate states concerned ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you very much for your very detailed answer .
One question : you yourself say that Croatia has already made an application for accession and that Macedonia has also announced that it will do the same in the autumn .
With these accessions being announced , would it not be politically better for the European Union to propose that these countries be put on the list of candidate countries , which is legally and politically different from formally opening up negotiations ?
With regard to the countries of the Caucasus , which I have had many opportunities to visit , each time I have noticed that the Greek ambassadors were more mindful of the need to ensure a clear possibility for integrating those countries into the European Union .
You know as well as I do that the destabilisation brought about by a major neighbouring country has had absolutely devastating effects and that it is a vicious circle , that without a clear option of accession these countries will not be able to get out of the spiral .
So do you not think that it is urgent that the Union should propose the same to those countries ?
Mr President , the question of the European Union 's borders is very interesting and has also been discussed by the European Convention .
Yesterday the Commission adopted a strategy for a good neighbourly relations policy which also lists those countries covered by the policy .
Is any significance to be attached to this strategic proposal by the Commission given that we are discussing the possible decision at the Thessaloniki Summit to open negotiations with the new candidate countries ?
In other words I am asking what the relation is between this strategy for a good neighbourly relations policy and the new , possibly to be called candidate , countries ?
Is the purpose of the neighbourly relations policy to specify which regions and states can never join the Union , or , in other words , is this in fact a matter of defining the Union 's borders ?
Mr President , we are still eagerly awaiting the arrival of the Commissioner , who has indicated that she would be present for this item .
I hope that she will be appearing any moment now .
In my own-initiative report on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , I have dealt with gender mainstreaming in the European Parliament both at political and administrative level .
We have held discussions on this in my committee with stakeholders , we have had a series of discussions both with the President and with the Secretary-General , followed by a public hearing , and we have also held discussions with staff representatives and with the advisory committee .
The European Union 's obligation to promote equality between men and women is rooted in Articles 2 , 3 and 13 of the EC Treaty and in Article 23 of the EU 's Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Gender mainstreaming as a political strategy is intended to assist in achieving this ambitious objective .
This also follows on from the definition of the Beijing Platform for Action , under which gender mainstreaming is intended to further the development , organisation and evaluation of political measures and decision-making processes so that the initial position and the impact on men and women is taken into consideration in all areas of policy and at all levels , with a view to working towards the objective of genuine equality for men and women .
Parliament must act as a motor for equal opportunities , as it has indeed repeatedly done in the past , and gender mainstreaming now needs to be incorporated into our political activities and our structures in a coherent and comprehensive way .
This report accordingly proposes a whole raft of measures intended to underpin the principle of gender mainstreaming in the long term .
Strengthening the position of women is therefore a key aspect , but not the only one , the aim being to adopt a double approach .
We propose a number of measures in the report .
The European Union needs to lead the way , and Parliament should signal its active commitment by setting up a High-Level Group on Gender Equality , chaired by its President , just as happened at the Commission under President Santer .
We are definitely lagging somewhat behind .
The Conference of Committee Chairs needs to be involved here and , in conjunction with the Committee of Delegation Chairs , it should make recommendations to the Conference of Presidents as to how to implement gender mainstreaming in the committees ' and delegations ' work in a concrete way .
Our proposal here is that one member , preferably the Chair or a Vice-Chair , should be made responsible for gender mainstreaming and that the individual committees should then identify projects in their respective work programmes to ascertain how gender mainstreaming can be achieved in their area of activity and systematically check the impact of measures affecting women and men .
With this in mind , planning and implementation , and also evaluation , need to be oriented towards achieving a defined quality standard and facilitating internal benchmarking .
Each committee should then carry out an annual assessment of its activities and achievements in the field of gender mainstreaming on the basis of predetermined targets and should monitor these measures .
We propose that the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities should then draw the individual reports together into an annual report on gender mainstreaming and make recommendations for further steps .
A further package of measures concerning agreement on how to reconcile staff members ' professional and family activities is then needed .
One important target is the use of gender-neutral language .
Our objective , particularly bearing in mind enlargement , must be to involve the candidate countries in this process , and with an eye to the elections to Parliament in 2004 to ensure that equal representation of men and women can be achieved .
The situation as it stands is that although Parliament has always been in the vanguard in this respect , the proportion of women Members was 17.5 % in 1979 , and this has now risen to 31 % .
However , in the Convention , there has been a step backwards .
I believe that it is highly important that we should give a positive political signal by implementing benchmarking and gender mainstreaming , so that the 2004 elections will represent an advance - and not a retrograde step .
I hope there has not been a misunderstanding .
We are not expecting a commissioner for this debate .
This is very much a debate for the European Parliament rather than the European Commission .
We can expect a commissioner later on when we have matters relevant to the Commission 's portfolios .
Mr President , I speak as the Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs , which has concerned itself with this problem of its own accord , as Mrs Gröner knows .
We have issued a favourable opinion , though we have highlighted certain points , because the objective of gender equality , as laid down in the Treaty and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , is an important objective that Parliament does well to debate .
Mainstreaming equality , as Mrs Gröner has said , means intervening in the fields of decision-making , political and administrative processes , encouraging the making of decisions that take into account the goals we must achieve .
Therefore , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities proposes that Parliament should adopt a plan of action alongside measures which , of course , are provided for in the legislation and are aimed at reaching the objectives we wish to achieve .
Mr President , this is a process which has ramifications in our social structures and in the institutions and which , naturally , must see effective equality as the conquest of substantive equality of fundamental rights and duties in an open , globalised society that wants to give due importance to all cultural expressions .
I believe expressions of equality have a profoundly cultural content .
I think it is fundamental that there should be a high-level policy group to restore the gender balance in Parliament 's governing bodies and in Parliament as a whole , especially in view of enlargement , which must take into account the goals we wish to achieve .
Therefore , the opinion that the Committee on Legal Affairs has drawn up and which I want to convey to this House , here this evening , points out that we have referred to the 2002 Lalumière report , approved by the Bureau .
That report not only provides for the appointment of a higher percentage of women at A1 and A3 levels in the next few years , but it also states that , in terms of career development , the principle of priority should be applied systematically .
This principle , however , has been considered by the Committee on Legal Affairs to be in some ways a little excessive , going rather beyond the goals we want to achieve , because it is at variance with the case-law - which I believe is quite enlightened - of the Court , which naturally considers that it is against national rules to automatically give priority where candidates of different sexes short-listed for promotion are equally qualified .
Such a priority should , of course , be seriously taken into account initially in the context of competitions for posts , but it must not constrain the actual outcome in practice .
In other words , giving absolute and unconditional priority to the under-represented gender for appointment or promotion is , according to the Court 's ruling , not only going beyond the objective of promoting equal opportunities but also replacing this objective with an outcome of equal representation , which can only be achieved if this objective is fulfilled .
I believe , therefore , that this philosophy of the Court and this fundamental principle , which , with some moderation , brings a substantive balance to decision-making , should be adopted as appropriate instruments that Parliament must adopt in order to achieve a more mature equality , which would be a victory in the process of social and cultural life .
Mr President .
I should like first of all to thank Mrs Gröner for the sterling work she has done . As one has come to expect with Mrs Gröner 's work , there was a long and thorough process leading up to this debate .
Mrs Gröner refers to Article 2 and Article 3 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty and to Article 23 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights , all of which emphasise the EU 's obligation to promote equality and remove inequalities between men and women .
I should also like , in this context , to refer to Article 141 ( 4 ) , which makes it clear that measures may be adopted providing for specific advantages in order to make it easier for the underrepresented sex to pursue a vocational activity or to prevent or compensate for disadvantages in professional careers .
I am in no doubt at all that this is particularly aimed at the Member States , but it is in actual fact a principle that ought also to apply here in the European Parliament , for equality will not be achieved until both the political will is present and the appropriate tools are in place .
We are able to observe some general warning signs right now .
Once , the debate revolved around women 's freely choosing to create equal opportunities .
Now , the debate has in actual fact moved on and altered its focus in many places in Europe .
Now , it is increasingly the case that men and women have become equal under the law , and it must therefore be up to women themselves to discover what they want .
The debate has moved back into the home .
This , however , is to ignore the facts .
It is still the case that women earn less , and it will therefore continue to be women who stay at home with the children , meaning that it will go on being men who take the decisions - here in the European Parliament , too .
31.5 % of MEPs are women , but they are distributed over a wide area .
8.7 % of Greek , and 44.3 % of Swedish , parliamentarians are women .
The last example shows how worthwhile it can be making active efforts to promote women 's participation and how it is possible to bring about more equal representation , either through quota arrangements on the individual lists or through the option of preferential elections .
Matters look quite different as soon as we turn to the indirect and the hierarchical systems .
One such indirect system is the European Convention , only 17 % of whose members are women , and an example of a hierarchical system is the administration of the European Parliament , which is also short on equality .
If we , as the number one democratic institution , cannot set a better example than we are able to do at present , how are we to be able to convince people in Europe that equality is a ' sine qua non ' , or necessity , if we are to have a proper future in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this evening 's report , for which I thank Mrs Gröner very much , concerns a very important subject because it is at the heart of policies of equality between men and women .
It is extremely difficult to implement what the European Parliament is proposing with gender mainstreaming , which I would translate into French as transversalité .
First of all we need to recognise how difficult it is to make policies specific to women , which is why Parliament has a Committee on Women 's Rights , and , at the same time , ensuring that those policies have transverse effects across all committees and in all political issues . That is what this report is proposing .
Europe is once again a pioneer in this area and we should be extremely mindful of this twofold problem .
We should walk on two feet rather than just one : on the one hand , equality , with the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , and on the other hand , gender mainstreaming , which is extremely difficult .
We all see this every day in our respective committees , outside the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities .
This report , for which I would again like to thank Mrs Gröner , proposes a two-stage process .
On the one hand , it is about affecting decision making , ensuring that gender mainstreaming is applied at all levels within the European Parliament , as I believe it already is , and to a greater extent , in the Commission .
On the other hand , the emphasis is not on parity but on equality of the sexes in all areas , thanks to this report , the adoption of which in the plenary I welcome , having myself tabled an amendment for the vote in plenary .
I think that this second point is just as fundamental .
That is why this report is important both for its pioneering nature and because it highlights the difficulty of this policy .
Commissioner , the informal Council meeting last week had already practically ratified some proposals of this report and I am pleased about that .
However , I am much less pleased about what is happening with enlargement .
Malta has just gained the right to vote on enlargement despite its anti-abortion legislation and its restrictions on divorce , and these seem to have been accepted by Europe and by the fifteen Member States .
It also seems that Poland is looking to retain the prerogatives of its laws on gender rights .
I question the political will of our fifteen Member States .
It has been said that it was important for us to set an example to future Member States , but if we cannot ask them to respect a certain number of established principles regarding women 's rights , I am greatly concerned .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I find it disappointing that yet another report on gender mainstreaming has to come before the European Parliament , a policy that was approved years ago and should have already been implemented .
This is to not to detract in any way from Mrs Gröner 's efforts in this excellent and very full report .
When I dream of mainstreaming and the resulting equality between men and women in this institution , I also see the first female secretary-general and a 50 / 50 division between men and women in all grades .
Half of the people working part time would be men and in the late afternoon there would be children running around who had been collected from a crèche for which there was no waiting list , and which had been provided by Parliament .
This House would also be run by both sexes in an innovative , progressive way that would result from the differences between the sexes .
This is , however , a dream .
I therefore see a the gender mainstreaming report as a missed opportunity to fully integrate the acquis communautaire in respect of equality , including the Hautala directive adopted by the Council not so long ago , into the statute of public servants and the personnel policy of the European Parliament .
I find it unacceptable that the Member States introduce equality legislation while the European Parliament fails to do the same .
During school holidays or an unforeseen strike at school we see many children running around in this House .
They are children of assistants , staff members or of the members themselves .
They are not always of an age that they can go to the crèche , assuming that , as in my dream , there is no waiting list .
Where in this huge building is there a small play area with toys , paintbrushes , and so on , where we can leave a child safely for a few hours ?
This would therefore be in keeping with the policy that is aimed at the reconciliation of social , family and working life with one another .
Fellow members , unfortunately I have to inform you that my contribution so far has been based on an argument that I articulated in this House on 8 March 2002 to add lustre to International Women 's Day .
Still nothing has changed .
It is unbelievable .
I would like to conclude by saying that our Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities is going to have a major part to play in verifying the implementation of Mrs Gröner 's report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to start by congratulating Mrs Gröner on this work intended to ensure parity .
Despite the overall extension of the protection of the fundamental rights of women in recent years , the integration of the principle of equal opportunities is still not satisfactory in all areas , particularly in the political and administrative fields .
The balanced and active participation of women and men in political life is a crucial instrument for consolidating a more just and democratic society .
Given that Parliament is the institution closest to the citizens and that its commitment to protecting equal opportunities has enabled many policies in this field to be developed , it is its duty to set an example by increasing the integration of women into parliamentary activities and into the institution 's internal structures .
We therefore need to promote women 's full participation in order to attain a more balanced situation .
In the prospect of enlargement and of the 2004 European elections , information campaigns must be undertaken to prepare women who wish to enter the European institutions .
This will enable us to prevent the percentage of women Members in the European Parliament slipping even further .
I wish to emphasise , without attempting to make a judgement on my own work , that the work undertaken by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities has proved to be of crucial importance in raising the awareness of other committees , through the speeches and opinions it has delivered .
With regard to Parliament 's administration , I fully support the measures for increasing awareness , information and vocational training , and on squaring the needs of professional and private life , specifically through flexible working hours and making childcare infrastructures available .
I do not think , however , that systematically implementing the principle of preference for women candidates for positions of leadership is a suitable alternative , as long as this imbalance persists .
I therefore support the amendment tabled by Mr Gargani , who does not agree with such a rigid and mechanical approach , preferring the possibility of adopting positive measures to encourage the under-represented in recruitment , career development and other professional activities .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a few days ago , I think we all supported the international women 's days observed in our respective countries .
What has emerged from those days is still quite a bitter taste : we are still victims of inequality and we are still being treated as a minority group , when we represent more than half of the human race .
It is with a great deal of regret that I have to observe that this evening , the problem of women appears once again to interest only women , and I hope that tomorrow there will be more of us to stand up and fight against that , as some men fought today , complaining that some very important items , in particular pensions , were being dealt with only at the end of the evening .
At European Union level , it has to be said that the principle of gender equality is not yet being applied .
Mrs Lalumière 's report , which looks at the situation in our institution , says quite clearly that this is the case and makes specific proposals .
It is true that we need to deal firmly with this problem and stop hiding behind socio-economic and socio-cultural considerations .
We have said that we want to be a fairer and more equal society .
Thank you , Mrs Gröner , for this excellent report , because , for the years to come it will provide an incomparable tool for developing the integrated and transversal approach in our policies , our actions and our budgets .
Why ?
Quite simply because we feel that this integrated approach will lead to a fairer , more democratic society , and that taking into account the differences between men and women will enable us to take better advantage of human resources .
We must take an active and effective approach , whether to structures , information policies , the evaluation of our actions , or the collection of statistics .
Might I point out that , in less than a year , the Committee on Women 's Rights will be twenty years old ?
Twenty years is an important milestone , and I hope that we will be able to make a more than positive assessment of all the work that has been done .
Mr President , gender mainstreaming was put on the European Union 's agenda and through the European Union on that of the UN around ten years ago by a joint action of Swedish and Dutch feminist policymakers .
I know this so well because I was involved myself .
The basic thought behind this approach , that is that women 's problems are cross-cutting problems , goes back much further however and was applied in policy far earlier .
In the Netherlands we spoke of facet policy and policy integration , in Germany we said that women 's policy was a ' cross-sectional problem ' , Mrs Gröner , and in French it was simply called le mainstreaming .
The experience acquired varied somewhat .
We can now fill quite a bookshelf with the successes and also the problems .
Unfortunately we also find misunderstandings on this bookshelf and perhaps even wilful distortions .
Some false guides in fact try to sell what is actually specific policy under the guise of gender mainstreaming and that gets us nowhere .
Fortunately , in her more than outstanding report , our rapporteur , Mrs Gröner , has erected a dam against such misuse of this term in the European Parliament .
The report makes clear once and for all that gender mainstreaming is not a matter of ' add women and stir ' .
No , that is not how it is .
The idea of gender mainstreaming is to strip so-called general policy of its generality , to shatter this myth and to see how it has a different effect on men and women .
Let us realise that we still have a long way to go before this is really understood .
Many men after all find the idea that their picture of reality is not relevant for women unbearable .
Hidden behind these definitions of reality are positions of power which , as feminists know , will never be given up without a struggle .
The political question behind this report is therefore the following : are the men who rule the roost in this Parliament really prepared to step aside a little and to share the power with us ?
As long as we cannot answer that question with a heartfelt yes , we must stay on the path we are following , despite all the pessimistic noises that I hear .
We must keep on beating the drum .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament must give a boost to the implementation of the principle of equal rights and opportunities and I congratulate Mrs Gröner on the proposals she has tabled and which , if implemented , will make a major contribution to gender mainstreaming , by promoting equality between men and women through incorporating this into all practices and activities .
I also wish to emphasise that this is not only a matter of increasing women 's participation in Parliament 's bodies , the various committees and working groups ; it is above all a matter of integrating the gender perspective into every stage of drawing up policies in the various working processes of Parliament 's committees and delegations , including the budgetary process and in all Community policies , which is extremely important .
Appropriate financial and human resources are of course essential , but what is needed above all is a genuine policy of promoting equality and considerable political will , not only on the part of the bodies responsible in this Parliament but also on the part of the Commission and the Council , to ensure that the gender perspective is genuinely present in all policies and practices .
Mr President , we will vote in favour of this report , because it contains a number of good intentions regarding equality between men and women , and it proposes that Parliament should put its own house in order .
Not only are there half as many women as men in Parliament , but in the managing bodies of Parliament - the Bureau , the Conference of Presidents , and so on - women are outrageously under-represented .
However , I must stress that acting only at that level would only be scratching the surface .
There is still a considerable difference between salaries for men and women in companies .
Why are the European institutions , which are capable of proposing restrictive directives when it comes to facilitating trade and business , not doing the same to ensure true equality of salaries ?
Why are they not imposing on all the Member States , including the most backward ones , women 's fundamental right to be in charge of their own bodies ?
That would not be enough to halt the progress of misogyny and violence against women , which is growing in the poverty and ghettos of working-class areas , but it would curb the deterioration of women 's standard of living .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at noon tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , the objective of equality of opportunities between women and men was incorporated into the Treaty of Amsterdam , and this established the legal basis for the Community commitment to working on all the Structural Funds programmes in order to attain this objective .
It was also incorporated into the Regulation for the Structural Funds for the 2000-2006 period .
Equality of opportunities is an objective in all the programmes and actions cofinanced by the Funds .
Despite these very clear objectives and their compulsory nature , we have observed that , apart from the European Social Fund , they are not being met , even when they are included in a programme that is due to be implemented .
The European Social Fund is the only programme in the field of employment , vocational training and career development that is meeting this objective with specific programmes intended to achieve equal opportunities ; but other important areas , such as infrastructures , transport , the environment , local and urban development , rural development , research , etc . , do not feature equality amongst their objectives .
Although the European Social Fund focuses on promoting employment , major actions still need to be undertaken , such as reducing segregation in the labour market and pay inequalities , and promoting the role of women in the fields of information and communication technologies , entrepreneurship , new employment opportunities and the decision-making process .
We ask the Commission to adopt more specific and more effective measures to remedy these shortcomings .
We also think that there is a clear lack of will in the Member States to promote the objective of equality in the Structural Funds .
It is true that progress has been made on compiling statistics broken down by gender , which gives us a truer picture of the situation , but monitoring indicators for the programmes have not improved in relation to previous programming .
The Member States are responsible for programming and we ask them to make more of an effort to support specific policies and actions to achieve the objective of equal opportunities , by selecting projects that meet this aim .
The Member States could also develop infrastructures , such as nurseries , and day centres for the elderly or the disabled ; normally these obligations are taken on by the women in the family and , with the appropriate infrastructures , we could ensure that women are better integrated into working life , promote the reorganisation of working time and arrangements for returning to work after long absences and do more to raise awareness of the need for an equal division of tasks between women and men in families .
Particular attention must be paid to women who find it harder to achieve equality of opportunity , such as women with disabilities , immigrants and heads of families .
Greater integration of women into decision-making bodies would undoubtedly facilitate this task .
Training and awareness-raising in the field of equal opportunities should not only target these women , however , but society as a whole .
Let us take the opportunities provided by the Treaty and the Structural Funds Regulation to make progress in equal opportunities with projects that fulfil these objectives .
The mid-term evaluation that will be undertaken this year , half-way through the programme , must analyse the extent to which account has been taken of this objective : the nature and the size of the appropriations earmarked for these practical actions in the field of equal opportunities to undertake the necessary changes , for the second programming period .
Account must also be taken of the importance of these actions in the candidate countries , which will become Members of the EU in just over a year and which have administrative and economic restructuring difficulties that particularly affect women .
Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Avilés Perea on this report , which is an extremely timely piece of work of considerable quality .
Despite the fact that obligations in the field of equal opportunities have been transposed into the regulations on the Structural Funds for the 2000-2006 period , their implementation is still weak in operations cofinanced by the Funds .
The European Social Fund still plays a vital role in implementing this objective , in comparison with other funds , because most programmes cover the fields of employment and social affairs .
We are forced to admit that much still remains to do in reducing segregation in the labour market and wage inequalities .
The gaps are many and various : the low level of women 's participation in information and communication technologies , the low level of entrepreneurship amongst women and their lack of representation in the decision-making process . This is just to mention a few of the shortcomings and to show that the Commission must act to remedy them .
We believe it is appropriate , not to say crucial , that the Commission establishes guidelines ensuring that the issue of equal opportunities is taken into account in all of the Structural Funds ' spheres of action .
Member States clearly cannot remain uninvolved . It should be stated , as a matter of fact , that despite the importance of the political commitment they have given , Member States have failed appropriately to honour this commitment .
The Member States must be more consistent in developing measures for the systematic integration of equal opportunities into all stages of programming and implementation of actions and in periodically submitting a report to the Commission on the progress they have made .
Statistics broken down by gender must be drawn up to monitor and evaluate programmes , and raising the awareness and training of candidates and of the various parties involved , from drafting stage to implementation , is also essential .
It is reasonable to give the responsible authorities the right to reject proposals or to propose their revision and to apply penalties in the event that projects do not comply with the requirements to integrate equal opportunities .
A final remark to emphasise that this year the interim evaluation of the Structural Funds for the 2000-2006 period will take place . In this context , the Commission and the Member States must take the opportunity to undertake the necessary modifications so as to increase the degree of implementation of the objective of equal opportunities for men and women for the remaining programming period .
Mr President , Commissioner , the regulation on the Structural Funds , which covers the ESF , the ERDF and the EAGGF , stipulates a commitment to the achievement of equality of opportunities .
The same commitment applies to the Equal , Interreg III , Urban II and Leader Plus Community initiatives .
However , as we have already heard from the previous speakers , the implementation of the objectives to be pursued to achieve equality between men and women in these programmes leaves a great deal to be desired in practice .
The Commission has undertaken to present a mid-term review of the Structural Funds by the end of the year .
I believe that this own-initiative report by Mrs Avilés Perea could provide a good foundation for that and I would like to briefly mention a few more of our aspirations and identify some of the shortcomings here .
There are a number of things that need to be improved as regards the allocation of funds . There needs to be balanced participation by men and women in the bodies responsible for decision-making , selection and monitoring at local , regional and national level .
Information needs to be provided to applicants and project management staff on how equality of opportunities can be effectively incorporated into draft measures . One of the important things here is for Structural Fund plans and programmes to include financing programmes which identify funding available for individual measures and actions to improve equality of opportunities .
This would both emphasise and guarantee that equal opportunities are being taken seriously and are really to be implemented in these programmes .
The difficulties , resulting from structural weaknesses , involved in reconciling professional and family life still represent a problem .
If equal opportunities are not systematically incorporated into all stages of programme planning and implementation , they will continue to be scandalously neglected in the future as well .
The Social Fund needs to be used far more intensively as an instrument for remedying the inequitable treatment of women in the labour market .
Women 's demands for equal pay for equal work go back a very long way , but they have still not been met .
We need to promote women in the areas of information technology and entrepreneurship .
There is also a failure to develop adequate new forms of employment .
Although the Member States have formally committed themselves to equal opportunities , implementation of them still falls short in many areas , despite legislation to promote equality of opportunities .
So the question that arises once again is this : what is the point of having excellent legislation if failure to comply with it has virtually no consequences ?
Mr President , I too should like to thank the rapporteur for her brilliant report .
In terms of equality policy , we have unfortunately begun far too late to focus upon money rather than upon mere words .
When we do indeed focus upon money , we shall be able to attach some real figures to inequality .
In this area , the EU 's Structural Funds are its handiest tools for redistributing resources , firstly between the regions and secondly between population groups .
They must therefore be seen as key tools for achieving one of the Community 's overarching goals : equality between men and women .
As both Mrs Avilés Perea 's report and analyses by quite a few women 's organisations show , however , the gender dimension has not , as Commissioner Diamantopoulou pointed out , been anything like adequately incorporated .
The fact that this has not happened is one issue . Another issue is that , when we address one of the major challenges for the EU - namely enlargement - we shall be faced with still greater challenges in the area of equality .
We are now to have an array of new Member States with traditions and histories different from our own and , therefore , with views of the concept of equality different from that which we have in the existing Member States .
The Communist regimes considered the oppression of women as something peculiar to capitalist societies , and sexual equality was therefore officially introduced .
This meant that women were to go out to work and to take part in political life . In return , nurseries were set up , maternity leave was introduced and abortion was legalised in a number of countries .
It worked in the sense that the proportion of women in the labour market was high in relation to what it was in the existing EU countries .
The other side of the coin , however , was that , in many cases , women experienced their work as nothing more than a mere duty , and not as a right , and there was no question at all of equal wages and therefore , of course , no question of equality either .
It can now be seen that , with the transition to a market economy , unemployment has hit women hard , and unemployment is something women will often associate with accession to the EU .
The EU must therefore make an extra effort to convince women that the EU is something other than a crude market economy . It is in this area , moreover , that the Structural Funds have a central role to play , specifically through their representatives in the different countries knowing how to practise mainstreaming and how to involve women in projects , for otherwise there will be no projects beneficial to women , precisely because the latter are not in the first place well disposed towards the market economy and the EU and because they have the historical background I have already described .
In this context , I hope that Commissioner Diamantopoulou will follow up on what she has already said along the lines of our being alert to this issue and that she will also intervene if it proves that there has been no proper mainstreaming . I am , moreover , completely convinced that all of us who are here this evening will happily help her .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur .
I very much welcome this report and I am pleased that the committee has taken the initiative to prepare before the mid-term review , so that amendments can be made at that stage .
As we all know , when operated effectively Structural Funds play a key role in helping the regions and the people in most need , reviving deprived communities and helping to combat social exclusion .
It stands to reason that women and gender equality are central elements of this .
My constituency in Wales includes some of Europe 's poorest communities .
Wales is a beneficiary of Objective I funding and has probably had a very similar experience to other areas of Europe .
Good work has been done .
The European Equality Partnership in Wales has developed systems to try to integrate mainstreaming and fully consider gender and other equality issues in the programming .
But people working on the ground still report frustrations .
There is a lack of understanding by those running programmes of the economic importance of equal opportunities and the positive effects for the whole community .
Good practice is sometimes undermined by the pressure to comply with spending deadlines .
Technical assistance is lacking for people trying to implement equality measures .
For us in Wales , in particular , there is a worrying under-spend in the gender-specific measures .
That is something we need to investigate .
All this shows the importance of monitoring systems which will enable us to compare what is really on the ground in different countries .
We now have the mid-term review , which is an opportunity to deal with the issues raised in Mrs Avilés Perea 's report , a chance to move the equality agenda forward .
For that to happen , the training and support mechanisms need to be in place to ensure implementation as well as efficient monitoring and sanctions for non-compliance .
Involving women and equality organisations in the evaluation is extremely important .
Much depends on their commitment , hard work and vigilance , which the Member States would do well to try to match .
Mr President , I too should like to thank Mrs Avilés Perea for her excellent report and , to tell the truth , there is not much to add to what she has written and what has been said this evening .
I therefore want to focus on the lessons we should learn from the Avilés Perea report , from what the Commissioner has said and also , I believe , from the Gröner report .
First of all , I think it is important to say that these two initiative reports aim to be a tool and a stimulus for the subsequent steps that the Commission , Parliament and the Member States have to achieve , because they focus on the tools that we should have available both at the planning stage and at the stage of assessing the impact that the policies we issue have on the actual , real lives of our citizens , especially women .

From this perspective , I think there are some important , positive examples : the indicators defined in the European employment strategy and the impact assessment carried out by the Commission can be a splendid benchmark for doing the same thing in other policy areas too , for instance in the assessment of Structural Fund programmes , and I am pleased to have heard the Commissioner say this evening that these will be the points taken into consideration in the mid-term review .
It is necessary , therefore , to develop the tools of statistics , the presence of women in decision-making positions and committees , and impact assessment indicators .
To these I believe another tool will be added , which we are developing as a guideline in the Committee on Women 's Rights : budget structure from a gender perspective .
I think this will be an important package that we can work on together , in order to have some effect on the implementation of these policies at all levels - national , regional and local - in the Member States .
We must , I think , provide greater information on the tools available , emphasise the positive things that have been done - even if we are not completely happy because there is still a lot to do - but we must not become dejected that we do not have any tools at our disposal : the tools are there , so let us try and use them !
Mr President , I too share Mrs Avilés Perea 's conclusion about structural policy .
Tens of billions of euros from the Structural Funds are left over , half of which the national governments should have contributed .
While there was an undertaking that 15 % of the Structural Funds would be destined for women 's projects and equal opportunities , the end result is just 6 % .
Let us be honest however ; we are talking here about 6 % of the money spent and not 6 % of the amount budgeted .
In reality therefore it is just a fraction of the original amount .
The Commission always takes refuge behind the fact that it does not know which of the proposed programmes are specifically for women and washes its hands of it .
Having regard to the great surplus we must therefore reverse the roles .
If the Member States do not submit any programmes in which 15 % goes to women 's programmes , we will unfortunately feel compelled to ask the Commission to reject these proposals .
This must likewise apply in the wake of enlargement , because the need for Structural Funds in the new Member States can be expected to be so great that the gender dimension there will be subject to extremely harsh treatment .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we in Parliament feel that gender mainstreaming in all EU policies is a given , which has certainly been much discussed ; it has simply failed to be implemented . This is no longer a true reflection , however , of the situation in the Member States .
Even with the existence of a regulation dating back to 1999 , which sets equality of opportunity as a key objective of actions under the Structural Funds , it is nevertheless true that , with the exception of the European Social Fund , this concept has still not been incorporated by the administrations , either of the fifteen countries of the Union or of the ten enlargement countries .
This is , however , an extremely important weapon in the Commission 's armoury for ensuring that positive actions to benefit women are implemented .
At both the drafting stage in each country - as the Commissioner said - of projects to be funded by the Structural Funds , and at the stage of their being studied by the Commission , and even in the implementing report , the gender perspective must be integrated and evaluated .
Greater participation by women in the teams that draw up and study projects to be funded and in drawing up indicators that enable effects and results in this field to be measured are crucial .
I therefore support Mrs Avilés Perea 's report and hope that in the interim evaluation of the implementation of Funds earmarked for 2003 will show evidence of the results of the equality policy and that the programming for 2004-2006 is improved , with a view to achieving the following aim : the Structural Funds must be a powerful weapon for improving equal opportunities for women in the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at noon tomorrow .
Mr President , on 27 May 2002 , the Council adopted Regulation ( EEC ) 881 / 2002 in the aim of transposing a series of United Nations Security Council resolutions .
In practical terms this dealt with two resolutions establishing actions , principally the freezing of funds and other economic resources , applicable to the persons and bodies included on the list created by the United Nations Sanctions Committee specifically for this purpose .
The European Parliament delivered its opinion on 11 April 2002 , under an emergency procedure , and adopted the Resolution with 14 amendments .
Last December , the United Nations Security Council adopted another Resolution , No 1454 of 2002 , recognising certain exceptions to the obligation to freeze funds and economic assets .
On this basis , the European Commission submitted the proposal before us today , which echoes , almost word for word , the United Nations text .
This proposal , therefore , concerns authorising the release of funds for the individuals included on the list , in order to cover basic human needs , such as expenses related to food , medical treatment , legal fees , rent , etc. as the Parliament European itself called for in the Resolution of 11 April 2002 , to which I have already referred .
On that occasion , however , the plenary of the European Parliament also tabled other amendments that were not included by the Council in Regulation ( EEC ) 881 / 2002 , or by the Commission in its current proposal .
For this reason , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs voted for a range of amendments that are adopted in the report before us today , which I propose we endorse in its entirety .
There are five amendments , which seek the express inclusion in the Community Regulation of the procedure for deleting the names of individuals from the list of terrorists currently in force in the United Nations , to ensure that the European Parliament is fully involved and informed , and to deal with the need for the lifespan of this Regulation to be in line with the period of validity of the United Nations resolutions it is transposing .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , having touched briefly on a specific issue , that we today have the task of debating , I wish to take the last few minutes of the speaking time I have left to make a more general observation on the reasons that have led to our having to adopt this type of international and European law . The reason is nothing less than the persistence of terrorism .
Indeed , over the last year and a half in particular , bloody terrorist brutality has shaken the entire world .
Focusing on the fight against terrorism in the European Union , I wish to highlight one aspect that I believe is relevant .
If we do indeed all agree that we wish to create an area of freedom , security and justice , we must work to ensure that its three components work fully and with equal intensity throughout the territory of the European Union .
Nevertheless , there is no point in talking about a European area of this nature if , in practice , not all of the European territory is fair , safe and free .
The main cause of this is the persistence of terrorism in the European Union .
This is not something alien to our borders but something that persists within these very borders .
To this end , the competent European authorities have started working on adopting an entire legislative arsenal to combat the terrorist scourge .
Although all actions to achieve this end can be questioned and , of course , evaluated ; I also wish to condemn those voices that have been raised , which are much more concerned about safeguarding the rights and freedoms of terrorists than with remembering the harm , the suffering and the despair that these people inflict on their victims , not to mention the sense of injustice and impotence engendered by such acts .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , I fervently hope in future to see practical approaches to the rights and freedoms of the victims of terrorism and their families .
In this context , and taking advantage of the Commission 's presence amongst us today - I see that the Council is not present - I shall take the opportunity to suggest the idea that is already beginning to be talked of in the corridors and to which I hope we will soon have an answer ; I am referring to studying the possibilities of creating a mechanism for solidarity at European level that provides formulas for compensating European citizens who have been the victims of terrorist attacks on EU territory .
Mr President , honourable Members , since 1999 the European Union has been applying sanctions against the Taliban regime in Afghanistan .
These restrictions were introduced under the common foreign and security policy and in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the UN Security Council .
Following the terrorist attacks on the USA on 11 September 2001 and the subsequent collapse of the Taliban regime , these measures were reviewed in early 2002 .
This review led to the lifting of certain restrictions against Afghanistan , such as the flight ban .
However , measures against individual members of the former Taliban regime were maintained .
At the same time , a great many countries adopted new measures relating to various persons and entities associated with Osama bin Laden and his Al Qaeda network .
These measures were taken by the European Union and other members of the international community in accordance with UN Security Council Resolution 1390 ( 2002 ) .
The list of persons and entities whose funds and economic resources are to be frozen was determined by a committee of the UN Security Council on the basis of Chapter VII of the UN Charter on measures necessary to maintain international peace and security .
These measures are binding on all UN members .
The Council of the European Union transposed this list into Community law by means of Regulation ( EC ) 881 / 2002 and authorised the Commission to publish amendments to this list .
As you yourself mentioned , Mr Hernández Mollar , it was in April that Parliament adopted its opinion on this regulation .
The Council and the Commission very much welcome Parliament 's cooperation in this matter , not only as regards the fight against terrorism and the financing of that fight , but also in terms of strengthening the reputation of Member States as loyal members of the United Nations .
In its opinion of April last year , Parliament quite rightly pointed out that there can be no exceptions in any circumstances to certain rights , the right to life being one of them .
The Council considered this and other demands made in Parliament 's opinion , taking into account the Member States ' obligations under the Charter of the United Nations .
On the basis of this consideration the Council reached the conclusion that under the relevant Security Council resolution it was not permissible for the Member States of the European Union to adopt unilateral exemptions to the provisions for freezing funds .
It was therefore necessary to raise this point in the Security Council .
Consultations took place with the members of the UN Security Council on the exemptions , which were largely based on humanitarian considerations .
During these consultations , some members expressed their concern that exemptions could make the basic arrangements unworkable in practice .
This is the background against which the proposal for possible exemptions needs to be viewed .
The proposal is in line with Resolution 1452 ( 2002 ) of the UN Security Council , in accordance with which exemptions are permissible upon application by Member States of the European Union .
The Commission welcomes the report prepared by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and wishes to thank the rapporteur very sincerely for his very hard work .
The report shows that the exemptions proposed here sufficiently reflect concerns about the possible impact of measures on the right to life of natural persons affected by sanctions .
The Commission welcomes the proposal contained in the report to stipulate exactly what procedures persons and entities on the list should follow if they wish to apply to be deleted from the list of those persons and entities whose funds and economic resources are frozen .
Resolution 1452 and the proposal on which Parliament has given its opinion are important means for promoting respect for fundamental rights .
The Commission is conscious that the right balance needs to be struck between the basic rights guaranteed in democratic societies and the need to fight terrorism , a need which has a very high priority on the agenda of the international community .
As the international community believes that terrorism threatens international peace and security , it is vital that the powers of the UN Security Council to react to such threats should be preserved .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , terrorism constitutes a threat to stability , freedom and democracy .
The tragic events of 11 September 2001 and the terrorist attack of 12 October 2002 in Bali are recent , shocking and violent illustrations of this .
We have absolutely no doubt that this scourge must be combated , in the aim of protecting our citizens from any threat to their security .
I must praise the swift and effective action that the European Union has undertaken to provide an effective response to this scourge , defining a global anti-terrorist strategy by adopting the European plan of action to combat terrorism on 21 September 2001 , with later updates in Ghent , Laeken and more recently in Seville .
I am also pleased to note the significant progress made on exchanges of information , on police and judicial coordination in the fight against terrorism , and on the legislative framework .
Nevertheless , whatever responses we come up with to combat this type of threat , we must always bear in mind that any measure that is taken cannot and must not call into question full respect for , assurances of and the promotion of the fundamental and human rights that have always underpinned European construction .
As I said earlier with regard to the issue of the transmission of personal data by airlines on flights to and from the United States , combating crime must be done in full compliance with the rule of law and not call citizens ' rights into question .
Furthermore , our fight for security cannot and must not undermine freedom .
We must , therefore , ensure a degree of balance without calling into question the fundamental values accepted by our societies .
We cannot allow the principles of law and civic rights to become victims of this combat .
The proposal that we are debating today clearly demonstrates that , if a set of repressive measures is adopted as part of the fight against terrorism , including the freezing of funds and financial assets , we must also provide for exceptions to these actions , which could be granted for humanitarian reasons - for example , the payment of rents or mortgages , the purchase of food , health expenses , amongst others , so as to avoid potential breaches of fundamental rights .
I therefore congratulate Mr Hernández Mollar on his report .
This is a timely initiative , which clearly alerts us to a fact that some people appear not to want to understand : the fact that any fight that forgets these priorities will ultimately constitute an unjustified acceptance of barbarity and a step backwards in terms of civilisation , which we find unacceptable .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at noon tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to congratulate Mr Bösch on his complete report , which gives a thorough account of the incidences that occurred in 2001 .
The protection of the Community 's financial interests and the fight against fraud are crucial components in guaranteeing the rights of citizens in the European Union .
The Group of the European People 's Party welcomes the almost 40 % reduction in the total annual volume of fraud and irregularities between 2000 and 2001 .
This fell from EUR 2 028 million in 2000 to EUR 1 275 million in 2001 .
Fraud reduction has taken place in all spheres , except in the Structural Funds , where there has been an increase .
We are unhappy , however , with the low recovery rate , which has fallen considerably .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has on several occasions expressed its unhappiness with the poor functioning of the system and the need for its management to be improved .
Our Group also hopes that the Commission will fulfil its commitment to a policy of zero tolerance with regard to internal fraud , and that it duly informs Parliament of developments made in the various cases in progress and in recently-opened investigations .
The Group of the European People 's Party believes it to be crucial that the Accession Treaties take account of the candidate countries ' capacity for control and looks forward to hearing the Court of Auditors ' assessment of each of these countries ' financial control systems .
We must recall , however , that knowing the control capacity of these countries is not enough , since , with enlargement , our new borders with Russia will mean a real danger of increased fraud , which will inevitably have repercussions for the Community 's financial interests .
We cannot discuss the fight against fraud without referring to the future general reform of the Treaty establishing the European Communities , which is currently being discussed in the Convention and which is reflected in the amendments tabled by my Group .
Following the publication of the Commission 's Green Paper on criminal-law protection of the Community 's financial interests and of the Convention 's proposal to reform Article 280 of the Treaty , the establishment of a new body is being proposed , one that will have the task of ensuring the protection of the Community 's financial interests : a European Prosecutor .
With regard to both external fraud - perpetrated in the various Member States - and to internal - that is , institutional - fraud , we in Parliament , and specifically the Committee on Budgetary Control , look forward to hearing the response of the various Member States to the proposal for a European Prosecutor , since we are attempting to determine the most appropriate way of dealing with this body , particularly with regard to its competences and to a relationship that befits a body for coordination and assistance , such as Eurojust .
Nevertheless , we would like the possible references that this report makes to the report on the European Prosecutor - for which Mrs Theato was responsible - to be made very clear and , to this end , probably before the vote tomorrow , my Group will table an amendment in the aim of preventing confusion arising between the reports by Mrs Theato and Mr Bösch .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , ( whom I wish immediately to congratulate on the report you have presented us with ) , I wish to begin by recalling that it was two years ago that I had occasion to condemn , here in this Parliament , with regard to the 1999 OLAF report , the Commission 's silence and indifference towards the adulteration of tens of thousands of tonnes of butter perpetrated in the latter half of the 1990s , involving countless major European companies .
Then , as now , the underlying philosophy was that OLAF 's investigations and conclusions should always be secret and are intended ultimately for the national judicial authorities , and remain secret even when these authorities do nothing with them and do not even ask for them to be treated with any degree of secrecy .
Secrecy is so great that the Commission , Parliament , and the Council are all unaware of irregularities and their perpetrators and consequently of the measures that are needed immediately for confronting those involved in illegal activity at the political and administrative levels .
Secrecy is normally only broken in the press , where it frequently appears as a form of accusation , without giving individuals - who are not presumed innocent - any advance warning or the right to defend themselves .
This is how we have reached a situation in which OLAF 's investigations into contracts between the Commission and the company Eurogramme , which began as long ago as 1999 , are completely ignored by the Luxembourg judicial authorities , and also by the Commission , whose Secretary-General decided to close the case with one blow of the gavel , without even informing the Commissioner responsible of the existence of this trial and allowing dozens of contracts to be signed in the meantime between this company and the Commission .
In practical terms , this means that an investigation by OLAF can be a curse for anyone who , as we have seen in real cases that have already come to light , is completely innocent and has his or her name dragged through the mud by the press . This can also be a blessing for the lawbreakers , who see it as a guarantee of almost total secrecy and of impunity .
This is a total perversion of justice .
I wish to make it clear that Parliament cannot put up with this situation and that we must instigate change immediately .
This change involves , first of all , the issue of secrecy .
Secrecy must only be invoked when it is crucial to protecting the good name and the reputation of the person accused or to the successful outcome of the investigation .
Unless one of these reasons is invoked objectively and within a set time-limit by the parties involved , either the defendant or the judicial authorities , OLAF must , without delay , notify and forward the relevant information to those entitled to see it , particularly the European Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control .
Secrecy should be the exception and not the rule .
Similarly , I think that the time has come to ask ourselves where is this situation going to end and what do the Luxembourg authorities intend to do about the various complaints that have been forwarded by OLAF .
In order to be able to act effectively and not to have to work only on rumours or on vague , incomplete or even contradictory information , the authorities must be informed . The public must also receive its information in a different way and not only through leaks .
This is all we are calling for .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to congratulate Mr Bösch on his excellent report .
He is renowned for his thoroughness and persistence , which have so often been the hallmark of the Committee on Budgetary Control in the past and which in fact led to OLAF being set up in the first place .
Parliament has proved its worth as a very worthy guardian of the interests of the public and has initiated an administrative reform of which it can be proud .
There is no doubt that OLAF could sometimes be more transparent , and I accept the criticisms expressed about that , including those of Mr Casaca .
There is also no doubt that the public should sometimes be given information about OLAF at an earlier stage and more openly , as OLAF needs to publicise itself more .
Nevertheless , I believe that we as Members should also stress that OLAF is a success story .
What would have become of Eurostat without OLAF ?
What would have become of Eurostat without the courageous witnesses who have gone to OLAF and been able to make statements ?
That issue is still being pursued today .
Looking back to what happened in 1999 , it has to be said that it was UCLAF , OLAF 's predecessor , which attempted at the time to play the matter down , and OLAF - demonstrating once again that the switch from UCLAF to OLAF was right - has grasped the opportunity with both hands to get this issue back on the agenda and to find a solution to the Eurostat problem .
Nevertheless , and I think that this is a point we can all agree upon , it is clear that there are major problems about continuing to follow up the Eurostat case .
It is clear that without the second step that must finally be taken now , by which I mean the step of setting up a European Public Prosecutor 's office , it will repeatedly be left to the Member States to decide what measures to take .
I therefore wish to take this opportunity to make a very clear appeal to the Convention to have the courage to take that positive step .
I fear that the Member States themselves will not have the courage .
Without the Convention we cannot hope to succeed in this , and we need a European Public Prosecutor to turn the administrative reform we have initiated with OLAF into a real success story .
Mr President , I feel I must comment on the report by Mr Bösch on the protection of the Communities ' financial interests and the fight against fraud .
The report has a coherence of its own , it has some qualities , and a fair evaluation has already been made of it this evening in this debate .
In this document , however , the chapter on ' Strengthening the criminal law dimension ' - from paragraph 58 to paragraph 65 - interferes , as has already been pointed out , with the institution of the European Prosecutor , on which the Committee on Legal Affairs - which I have the honour to chair - gave an unfavourable opinion and then it found points of compromise with the Theato report , which we must look into more carefully .
This is certainly solid ground that we should occupy , but , I repeat , we must find a balance .
This proposal , which in some way also interferes with the provision to be discussed at the end of March during the Brussels mini-session , does not even , I think , rationalise the legislative system .
The legislative simplification we are talking about is a proposal that , in practice , rather puts the cart before the horse , and we are forced to table some amendments to it .
In effect , the proposal again creates a European Prosecutor with competence to follow up judgments and crimes that harm the Community 's financial interests . In truth , it is quite unacceptable to the Committee on Legal Affairs because the legal order of the European Union provides neither competences in matters of criminal procedural law nor a judiciary at all levels of jurisdiction that could ensure a full right to defence .
In the absence of such a context , the aggregation of a European Public Prosecutor is illogical and unjustified , and I must emphasise this and also tell the Commissioner , who has rather hastily dismissed the problem .
We must think about this carefully , because the creation of such a body is premature , if one considers that the objectives of judicial cooperation - which prevails here - have not been achieved and that it is necessary to harmonise the rules on criminal matters in Member State institutions .
One cannot simply attribute criminal law competence to the Court of Justice : the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance were set up for other purposes and , anyway , it is not necessary to create a European Prosecutor when we just have to strengthen judicial cooperation , taking inspiration from the principle of subsidiarity , which is precisely the criterion on which we must base our action .
We must therefore continue to enhance the competences of Eurojust , and to strengthen and coordinate these powers at a European level .
The amendments tabled are therefore to clarify matters ; all the rest of the report can go ahead .
We are very afraid that , with the single exception of Italy , where the judicial order is being remodelled at this very moment , in no other country in Europe do prosecutors enjoy the status and powers that we want to give to the European Prosecutor , which is at the root of the alarm at the level of legal consistency and the European legal area .
These are misgivings we are going to voice regarding the European Public Prosecutor , but since the issue has in effect come up surreptitiously in this measure , we must formulate them right now in this Parliament and remedy them through the amendments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at noon tomorrow .
( The sitting was closed 11.10 p.m. )
Consumer Policy Strategy 2002-2006
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . Although we are not dealing with any legislative proposals on this occasion , the importance of this debate should not be underestimated .
The Green Paper on Consumer Protection - and I will confine myself to that during my first five minutes and move on to Mr Whitehead 's question in the remaining two minutes - is not only of legal and economic importance , it is also politically significant .
It can help us to refute the myth that the internal market is something that is only for business and that the consumer has nothing to gain from it .
Good consumer law is an outstanding instrument to bring the European Union closer to its citizens and it is up to all of us to work toward that .
Another misunderstanding that I would like to help to rid the world of is the alleged opposition being whipped up between realising the internal market and achieving a high level of consumer protection .
Both are objectives of the Treaty and each can support the other .
It is our job to apply ourselves to this , but unfortunately I have to say that the division of responsibilities between the Parliamentary committees does not always help us with this .
I think this is a matter that we should re-examine in the next legislature .
Then , thirdly , there is another deep-rooted idea that I would like to get away from , that is the widely held conviction that consumer law and regulations on fair trading practices are areas that are totally isolated from each other from a competition perspective .
Well , ladies and gentlemen , in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market we believe that these are often two sides of the same coin and this is why we are asking for a thorough impact study of both business-to-business relations and business-to-consumer relations .
That will bring us more justice , certainly as far as SMEs are concerned , more legal certainty and more stability in the legislation , all things we are all striving for .
Commissioner , we in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market agree with your analysis of the state of affairs in consumer law and we also think that the time is ripe for an evaluation and possibly for a new approach .
Let us not be over-confident , however .
After all , not everything that the consumer keeps on his own home market constitutes a barrier to the internal market that needs to be eliminated .
There are still natural limits to market integration - they are summed up in my report - and we must accept them .
What it comes down to is identifying genuine barriers and concentrating on them , then we will not miss our target .
The new approach , if it comes , must , in the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , be geared towards a high level of consumer protection - an objective of the Treaty - sufficient flexibility , simplicity and transparency of legislation and also legislation of a high legal quality .
That is why we support the suggestion in the Green Paper to ensure that an efficient and affordable procedure for settling disputes is included for consumers , because that is how it should be .
Nor do we reject the idea of a framework directive , Commissioner , but as responsible legislators we want to satisfy ourselves beforehand that such a framework directive with all that involves really would lead to greater simplicity , more legal certainty and , also , a more effective consumer policy .
That is why we are asking you to give us the full picture beforehand , that is to say both the framework directive and the proposals for directives that go with it .
For the sake of legal certainty we would prefer a general clause based on a prohibition on unfair trading practices .
Of course that prohibition must be well defined .
We recognise the usefulness of the instrument of maximum harmonisation , but , like Mr Whitehead in his report of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , we ask for caution and that we proceed on a case-by-case basis , otherwise we run the risk of leaping far too far ahead .
In any case , we in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market are also convinced that maximum harmonisation is not possible as long as a high level of consumer protection has not been reached , unless harmonisation is geared towards that .
A high level of consumer protection is , in our view , also a condition for fully implementing the principles of mutual recognition and for implementing the country of origin principle .
Commissioner , we say ' yes ' to a statutory basis for a European code of conduct provided the conditions in section 17 of my report are met , but , because no-one has anything to gain from a false impression of legal certainty , we are against any kind of bureaucratic approval mechanism that can only provide a questionable assumption of legality .
To the members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market it is simple logic that obligations entered into in codes must be enforceable .
Ladies and gentlemen , you will see that the Patrie Report of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy differs on many of these points from what we in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market have said .
We in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market have done our best to concentrate on the legal aspects of this matter .
We have made choices based on considered legal grounds .
I would therefore like to ask the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and other members of Parliament to have another good look at this before deciding how to vote and I would ask them to support these points of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Finally , Mr President , it only remains for me to thank colleagues for their very constructive cooperation and I can say to Mr Whitehead that I will answer his specific question in the two minutes I will be given soon .
.
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission communication and Mr Whitehead 's report on the Consumer Policy Strategy 2002-2006 are quite crucial documents .
In the EU 's Member States , people are relying on Parliament constantly upholding the protection of consumers , which they regard as a very important , indeed crucial , element in the EU 's internal market .
In our homelands , the standard of consumer protection is an important yardstick for measuring the effectiveness of our work .
Various committees have delivered their opinions .
The Committee on Budgets had the task of examining and evaluating the financial statement for this Consumer Policy Strategy .
Whilst it adopted the Commission communication , it proposed to the lead committee a number of regulatory adjustments .
The Committee also regrets the fact that no attempt had already been made to evaluate or qualify the effects that the measures proposed by the strategy as submitted would have on our finances or on the Budget .
The Committee furthermore points out that , if the measures envisaged in the strategy are , on being incorporated into the proposal for a new legal framework , to extend beyond 2006 , the finances will have to be confirmed , either by an agreement on a new Financial Perspective , or by annual Budget resolutions .
I therefore hope that time can still be found to make the necessary adjustments or to allow the proposed amendments to influence practical implementation .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am glad that we are able to have a debate today on this important subject , for the Spring Summit is about to be held , at which , every three years , we can give renewed consideration to how Europe can become the most competitive and the most innovative region in the world .
The importance of consumer protection as a subject is not a matter of dispute .
What we have to do is get to grips with how we put it into practice .
I will appeal to the Commission 's rigour in saying that I am , though , firmly convinced that consumer protection does not run counter to these criteria .
On the one hand , for example , we are pursuing the objective of a reduction in bureaucracy in Europe .
I get the impression , though , that we are creating ever more bureaucracy , thus taking ourselves that extra bit further away from the goal of reducing it .
I would also like to take this debate as an occasion to address the image that we have of consumers and the public .
I am a great believer in transparency in the field of consumer protection - by which I mean giving the public the information they need - but , at the end of the day , politics must not , piecemeal , deprive the public of their rights and responsibilities .
I am referring here to a quite specific example from an area with which I have been concerned , namely the Consumer Credit Directive , by means of which the Commission is accomplishing a shift that I regard as not entirely justifiable , by abandoning a standard of minimal harmonisation and mutual recognition in favour of maximum harmonisation .
This it is achieving , for example , by adopting an inverse burden of proof for banks , which will no longer be required to check with the utmost rigour to what extent a borrower is able to repay the credit .
It goes without saying that this is in the interest of everyone who gives credit and of everyone who sells goods on a hire purchase basis , but there is , at the end of the day , such a thing as the individual 's own responsibility .
In the final analysis , this is also , in terms of our interest in becoming the world 's most competitive region , about what forces we unleash in the economy and among small and medium-sized enterprises .
That is why I am glad of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ' ability to make a contribution in the form of opinions that may be slightly contrary , but that are no less important for that , and also glad that the Commission will in future be united in the line it follows in pursuit of this objective .
Mr President , actually I can be brief here and thank Mr Whitehead .
We in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market have done our best to concentrate on the legal aspects of the strategic document on consumer policy and Mr Whitehead and the other members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy evidently respected or appreciated that , as I see that almost all the points of our advice have been adopted in the Whitehead Report .
I can only express my thanks for that .
So it merely remains for me to respond to the comment or question from Mr Whitehead just now regarding section 15 of his resolution which is based on an original section in my report .
Section 15 deals with international private law .
I tried in my opinion to say that when aspects of international private law come up in consumer law , we should be able to regulate them under Article 95 , the article that concerns the internal market .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy added Article 153 to this and as far as I am concerned that can stay .
I do not think there can be many problems with that , Mr Whitehead .
I suspect that is a translation problem rather than something about which there can be a great deal of discussion .
I hope this clarifies things somewhat and I am eager to give half a minute back to the President to make up for speaking a bit too long just now .
Mr President , I will speak for two minutes on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities and the rest of the time I will speak about the report by Mrs Patrie and the report by Mrs Thyssen .
Mr President , it gives me pleasure to begin with the strategy for consumer policy and to respond to what Mr Whitehead has written .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities I am grateful to Mr Whitehead for the fact that many of our amendments have been included in the - as always , may I say , Phillip - thorough report you have produced .
What the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities wants is for vulnerable groups to be closely involved in consumer policy and I think this is expressed very well .
Special attention must be given to consumers and consumer organisations in the applicant countries , as we think that the internal market can only function at its best when the parties in the market are of equal standing .
This means that we need to equip the consumer to make considered choices .
The consumer organisations in the applicant countries are not yet , if I may put it like this , ideally equipped for their role as representatives of consumers .
The need to pay special attention to this is justified and we have asked for this very often .
So I can find in the main points of the 2002-2006 strategy : a high level of consumer protection , effective enforcement of the current regulations and a role for the consumer organisations . I have already mentioned that specifically .
Mr President , now I come to the Green Paper .
The aim of the Green Paper is to arrive at a framework directive for consumer policy .
I am , if a number of conditions are met , for such a framework directive .
Present legislation is indeed too fragmented and a framework directive can help to bring clarity to the situation .
I think it is excellent that the provision of information needed to make choices before the sale of a service or product , the sale itself , after sales , service , complaints procedures and access to law are brought together in the framework directive .
Unfair trading practices must be the starting point for this and so I feel very comfortable with Mrs Thyssen 's report .
The legislation of this framework directive must not and cannot come on top of the existing forest of regulations .
That would make everything even more confusing , not only for the consumer but certainly also for the business world .
I am therefore strongly arguing that , when we present this framework directive , we also at the same time immediately repeal the various vertical directives the water framework directive is a good example .
In that sense we think that the framework directive would solve something .
It is very important with this kind of horizontal framework , in our view , that the same obligations apply all over Europe , not only for business but also for consumers .
That makes things clear and provides more opportunities , especially for smaller businesses , to make use of the opportunities offered by the internal market .
Mr President , I would also like to say that this framework directive should assume a high level of protection of the consumer , but that it should also be based on the principle of maximum harmonisation , but linked to the high level of protection .
I think this is necessary , because if this does not happen confusion will remain .
We want the internal market to function well , we want to get good service throughout Europe , we want good services to be sold and for everyone to know exactly where they stand .
In that sense we can vote for a framework directive .
I also hope that the amendments submitted by our group to the Patrie Report , which we hope will bring that report more into line with Mrs Thyssen 's report , will be supported .
I think this will help us to reach a very good demarcation .
I wish the services of the Commission a lot of luck and ask them to please involve us , and the stakeholders , in drafting the new legislation .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . Consumers , it has just been said , are one of the reasons for the existence of the European Union .
Better and cheaper products and more choice are the mainsprings of the internal market .
Consumers have not been given full recognition for this before now .
Some consumer rights stop at national borders .
So I also warmly applaud a general initiative and framework directive for consumer policy .
I also support and compliment the rapporteurs Whitehead , Patrie and Thyssen .
There are four points I would like to emphasise .
First , it is about fair trading practices , a high basic standard that must apply throughout Europe , and in bringing this about European rules must not be allowed to detract from national achievements .
Information about rights and supplementary codes of conduct is needed .
Point two , the right to information .
Information about products and production methods is crucial .
Of course , not every consumer will walk into the manufacturer 's premises to ask about production methods .
Research shows that only 10 % of consumers are interested , but that 10 % set the trend , certainly when they are supported by strong consumer organisations .
This 10 % have ensured , for instance , that more attention is paid to animal welfare in the agricultural sector and to working conditions in the textiles sector , and this 10 % will also contribute to pushing globalisation in an acceptable direction .
Point three , give consumers a voice , support consumer organisations , especially in applicant countries , and search for new ways to make consumers less anonymous .
Experiment with public forums too where consumers can contribute ideas about the development of new production techniques and production methods .
My final point concerns political responsibility .
A strong consumer policy must , of course , contribute to the development of a situation in which consumers are the touchstone for European policy , from chemicals to e-commerce .
A great deal is done in the name of the consumer in Europe .
Liberalisation of public services is supposed to offer consumers cheaper and better services .
Splendid of course , but what has it achieved ?
Throughout Europe passengers are complaining about the deteriorating quality of public transport .
Prices on the telephone market have become obscure and confused and few consumers in the end are queuing up to choose between electricity suppliers .
What exactly has ten years of the internal market delivered for the consumer ?
Or take the euro , another example .
The euro was supposed to make everything cheaper .
Meanwhile we know that the euro has caused significant price increases .
Of course , things can go against us .
Every consumer understands that .
But if liberalisation , the euro and the internal market do not have the desired effect , what can consumers turn to then ?
Can consumers turn to European politics , their national governments , business and industry ?
Or nowhere in fact ?
Consumers must have rights , but they must also be able to get political redress .
In short , we must stop making vague promises about and to consumers .
Objectives for consumers must be concrete and clear and it must be clear who bears the political responsibility .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , we are dealing here with three important reports of course .
It is true that it is not legislation , but I look forward with interest to the legislation that will follow these reports .
I do that with a great deal of confidence , because on this point too we have every confidence in this Commissioner .
I am curious as to whether he can indicate how long it will be before we can expect the various proposals for this legislation .
The challenge , of course , is to properly coordinate consumer policy and the completion of the internal market .
Consumer policy must not be allowed to be an excuse for erecting trade barriers .
I also think that the figures that the Commissioner gave just now on the benefits that we all gain from harmonisation speak volumes as far as that is concerned .
Consumers benefit from free trade because they can buy cheaper and better products and of course we must achieve a high level of consumer protection .
Confidence is the engine of economic growth .
Consumers must have confidence in products or they will not buy them .
Industry must have confidence in the internal market and consumers must have confidence in suppliers .
We can kill two birds with one stone .
We must work towards a situation where it no longer matters to consumers whether they buy their products in the Netherlands or Greece .
That is not easy .
Consumers often do not know what their rights are .
Consumer organisations can help with this .
Consumer magazines are widely read and contain useful tips .
People have a lot of confidence in these organisations .
So I think and I am glad that the Commissioner is also working for this that the Union must involve these organisations closely in the preparatory work for future policy .
Besides , unfair trading practices damage confidence in the market .
A dishonest car salesman can spoil the market for his competitors .
Dishonest traders must therefore be tackled forcefully , which is why it is good that the choice has been made to adopt a European approach to tackling undesirable commercial practices .
Of course we need to be clear about what constitutes undesirable trading practices .
For me that is not only taking advantage of physical or mental vulnerability or the use of physical or moral pressure , obstructive behaviour must also be included .
For example , making it difficult for consumers to change their service provider .
Only when you can switch easily from one service provider to another , do you have optimum competition resulting in lower prices and better quality .
Just think about changing your bank .
They make it terribly difficult for you .
You cannot take your account number with you and I think these are artificial barriers .
Finally , Mr President , I think that the Commission should use Article 153 of the Treaty more often as the legal basis for consumer protection .
We did not create this Article for nothing and it will benefit both the consumer and the internal market .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , speaking this morning on behalf of my group in the debate on consumers and consumer protection , I , like many of my fellow Members , would like to say once again that , although we can adhere to the European Commission 's objectives in this area - high level of protection , effective application of rules and effective participation of consumer organisations - we must once again point out that the proposals made are still far too vague and not specific enough .
That is why I fully agree with the proposals made by Mr Whitehead and Mrs Patrie , in particular with regard to safety , transport , chemical substances , e-commerce and the provision of prior information in all cases in order to allow , where necessary , appropriate and effective defence and recourse mechanisms to be activated .
I would also like to mention specifically the readability of the ecolabel and , in particular , the need for highly comprehensive information on GMOs which , as you are all aware , are a contentious issue for us .
Lastly , I would like to stress the need for the Toys Directive and control of the CE mark .
As I was rapporteur on these issues a few years ago , I know that the Toys Directive needs to be revised urgently and that , due to insufficient controls , the CE mark has in many cases become devoid of all meaning .
I have also written to the Commission several times on this matter , but I regret to say that I have not received a satisfactory response .
Incidentally , at this stage of the debate on consumer protection and policy , I would also like to express very clearly two concerns in the form of basic criticisms .
My first concern is that , whatever their advantages , consumer protection policies are too closely linked to , and therefore overly dependent on , the objective of accelerated creation of a single market .
These policies are only rarely objectives in themselves and tend , for the most part , to be a result of free competition .
My second concern is that these policies are frequently , if not always , a pretext for erasing , suffocating , or even abolishing the concept of public service , even though this is far broader than consumer protection as it applies in the long term , which involves solidarity and land use planning , in particular through pricing and access conditions .
In some countries and some political groups , the best upholders of consumer protection are often those who do most harm to public services , acting in the name of free competition and the dominance of the private sector .
This morning , I therefore wanted to point out these fundamental differences or even divergences , while welcoming the efforts made by the European Commission and supporting our rapporteurs ' proposals .
Mr President , the Green Paper presented by the Commission and the reports presented this morning are along the right lines .
We should indeed establish all the elements that guarantee consumers a high level of protection without delay .
They must feel sure that their rights are fully and equally respected everywhere .
In order to achieve this high level of protection , it is therefore vital to involve representative consumer organisations in drawing up both Community and international policies .
As a number of significant changes are currently taking place in terms of trade , it is essential to consult our citizens .
They must be able to take part in debates and influence decisions that primarily concern them .
Consumers must play an active part through their consumption , which should no longer be uninformed .
Instead , consumers should be able to make informed choices .
They must therefore be protected , but also kept informed .
In order to achieve this , they must be able to have access to all the information they consider essential , for example with the opportunity to find out about production processes , including employees ' working conditions .
Community-level logos relating to fair trade or to companies that observe a social charter , are therefore valuable , effective instruments , as are those representing organic farming .
If we want to see ethical , fair trade , we need to restate our preference for quality products that do not endanger human dignity , in areas as varied as coffee or children 's toys , and that fulfil all the criteria of the precautionary principle .
In this context , traceability of GMOs seems , once again , to be one of the most basic factors .
In particular , we must not , as implied by some amendments , allow consumer confidence in GMOs to increase .
On the contrary , our duty is to protect consumers and provide them with accurate , comprehensive information that will enable them to make fully informed choices , what they feel are the right decisions for themselves and for their children .
We should also emphasise the need for citizen participation in establishing a sustainable model of society .
We must not reduce the citizens to mere consumers .
Quite the opposite , citizens must play a full part in identifying their needs , so that society itself chooses to develop in a way that can respond to them .
Mr President , although different , Mrs Patrie , Mrs Thyssen and Mr Whitehead 's reports appear to express a faint , common feeling of disappointment which - if it is actually there - we endorse , as we do the content of the reports .
Indeed , the Commission 's statements to the effect that the fragmentation of European and national rules on consumer protection prevents the smooth functioning of the internal market cannot be disputed , nor can the fact that many consumers ' lack of confidence , for example in cross-border transactions , is caused by the existence of divergences between bodies of law and , to an even greater extent , maybe , by lack of awareness of the protection available .
Similarly , therefore , an indisputable need arises for a simple , standardised legal framework comprising a limited number of fundamental rules that are applicable whatever the nature of the commercial transaction and provide protection throughout the cycle , including in post-contractual and after-sales relations .
We therefore welcome the line taken by the Commission as regards the need for a global approach to the issue which , on the one hand , seeks to set out obligations , starting with fair commercial behaviour , and , on the other hand , is based on objective criteria in order to avoid different interpretations by the Member States .
However , although all this makes sense , it is impossible not to notice inconsistent behaviour on the part of the Commission itself occasionally , starting with but not confined to an excessive acceleration of the rate at which we are addressing the issue .
As we know , the 2001 Green Paper on Consumer Protection , for example , opened a period of widespread consultation and a valuable debate on the future of Community consumer law .
Yet , even before the results of the consultation process are known , the Commission has presented a proposal for a regulation on sales promotion in the internal market , which , on the one hand , pays little attention to the views of the European Parliament on the global approach , and , on the other , gives the absurd impression that we would prefer to continue to take a sectoral approach .
Again , the different approaches to issues which are ultimately similar such as - by way of another example - the issue of labelling , in which the presence of identical substances is being regulated differently only a few months later , fall short of the ideal .
We believe that there is no cause for objection where preparations primarily intended for healthcare applications are used in other fields .
A recent example is that of cosmetics and detergents .
To stay in this context for a moment longer , we believe that consumers need to be informed of the products used but we also believe that , to this end , they need to have access to useful information , information which can put them in a position where they can make choices , not least ' political ' choices themselves .
That does not mean we do not value - for we greatly appreciate it - the major work carried out by consumer protection organisations .
However , if the idea is to pursue a high level of protection while seeking , at the same time , to achieve acceptable harmonisation of internal market rules , there appear to be two courses of action , one of which will follow on from the other .
The first is that mentioned by Mr Whitehead , when he states that a case-by-case analysis would be appropriate to assess whether , when amending existing legislation or developing new legislation , minimum or maximum harmonising provisions are more suitable .
Once this has been determined , the other is the correct transposal and practical enforcement of Community law by the Member States .
Here , once again , the Commission has a decisive role , although it is true that , from a general perspective , only five States have thus far met the targets set by the Barcelona European Council on implementation rates .
Mr President , as well as the legal protection of consumers , we are addressing a broad , ambitious project that will have to lead to a high level of protection .
A high level does not necessarily imply uniform protection .
We believe it is essential to observe the principles of subsidiarity , necessity and proportionality .
I personally am in favour of minimal harmonisation , leaving each Member State free to establish the legislation best suited to its way of doing things .
I also support the idea of systematically using Article 151 ( 3 ) of the Treaty , which should become the sole legal basis for legislating .
We must stop systematically using Article 95 , which only concerns the single market .
Guaranteeing all citizens universal , affordable access to high-quality services is one of our main requirements .
We must demand that the WTO does not dismantle our public services .
Similarly , I agree with WTO labelling as an instrument for providing information on origin and production methods .
On the other hand , I have reservations concerning the creation of a European consumer centre which would duplicate the role of the national organisations , which are effective and would benefit from working as a network .
I am also concerned about the content of the Thyssen report : asking the Commission for an impact assessment on the possibility of maximum harmonisation seems unrealistic .
Similarly , a link should be established between consumer protection and regulation of sales promotion .
As for establishing codes of conduct , the idea as its currently stands does not seem to me to be an option we should pursue .
What would be the basis for the legitimacy of these codes of conduct ?
How could we ensure their durability ?
All these questions are an indication that this would be the wrong course of action .
Mr President , it stands to reason that we are meant to protect consumers from unfair business practices , as that is how we create a climate of confidence , but , in doing this , we must not overshoot the mark by protecting consumers from themselves and declaring them to be incapable of managing their own affairs .
The Consumer Credit Directive is one example of this .
With that in mind , we should be supporting all measures that have the effect of promoting sales and the fulfilment of the internal market .
Under no circumstances must businesses be tangled up in more red tape , as it is above all small and medium-sized enterprises that are handicapped by it .
We must make it our objective to create more confidence while , at the same time , avoiding increased bureaucracy .

Thank you very much , Mr Ilgenfritz , I have a request to speak on a point of order from a Member who has a placard in front of him , which the Bureau has already asked him to remove .
This is a matter of showing respect for the Bureau and for his fellow Members , which I believe should take precedence over any request to speak .
The Bureau has already asked the honourable Member to remove the placard and it is common practice in this House that when the Bureau asks Members to remove placards or banners that they have put up , these are removed immediately out of respect for the Bureau and for the House .
If the honourable Member wishes to raise a point of order - the only thing the Rules of Procedure allow him to do - he will have to show respect for the Bureau and for the House and remove the placard he has in front of him .
Mr President , at this moment all over the Basque country demonstrations are being held -
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Gorostiaga , this is supposed to be point of order concerning the order of business .
The Bureau will not allow any type of speech other than a point of order .
Mr President , I believe that , today , we should welcome this debate on the Green Paper and the strategy proposed to us by the Commission on consumer policy .
We should welcome it because , with enlargement and , thereby , the extension of the internal market , it is clearly important to improve harmonisation of Community legislation relating to consumers .
We are also aware of the role that consumerism plays in the economy , and heaven knows we need it at the moment !
Studies have shown , however , that , outside the border areas , European consumers do not know how to make use of the advantages provided by the European Union .
Why is this ?
Quite simply , because they still lack confidence , because they do not always have access to the relevant information on products and services and because they do not always have the means of ascertaining the quality of products or price references , and because , particularly in the event of litigation , they do not know which authority will be competent .
All this means , therefore , that consumers do not take advantage of the possibilities offered by Europe and are in need of knowledge and information , although they are fully prepared to act responsibly , respecting ecolabels and suchlike .
In order to remedy this , we therefore need to harmonise legislation and establish genuine European consumers ' rights while guaranteeing the flexibility required for application in the Member States .
We are therefore in favour of better information for consumers . This should be clear and written in the consumers ' mother tongue so that they can make fully informed choices .
Developing a framework strategy for consumers also means ensuring their legal protection , putting an end to disputes relating to unfair practices on the part of companies and protecting the companies themselves too .
We therefore agree on a high level of consumer protection and on transparency achieved through associations and we expect a great deal from the Commission .
We can guarantee , Commissioner , that we shall be looking over your shoulder to ensure that this consumer policy is followed through .
Mr President , I wish to address my remarks to Mrs Thyssen 's report , which I welcome , and I congratulate her on such a balanced piece of work .
We know well the dilemma in dealing with a report that has to straddle the interests of business and consumers .
We have before us very good innovative ideas from the Commission - an overarching policy , a framework directive - something we need if we are really to make the internal market work and to make a success of eEurope .
However , to achieve all of that we have to build confidence in our consumers .
The one area that concerns me is in paragraph 17 of the report , which I endorse completely .
It concerns this linkage between codes of conduct , legal certainty and enforcement and how we get those three to really work together to protect consumers .
This year I shall be drafting a report on the monitoring of Community law and therefore feel very passionately that in moving to codes of conduct we have to ensure we still have legal certainty and enforceability or we fragment the very gains we have made in the internal market .
I shall try to illustrate that with an example .
Yesterday I received a letter from a constituent who had bought a property in another Member State .
Something had gone wrong with the purchase : money had been wrongly deducted from money he had handed over .
He applied to the appropriate overarching professional body .
He wrote in his own language , English .
He received a reply in their language that stated that they were unable to deal with his complaint unless he wrote to them in their language .
If we really want to do business across Europe together we have to be fair and reasonable with one another .
Codes of conduct have to be properly enforced .
Mr President , any decisions taken with regard to consumer protection must pay due attention to the expectations and hopes , and also the fears , of the 425 million consumers in the enlarged Union .
In its legislative acts , Parliament has the duty of taking the complexities and future effects of consumer protection into account , as well as the risks associated with it .
The reports on the future of European consumer protection policy meet this demand whilst also demanding that an end be put to the lack of discipline in relations with consumers .
Many people see the provisions in the areas of food safety , services , health and safety as having already lost their moral innocence in the face of market developments .
There is a great need for action , for example , in order to put a stop to abuses in the area of telecommunications and for reforms in competition law and in the field of financial services to protect consumers . Giving life to the right of initiative for the consumers ' benefit demands that a permanent place be found for consumer protection in the public advice and consultation system , as well as education and , above all , more information .
Consumer protection has to protect people against fraud , health hazards , and financial loss .
The principle of effectiveness applies to consumer protection as much as it does to anything else , but there must be no gain in efficiency to the detriment or disadvantage of consumers .
I therefore endorse the demand that complete harmonisation of the legal provisions be restricted to what are manifestly special cases , subject , however , to the condition that this principle is not misused and that minimum standards will be deregulated .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what I found absent from the Commissioner 's speech this morning was something quite essential , by which I mean the need for us to re-establish a clear order of precedence , according to which this self-evidently has to be about safety and consumer protection , but also about transparency . I see the subject of transparency as having had far too small a part to play in this morning 's debate as a whole .
Commissioner , I would like to urge you in quite specific terms to make a real effort to enact a directive on consumer information analogous to the directive on the freedom of access to information on the environment .
If , for example , there are problems , there should be real disclosure enabling all to see which businesses are causing them .
We must also use this to introduce incentives to get entrepreneurs to really plan for safety .
We need all these things .
Parliament 's resolution contains many lines of approach for the introduction of precisely this consumer information directive .
It is not enough simply to call for greater freedom of choice or more information ; on that I agree with all those who have already criticised that idea .
This is not about mounting a lot of campaigns in support of the genetic engineering industry , but what matters is that a directive on consumer information should be produced , laying down in very clear terms not only the consumer 's right to information , but also the enterprises ' duty to disclose breaches when they occur .
I would then like to urge you , as a matter of urgency , to enact the Toys Directive a good deal sooner .
I cannot restrain myself from making a final comment in view of the warning issued by the gentleman from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs about the provisions on the giving of credit .
It goes without saying that I am in favour of minimum harmonisation , and at a high level , but for as long as there are scandals such as that in Germany with the Berliner Bank , with , outrageously , members of the CDU accepting illegal donations , there will , I believe , be a real need for credit institutions to have rules applicable to them .
Let nobody try to tell me that that is obvious !
Mr President , in studying the three reports on consumer protection I asked myself whether this is not more about promoting consumerism .
The internal market is already a corollary of the commandment " thou shalt consume " .
Evidently we now need to add the commandment " thou shalt consume throughout Europe " .
Mr President , you will understand that I am rather critical of this .
We cannot deny that language , distance and cultural differences are the most significant barriers for consumers .
This is completely ignored when we look for the cause in unfamiliarity with regulations in other EU countries .
What is more , this assumes that the consumer is familiar with the regulations in his or her own Member State .
If we want to invest in consumer confidence we must above all invest in the reliability of products and services .
I take the view that well-informed consumers can make their own choices .
There needs to be a balance between protecting the consumer and the consumer 's own responsibility .
I do not think we need a uniform legal framework .
Let us first begin with minimum standards in the cases where there are real problems .
It is artificial to generate legislation based on Article 153 , because this has only been applied as a legal basis in practice on one occasion .
I do not have any anxiety about discriminating against Treaty articles because we make less use of them than other Treaty articles .

Mr President , I am not wholly convinced by certain aspects of the Whitehead report , in that I cannot accept some of the priorities laid down for consumer protection measures while I feel that others are not given enough emphasis or are even absent from the document before us .
In this regard I would put forward a number of proposals which I feel to be urgently necessary for a genuine policy protecting the wide range of consumer interests .
First of all , the need to set up a European monitoring centre to monitor consumer price trends and public service trends in the different Member States , to monitor the extent of increases and the procedures used and , in particular , to take stock of the situation in the wake of the introduction of the euro .
Then , as regards the sensitive issue of public services and banking and insurance services , there is an essential need for a heading for opening up the boards of directors of the public companies which manage these services - bank lending agencies , insurance companies and public services companies - to proper representation of the wide range of interests of users .
The European Union must adopt the necessary measures to achieve the participation of consumers in the management of this activity , if it wants to achieve genuine economic democracy .
In addition , I do not feel that the proposals for protecting young people , in particular , from the serious dangers of smoking are adequate or sufficient .
The spread of the habit , particularly among young people , is mirrored by the increasing , truly appalling figures representing the geometric increase in cases of lung cancer , which calls for much greater determination from Europe to implement the measures already planned .
It is time for Europe to declare war on the dangerous habit of smoking , introducing more effective awareness campaigns and maximum harmonisation of Member States ' legislation in order to eliminate the evil of smoking .
Mr President , a debate analysing three reports on consumer issues together is a rare , precious occasion after years of lukewarm interest from Parliament and the Commission in this area .
The first report is , as we have heard , on the Green Paper on European Union Consumer Protection , the second on the consumer policy strategy for 2002 to 2006 , and the third , a very weighty tome , on the legal protection of the consumer .
The strategy proposed by the Commission lays down these three medium-term objectives , which are to be achieved through a programme implemented immediately and to be subject to periodic checks carried out by the Commission and recorded in documents certifying progress made .
Achieving a common level of consumer protection means harmonising not just the safety of goods and services but , first and foremost , the different legal procedures through which the consumers exercise their role as guarantors in commercial transactions on the internal market .
If consumer policy is to be genuinely implemented , consumers must be accorded the same importance as an identical guarantee covering the whole of the Union 's territory .
The programme also provides for a plan of priority actions through which consumers can decide with the Member States on monitoring and , where necessary , appeal procedures , thanks to a system of genuine administrative cooperation .
Consumers and their various networks must have the capacity and the necessary resources to promote their actions on an unrestricted level playing-field within the internal market , and to do so in all areas , in respect of companies and the various production organisations .
The principle of minimum harmonisation of consumer protection policy is enshrined in the Treaty , moreover .
It is now important that there is a more effective , comprehensive policy to win support for minimum harmonisation across the board .
To this end , we need new rules which are endorsed and , above all , which supersede the previous rules .
Mr President , I want to thank all three rapporteurs .
It has been said here that this is not a matter of legislation , but in my opinion these issues must be dealt with right at this stage while we are discussing with the Commission what we expect from future legislation .
For that reason I myself wish to focus on those principles that I think should be incorporated into EU legislation on consumer protection .
The main principle , one which has been raised here very often , is that levels of consumer protection must be as high as possible .
It therefore follows that when the Commission proposes legislation that is harmonised as fully as possible in the EU , I agree with this basic standpoint only if that means these very highest levels of consumer protection are implemented though harmonisation .
I do not agree with harmonisation , however , if it means even one Member State having to forsake higher levels of consumer protection .
For this reason I am pleased with the view expressed by Mr Whitehead in his report , that each act should be examined on a case-by-case basis .
This same principle must also apply to mutual recognition .
Account here must also be taken of the notion that not one Member State , neither a current nor a future one , should downgrade its standards of consumer protection .
The advantage of minimum harmonisation from the point of view of consumer protection at least is that nationally one can go further in terms of legislation if the European Union does not attain that level .
It is also necessary that existing consumer protection legislation should be fully implemented so that consumers can be really confident that they can engage in commercial transactions and fulfil themselves as consumers throughout the entire internal market area .
Future legislation must also be sufficiently clear and must take the principles of subsidiarity , necessity and proportionality into consideration .
I also think it is important that we do not enact too much detailed legislation but concentrate on realising our goal , which is these highest possible levels of consumer protection .
If we have too much detailed legislation those who do not want to adopt these principles will focus their energy on looking for loopholes and this will create problems for court hearings .
Mr President , I welcome the in-depth work carried out by Mr Whitehead , Mrs Patrie and Mrs Thyssen concerning the implications of the Green Paper on consumer protection .
We agree with the request to establish simpler , more targeted legislative measures in order to facilitate the implementation of the legislative arsenal applicable to the internal market which , in our opinion , lacks transparency and is too fragmented to instil confidence in consumers .
We have seen with satisfaction the concept of citizen-consumers appearing and I would point out that their fundamental rights are the right to safety , information , free choice , representation , avenues of recourse , satisfaction and an unpolluted environment .
Consumption in future must take account of the three pillars of sustainable development , the economic , environmental and social factors , although the latter two are all too often neglected .
I propose that we consider the feasibility of a general directive on the environmental quality of consumer services and products , giving particular consideration to the need for a European label and for a high degree of protection .
We believe citizen-consumers must play an essential part , not just as customers but as decision-makers too , as proactive consumers concerned at an ethical level with the product they are consuming .
In this regard , they will become one of the main , essential players in this development , which we would like to be long term .
Mr President , I would like to refer to the Green Paper , specifically that on consumer protection .
It would be possible to make a long job of this , or to say something very brief , and the speaking time available to me leads me to choose the second option .
I believe that there are already adequate rules on the essential parts of what the Green Paper covers .
I therefore have in mind only the directives on misleading and comparative advertising or the fact that all the Member States have laws on duress and the use of force .
From the point of view of practical implementation , if one takes into account the scope of the amended directives on distance selling and of the proposed regulation on sales promotions in the internal market , the only consumers to which this would be applicable in cross-border business transactions would be tourists .
That , again , does not add up to much .
I therefore see no need for a framework directive in this area .
What would be more important , in order to shine some light into the jungle in the interests of consumer protection , would be clarification of how the directives applicable in this area interact .
Unlike some of those who have spoken before me , I do not expect an additional framework directive to achieve that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have spent over twenty-five years working on protection for European consumers , and not a Parliamentary sitting goes by without consumer issues being discussed .
I know I am disagreeing with some of those who have spoken today when I say that the rules that have worked for years have proved their worth and that their effects live on , even though they ended up as a legal package of which nobody could get an overview , and there are still some loopholes .
The Commission is therefore right , by means of the proposals on consumer protection , to seek ways out of the confusion and suggest what some of those ways might be .
I want to put the case for a framework directive with a comprehensive clause founded on the principles of sound business practice .
More and more frequently , the internal market ends up being handicapped as a result of the lack of regulations or the leeway left by the directives .
It is particularly in view of enlargement that measures need to be taken to remedy this as soon as possible , and there is a need to combat not only unfair business practices that affect consumers , but also those used by all participants in the internal market on each other .
This latter category would include the attempts made by some Member States to use the protection of consumers or their health as a shield with which to protect national markets and industries from competition .
There are also those who call themselves campaigners for consumers ' rights who allow themselves to be engaged in this cause and help to drive competitors from the market .
That is why I believe it necessary to make greater use of the legal form of a Regulation in order to achieve greater legal certainty .
That will also lead to harmonisation , and that is what we need in the internal market .
The Commission has drawn up a comprehensive list and appended it as an annex .
All the points in it are important , but the new priorities in the Whitehead Report introduce a succession of others , ranging from important to less important .
What Mr Whitehead has said today has actually contradicted this order of priorities .
Consumers can avail themselves of their rights only when they know what those are .
Work on consumer protection should make information policy a priority .
Consumers ' associations have an important part to play in this , and governments must support them in it .
It is because of their failure to do this that we have to set up these consumer centres in our Member States if we are to make progress in this area .
Mr President , the Commission 's new consumer protection strategy is a highly ambitious strategy which symbolises quality of life of consumers by protecting them against unfair practices and reducing unwarranted price differences between one country and another , as well as giving consumers the confidence to access a market of 350 million people and safeguarding the credibility of consumer organisations .
The Commission deserves our congratulations on its detailed research , as of course do our rapporteurs on their proposed amendments .
However , the path is not strewn with roses .
The obstacles and technical difficulties are manifold .
First and foremost , we need to convince the business world and a number of colleagues that a regulatory framework is not incompatible with the competitive ethos and is one of the basic prerequisites to healthy competition .
Secondly , everyone must realise that just listing business to consumer relations or even business to business relations does not amount to integrated consumer protection , especially if our common objective is a more efficient market and greater consumer protection .
For example , the Green Paper proposals also need to address the proposed regulation on sales promotions .
As for the approach , opting as a matter of priority for a coherent framework directive containing a number of principles , such as a ban on immoral practices , the principle of good faith and the principle of fair trading practices , is the right approach .
This approach does in fact reduce the need for detailed regulation , allowing a rapid response to be made to the increasing number of unfair practices and devices .
Even legislators in central Europe , which are well accustomed to detailed regulation , are relying increasingly on general clauses in order to adapt legislation to changing circumstances .
This approach has proven to be valuable and has allowed legislation to be updated .
We shall be unable to avoid specific regulation in the end , but it should play a complementary role .
Besides , the flexible approach of a framework directive is also in keeping with the policy of increased self-regulation , to which priority should be given , but on two conditions : first , there must be a general time frame within which interested parties are required to agree and , secondly , there must be a common framework for determining who is responsible for honouring the obligations provided for in self-regulation .
Another problem is choosing between maximum harmonisation and minimum harmonisation .
It is a difficult choice because , first , we do not want harmonisation to result in a lower level of protection and , secondly , maximalist proposals usually obstruct attempts to harmonise .
I think that we should proceed on the basis of maximum harmonisation and should only take selective recourse to minimum harmonisation in individual instances .
I should like to close with a couple of words about the special attention which needs to be paid to consumer organisations .
We need to ensure they are representative and transparent because consumer organisations are currently a consumer protection problem in themselves .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am very glad that I have managed to get a few of my amendments accepted .
I hope that the Commissioner is also satisfied .
The one amendment to the Patrie Report has to do with taking into account the protection of competitors from unfair business practices , without prejudice to consumer protection , and in the interests of a uniform legal framework .
Commissioner , I believe that to be of the utmost important particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I am particularly happy to have been able to get two amendments that I regard as being quite crucial made to the Whitehead Report .
One aims to guarantee optimum health and safety provisions in the current evaluation of chemical substances whilst ensuring the use of in-vitro testing procedures whenever possible .
This is just a fundamental principle , but its embodiment in law will be a major step forward .
In the other , we call upon you , Commissioner , to promote the use of labelling in the WTO as a means of ensuring that consumers may be informed about origins and production methods .
If I may adduce a simple example , it matters to consumers whether eggs are from hens that have been tormented in battery cages or happy hens that have been free to run around , even if they have to pay a bit more for them .
They get better eggs , which taste better .
Knowing as I do that you , Commissioner , are a particularly kind-hearted man , I am sure that you too will be very gratified by these amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , even though we are near the end of the debate , I would not want to speak without thanking Mr Whitehead in particular , especially for the focussed approach to which he referred at the outset , which has enabled us to dispense with a number of issues that would otherwise certainly have been on the agenda .
We have seen how the discussion so far has demonstrated our unanimity as regards the objective of achieving a uniformly high standard of consumer protection .
It is getting harder to achieve unanimity when it comes to clarifying where this objective ranks among the other policy objectives , and one Member said that we should support all measures that tend to promote sales .
When it is consumer policy strategy that is under discussion , I think the only thing we can say to that is that our esteemed colleague is on the wrong track , at any rate where consumer policy is concerned .
Consumer policy is about informing consumers , giving them freedom of choice as well as protecting them .
It has also already become harder to reach unanimity on the subject of what minimum or maximum regulation should be like .
This is where I am right behind our rapporteur Mr Whitehead in his approach and where I would also like to underline that this examination of specific cases must of course involve seeing whether there are in the individual states tried and tested measures that harmonisation would do away with .
I believe it to be apparent from all the reports and from everything that has been said , that we are a very long way away from our goal of a high standard of consumer protection in our Community , and that this makes it coherent and logical to enquire whether the country-of-origin principle and the principle of mutual recognition should remain applicable in future .
I would like to conclude by saying that I attach great importance to item 18 in the Whitehead Report , namely access to affordable and high-quality services of general interest .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish first of all to congratulate the three rapporteurs on their excellent work and say that enormous progress has been made in recent years at European level in the field of consumer protection , with the emphasis , of course , on food safety .
It is true that too many food scandals had to occur for this to happen , but even so , we have reasons to be proud of the EU 's legislative work in this field .
Now that we are beginning to draw up solutions for resolving other consumer protection issues , many people have expressed doubts as to the need to find common solutions in the EU .
It should be recalled that the success of the European Union 's food safety policy both in protecting the consumer and in balancing the internal market , has not been achieved only through more restrictive rules being established for food for human and animal food consumption .
This success is also the result of these rules being communitarised .
Consequently , given the enormous fragmentation and even incompatibility of trade and consumer protection rules in the Member States , which simply distort competition , bring down quality standards and undermine consumer confidence , I am in favour of all consumer protection legislation being harmonised to the highest possible degree .
With a view to this effort to harmonise , I believe that the European Union must start by defining a framework directive on commercial practices that clearly defines business operators ' responsibilities to consumers .
I believe , however , that there are other areas in which the European Union and the Commission must pursue their work , in particular on legislation to protect human health against the effects of electromagnetic fields , especially those created by mobile phones .
The fact that the largest mobile phone companies are European should not prevent us from doing so .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Byrne .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at noon .
Mr President , there is something I would like to have done in this House .
I noticed today that there are banners hanging in the Parliament 's courtyard .
I do not want to discuss what is on these banners , but it has no place in this honourable House .
If this precedent is followed , Parliament will soon end up looking like an advertising pillar or a hoarding full of posters , and that would be detrimental to the honour of the House .
I therefore ask that these banners be removed .
I have taken note of this and I shall inform the competent services .
Mr President , I am delighted to see that Commissioner Byrne is here this morning because , as Chairman of the European Parliament 's Intergroup on the Welfare and Conservation of Animals , I was very disappointed to receive a letter from Commissioner Byrne saying he was unable to come and meet our intergroup in the next three , four , five or six months to discuss issues concerning animal welfare , in particular the live transport of animals .
I hope the Commissioner will reconsider this and find some space in his obviously very hectic diary .
Mr Evans , I think you would find it difficult to cite the rule that allows you to raise a point of order such as this .
I hope , nevertheless , that this has enabled the rest of the Members to return to their places , because I have a statement to make .
I would like to read to you a message from Mr Cox , President of the European Parliament , following the assassination of Mr Zoran Dzindzic .
' I was shocked to hear of the assassination of the Serbian Prime Minister , Mr Zoran Dzindzic , and I strongly condemn this act .
I hope that its perpetrators will swiftly be brought to justice .
Zoran Dzindzic , in many respects , symbolised the new democratic State that Serbia has become .
We will remember in particular his personal commitment to democratic reform in Serbia and his role in the arrest and transfer of Slobodan Milosevic before the criminal court of The Hague .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I would send my sincere condolences to Mr Zoran Dzindzic 's family and friends , and to the Serbian people ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , I propose that we hold a minute 's silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Mr President , I wish to point out one remarkable characteristic of the vote that is currently in progress .
With effect from 1 April the European Union will be taking over from NATO responsibility for peacekeeping in Macedonia .
This will be the first military operation to be conducted under European Union leadership .
I would like to point out that the issue of democratic control is of even greater importance in this instance than in others ; that the mandate of a parliament - specifically of this European Parliament - is required ; and that this principle , whereby similar operations have to be subject to democratic control , has to be embodied in the future European Constitution .
Mr von Wogau , that was not a point of order .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0187 / 2003 ) by Mr Hernández Mollar , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on transfer of personal data by airlines in the case of transatlantic flights .
Are any Members opposed to the application of this oral amendment presented by our rapporteur ?
( Parliament gave its assent to the application of the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0423 / 2002 ) by Mrs Patrie , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the implications of the Commission Green Paper on European Union Consumer Protection for the future of EU consumer policy [ COM ( 2001 ) 531 - C5-0295 / 2002 - 2002 / 2151 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0054 / 2003 ) by Mrs Thyssen , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on prospects for legal protection of the consumer in the light of the Commission Green Paper on European Union Consumer Protection [ COM ( 2001 ) 531 - C5-0294 / 2002 - 2002 / 2150 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
. ( PT ) I congratulate Mrs Avilés Perea on the excellent report she has drawn up on ' objectives of equality of opportunities between women and men in the use of the Structural Funds ' , which I fully support , especially with regard to the need to consolidate the objective of promoting equality of opportunities between women and men in operations co-financed by the Funds ( as stipulated in the Structural Funds ' General Regulations and as applied to the programmes of the three Funds and four Community initiatives ) .
I also wish to highlight the need for actions taken under the European Social Fund not only to affect improving women 's participation in education , in vocational training and in the labour market , but also in reducing segregation in the labour market , in reducing pay differentials , in promoting the role of women in the fields of information technology and communication , entrepreneurship and decision-making processes .
The actions of the European Social Fund and of the other Community funds and initiatives must be drawn up in such a way that they properly cover regional and local levels within the State structure , and not only the national level .
- ( NL ) The Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities was right to also look into the opportunities and obligations that the existence of the EU Structural Funds can deliver for promoting equal opportunities .
The Treaty of Amsterdam and the regulations relating to the Structural Funds also make mention of this .
In practice little has been achieved when it comes to infrastructure , transport , environment , urban and rural development , fishing , enterprise policy , the information society , research , technological development , training and in-service training .
The rapporteur is asking for support for better child care , care for the elderly , better organisation of working hours and a different division of tasks within families .
She is also asking for a balanced participation of women in bodies that select and make decisions about projects at local , regional and national levels , and for sanctions against projects that do not meet these criteria .
I support this proposal because everything it contains is fair and well-intentioned .
However , I do not think it will do much to solve the present problems .
The role of the Structural Funds is going to diminish for the current EU Member States or even disappear altogether , in favour of projects for the newcomers .
It will be good if feminist criteria are taken seriously into account from the beginning for these new projects .
. ( EL ) As far as the ? U is concerned , unemployment and poverty among women are not caused by capitalist exploitation ; they are caused by women being less qualified and having greater family responsibilities and by reactionary perceptions that foster gender discrimination .
Instead of providing full-time , stable employment , it proposes to extend part-time employment and anti-educational , quick-fix specialisation programmes , turning women into cheap , flexible labour .
Not only does the third CSF fail to empower women ; it subsidises employers so that they can undermine employment rights , with most of the funding going to infrastructure works which empower big business .
Mainstreaming the gender dimension in various policies in the name of equality has swept away positive arrangements in favour of women as part of the harsh , anti-grass roots economic policy , with the result that they are now even worse off .
Proposals include further cuts to the state family benefit system and using private-sector programmes and structures to cover social services such as health , education and welfare .
We are in favour of positive arrangements for working women , provided they are free of charge .
We are not in favour of promoting flexible working hours on the pretext of reconciling working and family life .
We are in favour of full-time , stable employment and of extending and strengthening employment and social rights .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( PT ) I agree with the content of this report because , in my view , equality between men and women requires equality of access to the benefits of the Structural Funds .
In practical terms , with regard to the gender perspective and even when it does not legislate , the European Parliament , specifically in its capacity as a privileged forum and as the body that represents the citizens , issues guidelines both for the citizens in general and the Member States , which are the targets of some measures proposed by the report .
Parliament must , therefore , be able to translate and represent various points of view .
This report provides a good opportunity to promote further steps to achieve greater equality of opportunity between men and women and - it should not be forgotten - also greater equality within the worlds of men and women themselves .
Indeed , individuals ' freedom of choice cannot be ignored and it is important to correct inequalities where these different personal choices are concerned and to ensure that these choices are respected .
What is particularly interesting is the report 's proposal to promote the reorganisation of working time for men and women and the need to encourage awareness of the equal distribution of tasks within the family .
In this context , however , I think it is appropriate and crucial to protect and also deal appropriately with the high value of domestic and intra-family work .
Unless we do so , we will be prolonging and deepening inequality .
. ( PT ) The Structural Funds must contribute , even in the countries of the European Union , to combating existing gender inequalities in development policy .
The negative effects of economic and social restructuring must take account of the specific characteristics of women 's dual role and policies supporting children and the elderly must also be considered by the current Member States and those preparing for enlargement .
.
( FR ) The Friedrich report is correct on two counts : first of all , in stating that the current voting system in the ECB Governing Council ( ' one member , one vote ' ) will be impossible to maintain following the enlargement of the euro area ; and secondly , in adding that the reform proposed today by the ECB itself ( division of countries into groups , with differentiated rotations ) is unclear , complex and also extremely difficult to operate .

This report , however , is forgetting two important points : firstly , the ' one member , one vote ' system was deliberately introduced into the Treaty of Maastricht in order to present the model , supposedly attractive to the electorate , of a monetary union operating in an egalitarian way ; secondly , this model is already not working very well , even before enlargement , and is the main reason for the ECB 's inertia in the face of the problems of the largest economy in the area , Germany .
The reform proposed by the ECB , under its technical exterior , is therefore far from harmless .
The alternative suggested by Mr Friedrich ( introducing weighting according to population ) , for its part , calls into question a fundamental principle of equality adopted solemnly by the people .
That is why we are asking for more than just a hurried debate .
. ( PT ) Enlargement and the need to take effective decisions have been used to justify extending qualified majority voting , as at Nice , strengthening the federal approach and the domination of decision-making by the major European powers .
The ECB , the Community institution that has breached the principle that all Member States should be represented on its Executive Board , and also perhaps the least democratic and transparent of all the institutions , has made a recommendation to the Council to ' preserve its capacity to take decisions in an effective way ' .
It proposes that ' the number of governors with voting rights should be lower than the total number of governors with a seat on the Governing Council of the ECB ' and wishes to introduce a rotating system to determine who votes and when , which would mean the governors of the central banks losing their permanent voting rights , would introduce criteria of representativeness based on the size of the country 's financial sector and volume of GDP , and a system that will always ensure the presence of the major powers to the detriment of the smaller countries .
This is completely unacceptable .
Hence our appeal to the Portuguese Government not to accept this position and to take account of the European Parliament Resolution rejecting the ECB 's recommendation .
- ( NL ) I agree with the majority who reject the proposal , but my criticism goes even further than that of the majority .
Each central bank takes important decisions on interest rates and exchange rates , with major consequences for incomes , employment , investments and the level of public services .
It is precisely because of the importance of these decisions that banks that issue bank notes were brought under state control in the past .
This meant that important considerations could be taken out of the hands of the banks and were made the responsibility of governments and parliaments .
The European Central Bank is in danger of being cut increasingly loose from the Member States .
There is a grave danger that the central bank of issue will eventually start to operate as an institution that is separate from society and cut itself off from all forms of control .
A rotating system for the Governing Council means that members from the separate Member States are no longer involved in decision-making , while their countries do have to suffer the negative consequences of those decisions .
The enlargement of the number of members of the EU and EMU must not be allowed to lead to a situation where the individual Member States no longer have any involvement in this institution which is so important to the inhabitants of all the countries concerned .
Public control over the ECB should be increased rather than reduced .
. ( PT ) Taking advantage of the recent entry into force of the Treaty of Nice , the European Central Bank has already made use of its new powers by proposing an amendment to the operating methods of its Governing Council .
Although there are no doubts as to the ECB 's need to adapt its operation to the forthcoming enlargement of the EU , some questions nevertheless remain about the new model it has presented .
Like the United Nations , the ECB would now have an Executive Board consisting of 5 Member States with permanent voting rights .
The other Member States from the Eurozone , including Portugal , would be integrated into one or two groups with a rotating voting system , with votes weighted according to GDP size .
In practice , this reform runs the risk of marginalising the smaller Member States , abusing the principle of ' one country , one vote ' and making the ECB 's operations complex and opaque .
The ECB must be a strong body , with greater autonomy from the governments of the EU 's Member States .
This is not about the amount of power Portugal will lose but a fundamental issue of the type of European construction that we wish to achieve .
. ( PT ) The pretext of combating terrorism is now in place and a vast and complex mechanism to limit freedoms continues to be developed and established .
The lack of respect for fundamental guarantees of rights and freedoms is demonstrated in initiatives promoted at EU level and in the scandalously superficial procedures that have been used to adopt measures to combat terrorism , including the Framework Agreement on the European arrest warrant and other anti-terrorist measures .
Although I regret the fact that various proposals for amendments tabled by my group , which sought to ensure respect for the basic principles of law , have been rejected - for example the amendment establishing that a person accused of a crime shall be considered innocent in the eyes of the law until proven guilty ; the right to a fair trial , the right to protection and the right not to be sentenced or punished by the courts twice for the same crime - this proposal for a regulation has incorporated amendments that enable us to guarantee the survival of people whose names feature on lists of terrorists or of people with connections to terrorists without any trial having taken place .
Hence our vote in favour of the report .
- ( NL ) Since the disaster in New York on 11 September 2001 , attempts have been made to make the international financing of terrorist activities impossible .
People and organisations have been put on lists and suddenly forbidden to travel abroad .
It has also been made impossible for these same people and organisations to receive or spend money through bank payments .
This has even meant that people have lost all their income with which they support themselves and their families , without being locked up for a criminal offence against which they can legally defend themselves .
Once they are on a list , no matter how much of a mistake that may be , it is extremely difficult to get off again .
Generally it is not the real terrorists who are affected by this , as they have developed illegal routes that cannot be touched by it .
They are refugees and democratic oppositions in exile , who are hated by the regime in power in their country of origin .
I have asked for attention to be given to this problem before in written questions on organisations of people from the former state of Somalia and of the left-wing opposition driven out of the Philippines .
What is now being proposed is moving in the right direction .
The people affected are now able to pay for their food , accommodation , medical care and legal representation and it is no longer impossible to get names scrapped from the list .
. ( PT ) The ' replacement ' of NATO forces with a military force under the ESDP is being presented as the first military operation to have been undertaken under this EU policy , a policy to which we are opposed .
This is a military operation that has been executed following the EU / NATO declaration on the ESDP of 16 December 2002 , which welcomes ' the strategic partnership established between the European Union and NATO in crisis management , founded on our shared values , the indivisibility of our security and our determination to tackle the challenges of the new Century ' .
This is a military force , albeit a ' symbolic ' one , which can call on the resources and capabilities of NATO and is headed by the Deputy Supreme Commander of this organisation in Europe - a military operation under the ESDP as the European pillar of NATO .
This is an attempt to pursue an illegal and illegitimate NATO operation which is consistent with the interference and imperialist aggression inflicted on the Balkans .
It is therefore an initial military operation that will open the way to others , with the ' replacement ' of NATO forces in Bosnia-Herzegovina being suggested as the next .
Hence our vote against the report .
- ( NL ) External military interventions are usually a bad thing , as they involve a major power trying to impose its will on the warring parties from outside , without the consent of those parties .
Or they involve taking sides and giving support to one warring party based on the major power 's own interests or ideologies .
That is what people call ' peace-enforcing ' , the imposition of peace .
Peace that is not supported by the parties involved will lead to a resumption of conflict after the withdrawal of the new occupiers .
My party , the Socialist Party in the Netherlands , repudiates wars like those in Kosovo , Afghanistan and Iraq , nor do we support the construction of an integrated EU army .
We do support ' peace keeping ' , helping to maintain peace at the request of both parties in a conflict .
This is geared to keeping the warring parties apart and avoiding new disasters .
This is why we support this kind of military presence in Cyprus , Kosovo and Macedonia .
If the UN does not bear the direct responsibility for this , then better the EU than NATO with its bias toward American war policy .
That is why I am voting against the majority of the GUE / NGL Group and for the EU taking over peace-keeping responsibilities in the north-west of the Republic of Macedonia .
. ( DE ) Our society cannot at present do without measures aimed at promoting more equal opportunities for women .
This is where the European institutions , the European Parliament in particular , can play a role as a pioneer in the world of work as a whole .
Equal treatment for men and women is incorporated in the Treaty establishing the European Communities and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Here , gender mainstreaming is appropriate long-term for integrating gender issues into political and administrative decision-making processes and ensuring equal treatment in all policy areas and at every level .
Speaking as a woman , though , I wish to be judged by my achievements rather than by my gender .
The concept of ' positive discrimination ' is an inherent contradiction , as discrimination cannot be a positive thing .
We should therefore be careful not to throw the baby out with the bathwater .
. ( DE ) The reduction in the incidence of suspected fraud and irregularities in 2001 , by 37 % over against the preceding year , obscures the report 's real message , which is a powerful one .
The reality is that , in comparison to previous years , this is the second highest level that figures for suspected fraud have reached .
These results , which emerge from the report , give cause for concern .
Although there have been improvements in the combating of fraud , it seems utterly impossible to get misuse or the irregular use of EU funds under control .
I repeat my long-standing criticism that the structures mean that abuses are inherent in the system .
I appeal to the Member States to make greater efforts in this area in order to put an end to these abuses .
Cooperation with other Member States , as well as closer checks at home , is absolutely vital , and not just in view of the imminent enlargement .
- ( NL ) The protection of consumer rights , just like the protection of health , the environment and safety at work , must not stop at national borders .
Even if there were no EU , agreements would have to be made between different countries on common support for these rights .
As always , in the end it comes down , however , to the content of the agreements and not the fact that everything is subject to the same regulations .
You can level everything down by regulating as little as possible , scrapping existing national regulations and leaving as much as possible to voluntary cooperation of the companies involved .
That may fit in well with the prevailing neo-liberal ideology , but then the protection does not amount to much and those who break the rules are not hindered in continuing their bad practices .
In the decision-making on strategy and the Green Paper on European consumer policy , there is a great temptation to misuse consumer protection as a lever to bring about greater uniformity of regulations at EU level , without solving the real problems .
I support the warning against this of the Consumer Association in the Netherlands .
It has to be about combating unfair trading practices .
Codes of conduct cannot substitute for legislation but are no more than detailed supplements .
It has to be possible to enforce compliance with the supplements by all concerned .
Fortunately the proposals of the rapporteurs , Mrs Thyssen , Mrs Patrie and Mr Whitehead are moving in more or less that direction .
I voted wrongly on the conclusion to section 23 .
. ( PT ) The Whitehead report constitutes a crucial initiative in the European strategy for consumer protection policy .
It is significant that this report focuses on the tourism sector - so important for the survival of the Algarve region , which I represent here - a sector in which consumer protection is synonymous with quality .
In this context of promoting high-quality tourism , the report calls above all for a high common level of consumer protection and for more effective compliance with existing rules .
Although these priorities are important , taken on their own , they are relatively unambitious .
I therefore agree fully with the rapporteur 's emphasis on the need for the EU to adopt legislative initiatives that are crucial to the protection of human life , specifically in the field of tourism .
In particular , to rapidly adopt a Directive on Fire Safety in hotels , a review of the current timeshare system and even to extend consumer protection in the air transport sector .
I also welcome the initiatives on informing consumers about their rights .
Currently , only a meagre 52 % of consumers feel that they are well informed .
To this end , I support greater participation of consumer 's organisations in developing awareness-raising and information campaigns .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of this report and welcome , in particular , the fact that broad consensus was reached on this matter in the specialist committee .
In fact , the consumer policy strategy for 2002-2006 will lead to legislative proposals that we , like the rapporteur , hope will respect the important criteria established in the European Commission 's package on better regulation , in particular : the principles of subsidiarity , necessity and proportionality ; the presentation of consistent proof of the need for Community action ; the identification of existing barriers to the development of the internal market ; making appropriate information available on the impact on the existing Community acquis and on the main interested parties , which are undertakings and consumers ; and lastly , the presentation of adequate proof and guarantees on the viability and effectiveness of measures intended to implement the objectives that have been set .
In addition to the reference made to the importance of listening to consumer associations - including those from the candidate countries - and to the fact that their involvement in the preparation of future legislation is much needed , I believe it is , at this stage , extremely timely that , in addition to launching the debate stimulated by the Green Paper on consumer protection , the Commission is initiating awareness-raising campaigns directly targeting consumers .
As the rapporteur rightly states : ' an informed consumer is an empowered consumer ' .
. ( PT ) As I stated in my explanation of vote on the report by Mrs Thyssen , Community consumer protection rules have clearly failed to adapt to a rapidly changing market .
It is therefore extremely important to provide , essentially , for consumers to be given a simple , coherent , reliable and effective legal framework that can be implemented regardless of the nature of the commercial practice in question .
I also agree with the idea that the Commission should give serious consideration to establishing databases that will enable the exchange of information and the creation of an early-warning system , allowing Member States to undertake coordinated actions when faced with a flagrant breach of consumer rights .
The existence of an internal market and within this , various transnational business operators , requires the creation of appropriate mechanisms for protection and transparency .
Lastly , I also believe that following on from the participation of consumers ' associations , a code of conduct should be adopted , a list of unfair practices should be drawn up and in due course a legislative framework adopted that corresponds to the final outcome of the debate , ( amongst the models proposed are ' maximum harmonisation ' , ' minimum harmonisation ' , or a model based on a ' case-by-case approach ' ) .
This model , however - it must be stressed - will still have to take due account of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
. ( PT ) The Thyssen report quite rightly calls for simpler and better targeted legislative measures to ease the implementation of the legislative strategies proposed in the Green Paper on the legal protection of consumers , since , despite the progress that has been made , the legislative arsenal applicable to the internal market lacks transparency and is too fragmented to inspire consumer confidence .
As everyone knows , this Commission Green Paper on fair commercial practices is intended to stimulate debate on the possibilities for improving the operation of the internal market in the field of electronic commerce between business operators and consumers .
We have a real obligation to support this debate and to produce legislation that is simple and effectively implemented and which offers genuine protection to consumers in an internal market that is constantly and rapidly changing .
Hence my vote in favour of this report .
. ( PT ) I share the idea that Community consumer protection rules have failed to adapt to a rapidly changing market .
This is why , in stimulating a debate on possibilities for improving the operation of the internal market , the Green Paper is extremely opportune .
I also agree with the attention the Green Paper pays to the new relationships between undertakings and consumers , particularly in the context of electronic commerce .
In fact , the emergence of this new commercial situation as a result of the explosion of electronic trade calls for realistic measures to be adopted , specifically measures in line with the principles of greater security in legal trading , the security of commercial transactions , consumer protection and fair trading practices between competitors .
In order to achieve these aims , I agree with the view put forward by the Committee on Legal Affairs , specifically with regard to the need for Community legislation arising from this Green Paper to be clear , simple , coherent and of high legislative quality .
I am also of the view that it is crucial to promote , as suggested , impact studies and preparatory studies ( upstream ) , and studies of the effects ( downstream ) , enabling the creation and gradual development of a system that is accessible , effective and available at low cost for consumer protection and dispute resolution .
Mr President , the Turkish Constitutional Court has today proscribed HADEP , the pro-Kurd People 's Democracy Party , and has , among other things , forbidden forty-six of its members to take part in any kind of political activity for the next five years .
Turkey is a candidate for accession to the European Union , in which it is not acceptable for political parties to be banned in this day and age .
Mr President , I ask you to intervene in this matter .
I do indeed have great sympathy with your criticism , and this is something I do not understand either .
It will be noted in the Minutes .
Thank God we do not have to discuss Turkey 's accession today .
Mr President , I now wish to ask the Bureau the following question : in the resolution on the issue we will shortly be voting on , concerning company relocations , the Portuguese version of item 8 is different to all of the other language versions .
I believe that item 8 of the Portuguese-language version is wrong and item 8 of the versions in French , Spanish , English , etc. is correct .
I would therefore ask the Bureau to ensure that this item is corrected and to inform the plenary that this is done before the vote takes place .
Thank you for pointing that out .
We will ask our language service to take up this issue .
The next item is the Commission statement on the closure of undertakings after receiving EU financial aid .
Commissioner Fischler has the floor .
Mr President , honourable Members , newspaper headlines feature - with increasing frequency - the closure of undertakings to which financial aid had been granted by the European Union .
Whilst this is not a new problem , it is true that the instances of closures , often followed by relocations , have recently been increasing in number .
The Commission therefore understands very well why Parliament attaches great importance to this problem and has a considerable interest in it , and how our fellow-citizens are quite right to be perturbed by it .
My fellow Commissioners , Mrs Diamantopoulou and Mr Barnier , have asked me to put before you the Commission 's position on this complex problem .
This will obviously have to touch on several different aspects , the first being the policy of economic and social cohesion by means of co-finance from the Structural Funds ; secondly , European social policy ; but also , thirdly , the rules of the European internal market , which should enable our enterprises to build themselves up in a climate of fair competition .
I would like , in my statement , to focus on the issues I have just mentioned , but before doing so , there are two other points I would like to address .
The first is that the problem of the closure of undertakings - even if the financial aid granted means that the Community is directly affected - is not a phenomenon exclusive to Europe , but one that must be considered in its international context .
It is unfortunate that our enterprises often succumb to the temptation to relocate their operations to countries where wages are low , sometimes disregarding all the requirements of social and environmental integration .
This international dimension of the problem demands that we be consistent in finding international or global solutions to it , which will , above all , involve active cooperation with the poorest countries and the creation of a system of international law that is more rigorous and better applied .
Secondly , it is in the context of enlargement that the Commission gives this problem particular attention .
My fellow Commissioner , Mr Verheugen , recently stressed that the forthcoming enlargement offers Europe great opportunities in the future despite the difficulties necessarily involved in the short term in integrating these countries , which , on average have a lower per capita gross national product .
In an internal market such as our own , the decision as to where to base a business operation rests solely with the management of the enterprise in question .
As we know , investors base their decisions on the advantages of one site as compared with those of another , and these include labour costs , social conditions , the quality of the infrastructure , the legal framework applicable , but often aid from the public purse and favourable tax treatment as well .
The subsidies granted to the investors are freely negotiated with the public authorities , within the limits of Community and domestic legislation on state aid .
Let me now turn to the subject of ' closure of undertakings and Community aid ' and remind you that the European Union 's regional policy has as its objective the promotion of economic and social cohesion by stimulating the development of the poorest regions .
The regional aid granted for productive investment is therefore meant primarily to compensate for the disadvantages of the regions supported in this way , making them better able to hold their own in competition with regions that are better off .
This is an area in which the Commission can ensure only the implementation of the general provisions on the Structural Funds laid down by the Council with Parliament 's agreement .
I might add that this corresponds to the practice within the Member States , in which every region endeavours to attract new enterprises and direct investment .
The Commission , however , also has the task of preventing unfair competition between states , business people and the social actors , for which , in the 2000-2006 programming period , the Structural Funds provide for a range of preventive measures , which I would like to rehearse briefly .
The guidelines on national regional aid require the recipients of this aid to maintain their investments for a period of at least five years , a period beginning with the date of the initial investment in the enterprise in question .
The 1999 general Structural Fund Regulation takes the same approach , stating as it does that the Funds will continue their contribution to productive activities only if there is no change in the site at which these activities are carried on in the course of the five years following the Structural Funds ' decision to contribute .
Finally , the new regulation on State aid for employment enacted in 2002 is rather more flexible , requiring that the jobs created be maintained for a period of three years in the case of large enterprises and for a period of two years for small and medium-sized enterprises .
All these provisions will have to be applied in the future Member States from the moment of their accession .
I would like to observe , in order to give the full picture , that the five-year rule I have just mentioned applies only to the 2000-2006 programming period .
It is possible to reduce or cancel Community aid in respect of the period from 1994 to 1999 if the conditions subject to which the measure is operated no longer apply .
In all these instances , neither the Commission nor the Member States may refuse to grant a subsidy if the necessary conditions are complied with , but , if it becomes apparent that an enterprise has received support without complying with Community provisions regarding state aid , it shall reimburse the aid to which it is not entitled .
The Commission is prepared , then , to discharge its responsibilities where an enterprise has , under an aid scheme co-financed by a Community programme , received subsidies without being entitled to them .
This does , however , presuppose that the authorities in the country from which the enterprise has migrated have , in the first place , established that the points described above of the provisions have been breached .
Let me also briefly enlarge upon the social dimension of the problem of the closure of undertakings .
Although there is no doubt that the closure of a plant is a matter for the management of the enterprise in question , we cannot , however , disregard the fact that the many restructurings currently in progress in Europe are not all comparable with each other .
Some are the result of clear economic decisions and have been discussed frankly with the workers and their representatives , while others , regrettably , carried out without regard for labour law , force people , unprepared , into unemployment .
The Commission 's position is clear ; enterprises may well be free to come to their own economic decisions , but they must always be aware of the social dimension .
If job losses appear to be inevitable , everything possible must be done to make the workers affected by them more employable .
If this is to be done , the enterprises must have thought out a forward-looking policy and must also demonstrate social responsibility .
At this point , I really do want to particularly stress the point that nothing , indeed nothing , can justify the failure to inform and consult workers ' representatives in the case of restructuring .
Several Community directives lay down the framework within which such a dialogue must take place .
The European Works Councils Directive , in particular , imposes on multinational groups of companies with bases in Europe precise duties as regards informing and consulting workers ' representatives .
Social measures accompanying restructuring are , after all , also an important issue for the social partners and for the new European Observatory on Industrial Change .
In this area , too , the Commission relies on the Member States , upon whom devolves the duty of ensuring compliance with Community labour law .
What the Commission will do , however , is to exercise a comprehensive monitoring function , with the primary objective of ensuring that the directives on worker information and consultation are adequately transposed .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Fischler on the communication that he has just given this Parliament , but I cannot .
I am unable to do so because of the lopsided thinking that has led to the belated approach to a problem that has been around for a considerable time , as in fact the Commissioner stated a few moments ago , and also because of the disappointing content of this Commission communication .
Today , at best , we will be attempting to limit the damage caused by the abuse of Community aid granted to multinational companies .
Perhaps , if the Commission had shown greater foresight and been more vigilant , the situations involving the closure and restructuring of companies that have led to this Commission communication would not have occurred .
On my own behalf and on behalf of the PPE-DE , I wish to express my total solidarity with all the workers , especially those in Portugal , affected by foreign companies ' decisions to close .
Job losses deal a devastating blow to the workers affected and their families .
I shall highlight two cases with which I am very familiar : those of the Clark shoe factory and the Bawo clothing factory .
Last January , the management of the Clark company decided , unexpectedly and without consulting anyone , to close their factory in Castelo de Paiva in Portugal , leaving 588 workers unemployed .
Two years previously , acting in a similar way , they had shut down their factory at Arouca in the same region , leaving almost 500 people unemployed .
Clark had benefited from enormous sums of Community , national and local aid .
Despite this fact , the company claimed that the justification for these mass redundancies was their having to import shoe uppers from India and Romania in order to maintain a competitive price structure .
I have just quoted verbatim from the press release issued by Clark on 10 January .
The other case is as follows . Last February , the management of the Bawo company proceeded to remove the machinery from its factory at Estarreja under the cover of night and entirely without the knowledge of its workers .
By pure chance , one of them realised what was going on and alerted her colleagues .
All the workers maintained a vigil at the factory gates , day and night , in the rain and cold , until the courts ordered the seizure of the equipment .
Both companies intend to relocate to enlargement countries and to third countries .
These cases are models of a poor example to set and raise the following questions : where is the balance between economic interests and those of the companies and the rights of workers and of society ?
If this situation continues , what will become of the European social model ?
Mr President , Commissioner , we are in favour of competitiveness , we are not enemies of globalisation , we understand the competitive nature of the world market , but we cannot accept the economy being considered to be an end in itself rather than something at the service of mankind .
What we cannot tolerate is that the money from all European taxpayers should be used to reward companies that skip from country to country in the pursuit of greater profit and cheaper labour .
Companies act in this way , moreover , without any social concern , either for their workers and their families , and even less for the economic effects on the regions affected .
Subsidies that are granted must serve to create employment and not to fund relocations .
It is not our intention to prevent companies from closing or relocating their factories , but to ensure that those benefiting from financial aid give commitments and provide guarantees for long-term employment .
The European Union 's priority is employment .
The Lisbon strategy set the objective of achieving full employment within the decade .
This Parliament is increasingly apprehensive about the progress that has been made in the European Union with regard to the Lisbon ambition .
This phenomenon of factory relocating is spreading in several Member States , creating unemployment and endangering the economic and social development of the regions .
The consequence of this will be greater pressure on social security systems , which will have to bear the costs of social assistance for these unemployed citizens and we are , of course , moving even further away from the vision laid down in Lisbon .
Something must be done urgently .
We therefore call on the Commission to draw up a legislative framework that will attach a moral component to granting companies Community funds .
Clear rules must be established , which prevent and punish abuses by companies that receive subsidies from the European Union .
The Commission must refuse to grant aid to companies that fail to respect the commitments they have given to the Member States and must force them to pay such aid back .
As an immediate measure , we urge the Commission to monitor closures currently underway and to draw up a list of companies that fail to comply .
I wish to use my final words to welcome the support of the other political groups in this Parliament , in particular that of our socialist colleagues , who have understood the reach of the serious consequences of these company relocations in the Community area .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if I may , I shall fulminate and also express a demand and a regret .
I shall begin with the fulmination : company closures , brutal and inhumane restructurings , mass redundancies , sudden relocations ; these are the unexpected and , I hope , incidental aspect of Europe 's somewhat savage capitalism .
This is what happens , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when books are written and proclamations are read about a new business culture and when there is so much discussion of business and entrepreneurial ethics .
People even talk about the social ethics of companies , about ecological ethics and I have even read , heaven preserve us , about the Kantian ethics of businessmen , when in fact many of them appear to be more set on disproving the ideas of the 19th Century thinker , Karl Marx .
Some businessmen behave like real predators , indifferent to the social crises they cause , to the tragedies that they create for individuals and families and to the crises they produce in local economies .
There is even a new specialised area of business , which consists of obtaining the maximum subsidies possible from European Funds only then , at the first opportunity , to leave the companies , which have been subsidised with European funds , on the brink of bankruptcy or even bankrupt .
We have to react against this ignominious scenario , which is not in keeping with the modern business market and with the type of prosperous and social economy that we have in Europe .
My demand is this : since this is a European phenomenon and , therefore , one that must be combated on a European scale , we must emphasise the special dimension that the phenomenon of company relocation and closure has taken on in recent months in Portugal , where various companies , most of them multinationals , have announced their intention to shut down operations and to transfer their activity to other places .
Some of them have received substantial financial aid to set up in regions such as Aveiro , Coimbra and Leiria , and to that end signed contracts with local authorities committing them to maintain activity there for a certain number of years .
All of this represents a huge disaster for these Portuguese cities , towns and regions , where hope abounded when the initial investment was made and has now been painfully dashed .
My regret echoes the words of Mrs Bastos concerning the delay in the Commission 's response to this phenomenon , which was announced a long time ago in various European countries .
I also agree that the Commission should have acted more swiftly , not only by ensuring that its legislative machinery and the various directives in force were implemented , but also by drawing up a programme of action for a crisis situation such as this .
Nevertheless , to conclude , I also wish to offer my congratulations , on the fact that the Commissioner has defined a doctrine and a strategy that in principle warrant support , for responding to situations of this type , at the legislative , financial and social levels .
I also wish to congratulate this Parliament and all the political groups on having united over this serious situation , thereby demonstrating that the European Parliament is not turning its back on the citizens ' problems and that it can put this communication to the benefit of society and of Europe 's citizens . Such action also ennobles and dignifies the European Parliament .
I therefore hope , Commissioner , that we will still be able to provide encouragement for those workers who are today without hope and that we can provide a practical response and an alternative to these situations .
And on that note , Mr President , I shall obey your gavel .

Mr President , two initial comments : the first is to say that Commissioner Fischler has not disappointed me because I no longer have any illusions about his actions .
The second concerns my colleague , Regina Bastos , whose words were in total contrast to what the Portuguese Government is doing , presided over by the senior leader of her party , the PSD .
I congratulate her on this , however , although I feel bound to note the contradiction .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the increase in relocations by multinationals involving the partial or total closure of their factories in the countries of the EU in which they have been based , especially Portugal , is aggravating unemployment , stifling the development of regions lacking alternative forms of employment and increasing poverty and social exclusion .
In the majority of cases , these companies relocate in the sole aim of maximising their profits , since their productivity , efficiency or economic viability are not at stake .
Furthermore , they sometimes undertake such action after receiving substantial Community , national and local aid , failing even to meet the commitments they have given and ignoring the extremely serious social and economic damage they cause , which is what happened in the case of C & J Clark in Arouca and Castelo de Paiva and in many other cases in Portugal .
This is an unacceptable situation that is underpinned by the existence of a roving form of investment for which ethics and social responsibility do not exist , and whose sole aim is to obtain the maximum profit possible , always in the pursuit of more incentives and more financial and fiscal aid and of cheap labour with few rights , ready to change location when the prospect of greater profits or greater community aid for them to set up appears elsewhere .
This situation is particularly serious in countries that are weaker in economic and social terms .
The case of Portugal cannot be compared with that of other countries , although this entire issue warrants attention throughout the EU .
In Portugal we have seen various examples of this phenomenon , of which I shall only refer to a few , involving closures of companies and parts of companies , new threats , and job cuts in multinational companies . I would highlight several examples of this : Eres , Bawo , Schuh-Union , Scottwool , Rhode , Ecco 'let , Yasaki Saltano , Philips , Alcoa , Dhelphy , Alcatel .
To sum up , this is a very long list , which needs to be closely examined . There are several thousand workers who are under threat , mainly women - and this is worth noting - in the textile , clothing , shoemaking and electric and electronic goods sectors .
Measures must therefore be adopted to regulate this type of investment and to protect employment and local and regional development .
Hence our proposals for the urgent creation of a regulatory legal framework - which must not be confined to what Commissioner Fischler stated a few moments ago - that makes Community investment aid conditional on companies ' meeting contractual obligations that ensure the protection of the interests of communities and regions affected and in this way ensure respect for sustained economic and social development accompanied by the full guarantee of information and intervention for workers ' organisations throughout the process , including the right of veto .
It is particularly important that all aid is made conditional on long-term agreements in the fields of employment and local development , that no aid is granted under Community programmes to companies that do not respect these commitments or that misuse aid . Nor must aid be granted to companies that , having received aid in one Member State , transfer their operations to another without having fully met their commitments .
Otherwise the aid they have received in the first country must be repaid .
Consequently , the Commission must make a rigorous assessment of all recent and current cases .
Companies that have received Community financial aid must also all be audited , and these actions must be accompanied by an exhaustive study of the closure of companies that have received Community financial aid and into the relocations now underway , at a time , like this , when enlargement is close and when this situation is even more worrying .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must unfortunately start on a note of difference between fellow Members , because I wish to express my regret that Mrs Figueiredo has been unable to resist giving priority to side issues rather than to the main one .
The side issue in this case is the petty quibbling of the national opposition . On top of that , what Mrs Figueiredo is saying is not true , because the Prime Minister , the government and the local authorities have been persistent and tireless in this matter .
Their actions in fact match the consensual way in which the Portuguese Members in this House have behaved , and this explains to a large extent the direction this debate has taken and much of the success achieved in terms of the compromise resolution , on which we will shortly be voting .
Let us hope that , especially where this Portuguese case is concerned , that of C & J Clark , which has upset everyone in Portugal , the Commission will finally draw the conclusions necessary to bring an end to a problem that has been around for such a long time : that of companies chasing Community subsidies .
I still remember an example that was renowned in Portugal ten years ago : that of Thierry Rousell , who successfully prospected - or so he said - in the Brejão region , sowed hope and then stole many millions of escudos .
Even today the case has still not fully come to light or been brought to justice .
These are longstanding problems , to which solutions will one day have to be found .
Industrial relocation and restructuring and companies closing down once they have received financial aid from the European Union are not new phenomena , but their scale and context has changed considerably .
We know that companies ' motives for closing and then relocating are many and various .
We are also aware , however , of the damaging effects of relocations , especially when they take jobs away from regions that have no alternatives .
The recent case of C & J Clark in Castelo de Paiva speaks for itself .
These decisions lead to high numbers of redundancies , thousands of jobs are threatened by the far-from-distant prospect of the mass redundancy of workers - those , that is , who have survived previous rounds of redundancies - , with extremely serious repercussions for the regional economy . To these consequences we can add all the indirect effects of the fall in jobs and orders for subcontracting companies , most of which are fragile small and medium-sized enterprises created as offshoots of the main project and dependent on them .
Consequently , we cannot remain indifferent .
We cannot ignore , or pretend to be unaware of the fact that in most cases , these businesses , especially in Objective I regions , benefit from Community financial aid and from direct or indirect financial aid from the Member States .
Nor can we ignore , or pretend to be unaware of the fact , that most of the companies that close , relocate or seek to relocate are not companies that are suffering , and are instead success stories with high productivity rates and with acknowledged product quality . The decision to close is , therefore , a cruel one in social terms and is dictated purely by external economic reasons .
We must fully shoulder our responsibilities , bearing in mind that the European Union is the most significant player in the world in this field and in particular has to ensure that there is internal discipline in company relocations within the internal market itself .
We therefore wish to express our solidarity with workers who are directly or indirectly affected .
We feel it is unacceptable that a multinational company that has benefited from Community financial aid in the Member State in which it has decided to set up could breach the obligations inherent in this aid .
We call on the Commission and the Member States to urge Community-wide companies to refrain from taking decisions that will harm employment unless due consideration has been given to all possible alternative solutions .
We ask the Commission to look into the support mechanisms , at both national and Community level , from which the companies in question have benefited and which it distributes .
We must all know what is happening in this area and that public opinion can also exert control and impose its own sanctions .
( without microphone ) ... as a result of affirming my culture and language , unfortunately represents at this time the observation that the main social problems caused by the phenomenon of relocation are being seen in Portugal .
They are being seen in Portugal without the Commission having taken the due precautions in good time - I agree with my fellow Members who have said this already - but above all , as a result of the rules in Portugal being subordinated to an entirely excessive form of financial fundamentalism , which takes no account of the real economy and people .
Mr President , Commissioner , strengthening the collective and individual rights of workers , especially in the context of mass redundancies , company transfers and insolvencies as a result of industrial change , is enshrined in directives that the Member States must respect , by transposing them swiftly and effectively into national legislation , which does not always happen , and on which the Commission must take special action .
All of this legislative discipline and harmonisation is becoming all the more necessary now that we are - fortunately - seeing a phenomenon of integration of the European economies which has led to a high degree of foreign investment in production .
The benefit to the development of the various European regions is undeniably extremely positive , with the emergence of many success stories of one type or another that have contributed to the economic and social development of regions which , without this investment , might be condemned to stagnation and to falling behind .
Unfortunately , we are also seeing frequent cases of unfair advantage being taken of the material gains achieved without any concern to contribute to strengthening the chain of value produced in the region and , in particular , which fail to demonstrate any social concern .
Much of the responsibility clearly lies with the Member States themselves , who facilitate the start-up and operation of some production units to unimaginable levels , attaching priority only to the immediate interests .
The increase in industrial relocation that we are seeing in some European countries and , if we can generalise , particularly in the less developed economies such as Portugal 's , is truly unacceptable .
Nothing , not even the current climate of economic stagnation in Europe , justifies the illegal and immoral behaviour in Portugal of some companies backed by foreign capital .
They have made their investments freely , the companies have been welcomed in good faith and with high expectations , and the aid granted is normally generous and funded partially from the public purse . The ongoing contempt for the interests of regional communities , for individuals and for the European Union itself is , therefore , completely unacceptable .
This aid must be conditional on long-term agreements in the field of employment and local development , which means that aid must not be granted to companies that do not respect these commitments .
It is also becoming necessary , as we stated in the motion for a resolution , to draw up a code of conduct regulating the conditions for relocating jobs and which also enables us to monitor the virtual practices of companies that fail to comply .
This is why a special role has been given to the European Monitoring Centre for Industrial Change , which can assist in defining alternative policies for cases of relocation .
It is also becoming necessary to increase and improve use of the European Social Fund , by focusing it in particular on the training and professional retraining of the workers involved .
Lastly , effective programmes focusing on research and development that make the best use of human resources and improve reception conditions for the reception economies must be promoted and developed , especially by the national authorities of countries under threat .
Commissioner , I wish to take this opportunity to convey our concern at the deterioration of the current social situation that the behaviour of some companies subsidised by the Commission is causing in Portugal .
Despite everything , I am fully convinced that the Commission is sensitive to the situation and will find the appropriate measures to remedy the situation , whilst taking the laws and the interests of the Union into account .
Mr President , this resolution takes it for granted that the European institutions grant public aid to private enterprises , even if they want to have a certain amount of control over the use of this aid .
I personally am against the use of public funds to increase private profits .
Public money , whether it belongs to the Member States or to the European institutions , should be reserved for public services .
Naturally , at the very least , we should demand that companies which do not fulfil their obligations , and in particular those which implement redundancies after receiving public money , reimburse the subsidies they have received .
Just as , at the very least , we should refuse to grant subsidies to businesses which , having received aid in one Member State , transfer production to another State .
The real problem , however , is not even that .
The problem lies in the current exponential increase in mass redundancies .
It is unacceptable for an employer or board of executives to be able to decide to make workers redundant simply to increase company profits .
It is unacceptable for lives to be destroyed and regions ruined in order to pay higher dividends to shareholders .
Mr Fischler , I would ask you this : what use are the European institutions if they are powerless in the face of this fundamental problem ?
What power do they have if they cannot or do not want to force at least the major profit-making companies to keep on their employees , by forbidding them from implementing mass redundancies ?
Mr President , Commissioner , during the last Strasbourg part-session , the metalworkers came to demonstrate their dismay at the restructuring of Arcelor .
They left Parliament in disbelief , disgusted at not having been heard , and some said that they would come back , but only to cause damage .
The dockers were here this week , and they almost did destroy everything .
If Europe continues to ignore the social impact of the liberalisation policies it is implementing , there will be further explosions .
Of course , Europe is not responsible for uncontrolled restructuring , but , at the very least , we could try to regulate it .
For now , however , there is total refusal to do so .
The Commissioner for Employment and Social Affairs , Mrs Diamantopoulou , has already stated that there will not be a directive on the matter .
Nor will there be a European code of good conduct for companies .
Nothing .
But when there is nothing , and no political outlet for despair , violence becomes the last resort .
Today , whatever Mr Harbour thinks , the restructuring of large companies has become proactive , in other words , far from just fulfilling the need to adapt to market fluctuations , they are responding to financial calculations alone .
These calculations are based on share price and anticipate the very short-term profits to be gained from a mass reduction in personnel costs .
Ultimately , even where expensive social plans are implemented , the calculations are viable and there is a return on investment within two years on average .
These stock market transactions , however , completely disregard the men and women whose lives they are destroying and the increased stress and workload they create for those described as survivors .
They also ignore externalised costs such as public aid and unemployment benefit .
You might ask what Europe 's role is in this internal scheming within the Member States .
Perhaps none , except that the vast market and the rules on free competition that it supports create areas where , apparently , anything goes .
The Portuguese example of delocalising businesses is just a drop in the ocean , but it is representative .
Europe must , at last , provide genuine answers to this trend , which is not an economic accident , but a result of financial plans in action , which can only lead to violence .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would first like to make the fundamental observation that the Commission , too , very much welcomes and supports your initiative in taking up this very difficult issue .
We can also accept most of the points made and endorse those contained in the motion for a resolution .
I would like , though , to set out under three separate headings my response to the questions that have been raised in the various speeches , for all of which I am grateful , as they have led to a very rounded debate .
Firstly , I believe that , despite our structural and support policies , we must not ignore the fact we are in a market economy system and that the primary task must be to ensure that the market economy system works .
That has nothing to do with Manchester liberalism , but rather with adherence to , for example , our European rules on competition , for failure to ensure that competition works would utterly contradict the whole of our support policy and the entire cohesion and structural policy .
I believe that to be something that we must not permit .
The consequence is that evidence indicating the importance of our having a working market economy is very important and must not be allowed to be disregarded .
The second is to ask what we can do to ensure that aid is not misused , but applied to the purpose for which it was granted .
It was in relation to this that I set out in my first speech the elements of the current rules , and it goes without saying that , in this area , the Commission has to ensure that , where one rule or another is not complied with - where , for example , a firm , contrary to what was laid down in its agreement with the Member State in question or with the Community , moves the business to another location before the permitted date - then , reimbursement is required .
To the assertion made by some of you that there is , over and above that , the need for sanctions , I can only say that , at present , repayment is the sanction .
No additional sanctions at present exist .
That is an issue that perhaps ought to be discussed in the Convention , for if additional sanctions , for example of a financial nature , were sought , provision would have to be made for them in the Treaty .
Such a possibility does not at present exist in the Treaty .
The third thing I would like to address is the issue of whether new firms are given preferential treatment .
For a start , it does not make much sense in this context to insist that a firm be newly established .
What is much more interesting is to focus consideration on how many new jobs will result from a project being supported .
That is the decisive factor .
What this is about is increasing the level of employment in these regions .
You have made a number of suggestions with the future in mind , and to these I want to say one thing .
One of the items in your motion for a resolution is a demand that the Commission should draw up a list of those firms that have been found guilty by a court of law .
We can see difficulties in this as regards data protection .
That is a fact , and we have to live with it .
Apart from that , this debate comes just at the right time , as we will today have the opportunity to discuss future structural policy in the context of the new cohesion report .
It is therefore appropriate the proposals should be made as to how the rules on the grant of structural funding might be improved .
Thank you , Commissioner Fischler .
I have received five motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , Commissioner , we can only regret that , at the time of this new resolution on a South-East Asian country , once again our Parliament must condemn an increasingly widespread and serious failure to respect democracy and human rights .
Cambodia , despite the promising future that could have been predicted at one time , is becoming dangerously subject to the influence of an authoritarian junta , similar to those in the neighbouring countries of Laos and Burma .
Whereas democracy defuses wars , the juxtaposition of despotic regimes here represents a dangerous threat to this entire Asian sub-region .
How else can we interpret the crisis that has developed between Cambodia and Thailand , which has led to the devastation of the Thai embassy and Thai possessions in Cambodia and the closure of ground borders between the two countries ?
This border conflict reflects what takes place on a daily basis in Cambodian society , which is a mosaic of different ethnic groups and cultural and religious diversity and has been harshly and deliberately weakened by the putschist leader , Hun Sen. State violence and all kinds of persecution have recently led to the assassination of Mr Om Radsady , presidential adviser to the national assembly , in the street .
Europe must use the many channels available in order to stabilise this country , and the entire region as well , especially at election time .
Let us not forget that Cambodia is the main recipient of aid in this region .
Both the situation inside Cambodia and the situation regarding its relations with its neighbours demand our attention today .
On-going tensions with Thailand and an atmosphere of political intimidation are characterising the run-up to the general elections of 27 July .
The draft resolution before us is therefore opportune .
The religious situation in Cambodia is also giving cause for concern , which is remarkable , as up to now the country has distinguished itself in a positive sense from its neighbours Laos and Vietnam as far as religious freedom is concerned .
Still the Christian churches are worried as conflicts between Buddhists and Christians are on the increase .
New guidelines from the Ministry of Religious Affairs also threaten to make serious inroads on the freedom enjoyed by Christians to practice their religion in public , provide Christian schooling or build new churches .
The resolution rightly asks the Cambodian Government to withdraw these guidelines .
I sincerely hope that the Council and the Commission will actively support this appeal .
The resolution contains another appeal to the Cambodian authorities that also meets with my complete approval .
They must take all necessary measures to curb the abuse of children .
Sadly trafficking in women and children is in any case an increasing problem in Cambodia .
Insiders stress that the national government could do more about this .
The US shares this view .
Their ambassador gave the Cambodian Government this warning very recently : less aid if they fail to address this .
Especially at this time of transatlantic drifting apart , Brussels must form a united front with Washington on this .
Mr President , this House has given a great deal of attention to Cambodia ever since the days of Pol Pot , the Stone Age Communist with a doctorate in philosophy from the Sorbonne .
Since then , we have campaigned for the freedom of the Cambodian people , even after the Khmer Rouge had been replaced by the Vietnamese occupation , and , even when the situation appeared as hopeless as it did in the struggle against the regime imposed by the Khmer Rouge , we kept on supporting the human rights of the Cambodians .
We did this in close collaboration with Son San , a grand old man of Cambodian democracy , who was a frequent visitor to this House .
What is even more disturbing is that the current deterioration in the situation follows signs of hope in the shape of last year 's local elections , which provided a firm basis , at least in the most general terms , for the beginnings of democracy , which can be established only from the ground upwards , that is , out of local communities , in many of which - fortunately enough - it is actually growing .

What makes matters even worse is that repression from the centre outwards , that is , on the part of the government , is currently on the increase .
This is linked to the regime 's fear of democratic movements and of opposition ; it has to do with the instability resulting from the unresolved issue of succession to the throne , and with many conflicts along ethnic and religious lines , on which point I have to say , in response to Mr Belder , that these conflicts are not just between Christians and Buddhists , but believers , Buddhist and Christian alike , are being persecuted , and we have to stand up for both of them .
It is for this reason that I want to make it clear that , whilst our cooperation agreement with Cambodia was a step in the right direction , it was a pledge of our confidence , and such a pledge is justified only if the developments initiated by the United Nations , along with the rule of law and the beginnings of democracy , continue without interference .
If , however , the elections on 27 July are taken as an occasion for putting leaders of the opposition in fear of their lives and limbs , and intimidating religious groups and ethnic minorities , then that is a lamentable development presaging a fearful backlash , and something that we cannot accept .

So ' yes ' to cooperation and to support for the fledgling democracy , but we also have to make it clear to our Cambodian partners that , if they jeopardise their democracy , they are also putting the European Union 's cooperation at risk .
Mr President , I am delighted at the progress on economic cooperation with Cambodia and other Asian countries and I am also for the financial support that the European Union gives to Cambodia , but with a qualification and I will come back to that in a minute .
I would like to remind you that of all the countries that the European Union gives financial support to , Cambodia receives the most support per head of population .
However , I am very concerned about the human rights situation in Cambodia .
We all know that practices such as torture of prisoners , the involvement of the army and police in trafficking of women and children and excessive pre-trial detention are commonplace .
I have in mind particularly recent reports about the murder of Om Radsady , the ex-chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Cambodian Parliament , the threats against Princess Vacheahra , the present chair of this Committee , and the continuing violation of the rights of the opposition parties , especially the party of Sam Rainsy and the accusations against him over the responsibility for the attack on the Thai Embassy in Phnom Penh .
Mr President , in the light of these events I would urge that the aid to Cambodia from the European Union must not be allowed to be unconditional and that our representatives in Phnom Penh must put explicit pressure on the Cambodian Government to make every effort to improve the human rights situation in their country .
With a view to the coming elections , the European Union must also press for guarantees of free , fair and democratic elections and of the safety of the various opposition leaders , otherwise , then the European Union must indeed immediately revoke its cooperation agreement with Cambodia .
It would be completely incredible if the European Union , that is always so tough on improving human rights and promoting democracy everywhere in the world , were to give such enormous amounts in financial aid to a country that cannot guarantee either one of these things .
Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is entirely of one mind with Parliament in its view that the recent violent deaths of many Cambodian politicians , which a number of Members have mentioned , give cause for grave concern .
The Commission very much hopes that the political climate will not deteriorate still further at a time when preparations are being made for Cambodia 's forthcoming parliamentary elections .
The Commission also gives voice to the hope that the investigation mounted by the royal government into the background to the riots on 29 January this year will help make the country more stable .
I am able to assure you that the Commission , in close consultation with the EU 's Member States , is following further developments in Cambodia with close attention .
The Commission is , moreover , concerned about the situation of the media in Cambodia .
Free expression of opinion in the press is , admittedly , permitted , but the publicly owned media continue to be under government control to an immense degree .
This is a point that has already been made by the EU committee that was sent to observe last year 's local elections , and it has also been made by the Commission in its representations to the Cambodian authorities .
A preparatory mission , led by the Commission and consisting of experts on elections and representatives of the Member States , was in Cambodia from 27 January to 4 February .
It is on the basis of the information they brought back with them that a decision will be taken on whether , and if so how , to support the electoral process , and , above all , on whether sending an EU mission to observe the elections on 27 July makes sense , is advisable or , indeed , feasible .
All those in Cambodia with whom we have entered into dialogue have spoken in favour of the EU being involved in the electoral process and have expressed the view that the observers ' mission at the time of last year 's local elections had done a great deal to further a climate of confidence and transparency during the election process .
The outcome of the preparatory mission , which drew attention both to positive and objectionable aspects of the preparations for the elections , led the EU Member States to endorse the Commission 's recommendation that a mission be sent to observe the forthcoming elections .
The Commission notes with satisfaction that Parliament has supported this decision .
I will turn now to the problem with the civil disabilities imposed on Christian associations .
A decree of 14 January for the prevention of conflicts between individual religious groupings permitted - and I quote - ' all activities connected with religious propaganda and proselytism , including the dissemination of notices and information brochures , only within religious institutions ' .
Permission for such activities in public can , however , be obtained from the Ministry for Education and Religious Affairs .
These provisions apply not only to Christians , but also to all religious bodies , and were introduced to reduce the risk of conflicts and clashes motivated by religion .
In the absence of any in-depth legal analysis , it would appear that this decree , like other measures enacted to date by the Ministry for Education and Religious Affairs , does not necessarily constitute a violation either of the Declaration on Human Rights or of the Cambodian Constitution .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place after the debates .
The next item is the following five motions for resolutions :
( B5-0171 / 2003 ) by Mrs Kinnock , Mr Veltroni and Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the PSE Group , on Burma ;
( B5-0173 / 2003 ) by Mrs McKenna and Mrs Isler Béguin , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Burma ;
( B5-0178 / 2003 ) by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Van Orden , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the renewal and strengthening of the EU Common Position on Burma ;
( B5-0181 / 2003 ) by Mrs Morgantini , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the renewal of the EU Common Position on Burma ;
( B5-0185 / 2003 ) by Mrs Malmström , Mrs Maaten and Mr van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the renewal and strengthening of the EU Common Position on Burma .
Mr President , with this joint resolution , Parliament is addressing very clear requests to the Council and the Commission regarding the respective competences , not least because it has been unanimously agreed that there is a situation of total violation of human , political and social rights in Burma .
It has been noted that the military regime is continuing to prevent the parliament elected in 1990 and the parliamentary Committee created in 1998 which represents it from carrying out any democratic activity . It has been noted that , although no longer under house arrest , Aung San Suu Kyi is being subjected to pressure , threats and intimidation .
It has been noted that the systematic use of torture , extrajudicial executions and forced labour is widespread in Burma .
Thus , the requests are quite clear and direct .
We call upon the Commission to bring the case of forced labour in Burma to the attention of the World Trade Organisation , pointing out that , in the Singapore Declaration , the WTO stated that the ILO is the competent body to deal with matters of respect for labour law .
We also call upon the Council not to show any signs of openness towards the regime in Rangoon and to preserve and strengthen the Common Position , bringing all possible pressure to bear on the country , including pressure on foreign investments .
This is the very clear appeal that Parliament is making .
We expect a response from the Commission .
It is a pity that we cannot have a response from the Council , but the request is contained in the resolution .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , given the situation in Burma , as Mrs Napoletano has described it to us , you can imagine what expectations and hopes this strongly-worded resolution on Burma , which is currently a State with no rule of law , will inspire in Burmese civil society .
What fears it should inspire in the military junta currently in power , if this resolution determines the EU 's policy with regard to Burma .
Until now , the measures taken by the European Union to improve living conditions in Burma , to try to humanise the situation of its millions of inhabitants , have been limited to theory and political statements that have never been followed by action .
The political and moral responsibility of the EU is now involved . Perhaps it should be involved to the point of criminal prosecution .
Surely the very significant investments made by the Member States , regardless of any development in the military regime , represent de facto collaboration in maintaining the junta in power ?
Surely European businesses are cynically exploiting the workforce in this prison-State , which has become a general labour camp , where the concept of citizenship no longer applies ?
This country is certainly far from the European continent and European legislation !
Although we are aware of the totalitarian nature of the Burmese regime , however , and the motions for resolution are coming from all sides , the current state of affairs , in other words , the absence of the rule of law , continues under the Burmese sun .
We need to activate the European Union 's economic and industrial lever in order to prohibit any investment by the Member States in undemocratic regimes .
We need to ensure that the industrial policy of the Member States is a moral one .
We also need to use the force of Community diplomatic and political action throughout this Asian region , which has a shared history with some of the Member States and for which relations with Europe are still so important for its development .
We must consider the criminals in power in Burma in the current context , in the context of the International Criminal Court that is now permanently operational to prosecute all individuals accused of genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes .
The time for theoretical statements has passed .
The European Union owes more than that to the winner of the Sakharov Prize and the Nobel Peace Prize , Aung San Suu Kyi , to the 1200 political prisoners , and through them , to the millions of Burmese citizens .
This resolution is very strongly worded and comprehensive .
Each paragraph should be part of a framework for a genuine Community policy on the military junta , and therefore to the benefit of Burmese civil society .
Mr President , there have now been too many years of systematic violation of human rights by the military regime in Burma - the Parliament should be active but it is non-existent - although there have , without a doubt , been improvements in the sectors of political and social life , and progress has been made in the area of individual freedoms , the most important element of which is the release of a remarkable woman who is leading democratic , non-violent resistance with determination and dignity - Aung San Suu Kyi . She is not yet free , however , and cannot move about freely .
In reality , however , Burma still continues to be afflicted by the repression of ethnic minorities , rape and violence against women .
The elimination of political dissidents and summary executions have not stopped .
Torture , detention and forced labour are common practice .
Despite the government 's denials , I believe that children are still forced to join the army and also , I regret to say , the rebel military forces .
There are thousands of people suffering who we do not hear about from the media as we did , I am glad to say , in the case of the 13 years of house arrests imposed on the Nobel Peace Prize-winner .
Consider , for example , the tragic child-soldier system .
' It is a good idea to conscript children because they do the same job as adults but they are difficult for the enemy army to see ' , one official had the courage to say .
Forced labour is still common practice : recent Amnesty International surveys have shown that approximately 90 % of the population of the State of Shan are subject to forced labour .
These people have no choice : either forced labour or prison .
Their work , for which they are not paid , consists of building military infrastructure , roads , buildings and military camps and even performing military duties .
They work without a break from morning until night , with no food except a small quantity of toasted rice .
Despite the fact that the Burmese penal code has banned forced labour , the situation has not changed . It has not changed despite the presence of the International Labour Organisation .
Even the recent endeavours of the Thai Government have been frustrated by the categorical opposition of the Burmese authorities , which have even refused to give members of the political opposition permission to leave the country in order to discuss its economic problems .
Worst of all is the continued abuse of power by the Burmese army , the military intelligence services , the police and other security forces .
I genuinely believe , as other Members have said too , that the European Union must both continue to use its influence to press for negotiations between the democratic groupings , the ethnic minorities and the State to resume as soon as possible , and put pressure on the Burmese authorities , continuing , that is , with the current trade policy on Burma and , if possible , taking even stronger measures to curb the scourge of forced labour , in particular .
It must also undertake to pursue ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
The Burmese generals continue to wage war against their own population .
They take no notice of the rest of the world .
The military regime is still breaking all records when it comes to violation of human rights , political prisoners , forced labour , child soldiers , media censorship , violation of religious freedoms and violence against minorities .
Everything that God has forbidden goes on in Burma .
In drawing up a new common position , the European Union must speak with a clear voice .
The time is long overdue for the generals to release unconditionally the 1 200 political prisoners who are being held in atrocious conditions and tortured .
The Council and the Commission must also give very serious consideration to the systematic rape of women and sexual enslavement and argue for an international investigation into this .
The ILO must be given access to all areas where forced labour is going on .
The European Commission must denounce these abuses at the WTO .
The European Union must also demand that the regime put an end to the climate of impunity , that applies to all those who are guilty of torture , forced labour , deportations or unlawful executions .
Finally , Mr President , it is of the utmost importance that the Burmese refugees in Bangladesh are not forcefully repatriated .
While it may be true that the freedom of movement of the NLD of Aung San Suu Kyi has been slightly increased , that seems to be more a question of window dressing than of a significant change in policy .
The European Union must strengthen the sanctions against Burma .
A ban on foreign investments should be introduced .
European companies which get Burmese blood on their hands to serve their shareholders must be pilloried .
Unfortunately there are still Member States that give more weight to their own business interests than they do to a consistent human rights policy .
Only with broad international support do the oppressed Burmese people have a chance of ousting the generals .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place after the debates .
The next item is the following six motions for resolution :
B5-0172 / 2003 by Mr Karamanou , Mrs Gröner , Mrs Ghilardotti , Mrs Prets , Mr Veltroni and Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the case of Amina Lawal , sentenced to death by stoning in Nigeria for adultery ;
B5-0175 / 2003 by Mrs Maes , Mr Rod and Mrs Lucas , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the human rights situation in Nigeria and , in particular , the case of Amina Lawal ;
B5-0179 / 2003 by Mr McCartin , Mr Posselt , Mr Sacrédeus and Mrs Scallon , on behalf of the PPE-DE , Group , on the case of the Nigerian woman , Amina Lawal , sentenced to death by stoning in Nigeria ;
B5-0182 / 2003 by Mrs Ainardi , Mrs Eriksson , Mrs Morgantini , Mrs Fraisse , Mrs Uca and Mrs Figueiredo , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on Nigeria : the case of Amina Lawal ;
B5-0183 / 2003 by Mr Collins and Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the case of Amina Lawal in Nigeria ;
B5-0184 / 2003 by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte and Mr van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the human rights situation in Nigeria and , in particular , the case of Amina Lawal .
Mr President , Commissioner , the subject of women sentenced to death by stoning in Nigeria , which has outraged public opinion worldwide , was debated here in the House last September .
And yet , Commissioner , ours was a voice crying in the wilderness .
Amina Lawal , the unfortunate woman who committed the heinous crime of believing that she has a right of self-determination over her own body , is due to appear before the Sharia court of appeal on 25 March .
Under Islamic law , she is guilty of treason .
How can this happen in the 21st century and be ignored by the powers that be on the planet ?
What a pity the Commissioner is not listening .
How , Commissioner , can women 's fundamental freedoms and rights be so violently , so rudely infringed , and be left to lobbying by women 's organisations , public opinion and the media ?
What has the political leadership of the European Union done , what have the Commission and the Council done ?
What sanctions have we imposed on Nigeria , a country with which we have economic and commercial ties ?
What purpose do clauses about respecting women 's human rights in the Cotonou Agreement serve , Commissioner , if there are no sanctions ?
Finally , does Nigeria have a secular , democratic regime or a theocracy ?
Does the country have a government or is it ruled by mullahs ?
Mr Karamanou , I do not know whether Commissioner Fischler understands Greek too .
I am asking this because I can see that he is not wearing his earphones .
Mr President , I have almost finished my intervention ; the Commissioner has not listened to a word I said and is not therefore in a position to answer the questions I have put to him .
My intervention took the form a series of questions to the European leadership , which has done absolutely nothing to stop the crimes being committed against women in Nigeria .
Nigeria is a signatory to the Cotonou Agreement , which contains clauses about respecting human rights and women 's rights and yet , as far as the Commission is concerned , it is a case of out of sight out of mind .
The political leadership has done nothing whatsoever and the entire matter has been left to the loyalty of women 's organisations and the media ; in other words , to pressure from global public opinion .
This pressure is very strong and it does bring in results but , in the final analysis , the European political leadership also needs to do something and insist that the Nigerian Government do what it should to protect women 's rights in Nigeria .
And I also have this to say to you , Commissioner : in the final analysis , what is Nigeria ?
A democratic regime , a secular regime or a theocracy ?
Because on 25 March , Amina Lawal 's case will be heard before the Sharia court of appeal .
We are out of our minds with worry .
We have no idea what is happening in Nigeria .
Three years ago , we were celebrating the return of democracy to Nigeria and a democratically elected government .
And yet this government is completely incapable of imposing the constitution and the law on the country .
The mullahs rule the country and are sentencing women to death by stoning for allegedly engaging in sex outside marriage .
We want the Commission and the Council to intervene at once .
The leadership must take a stand against these issues .
That is what we are asking of you , Commissioner .
Mr Karamanou , I have given you a lot of speaking time , firstly because I feel it was impolite of the Commissioner not to listen to you while you were putting questions to him - admittedly , the Commissioner does have a written text prepared beforehand , but it is always polite to listen - and , secondly , because the Chairman of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities was talking .
Mr President , Commissioner .
You will understand that this is a matter that concerns us greatly and I also endorse , not only the indignation of Mrs Karamanlis because of the colloques singuliers organised at your bank and for which you as Commissioner are not always responsible , but I also endorse the content .
Thanks to the international campaign , we were able to help Safya Hoesseini escape the stoning to which she was convicted even though she had been raped .
She was , however , spared on procedural grounds and that means that the danger has certainly not gone away for Amina Lawal , who was granted an appeal on 19 August and whose sentence will probably be reconfirmed on 25 March .
So you still have a little time , Commissioner .
She was convicted in Katsina , one of the twelve northern regions where Sharia has come into force during the past 3 years .
The death penalty , mutilation of women and flogging and the prevailing discrimination that accompanies these things have become common practices .
This immediately renders the Constitution of Nigeria , the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and all other treaties that Nigeria has ratified dead letters .
Presidential elections are being held in Nigeria in a couple of weeks .
Rioting associated with the introduction of Sharia has already claimed a couple of thousand victims .
Recently 220 people were killed in riots surrounding a beauty contest .
The atmosphere is defined by economic crisis , unemployment , lack of security and widespread corruption .
There is , alas , a huge danger of civil war in this enormous and densely populated African country .
And here we are voting on another resolution .
Commissioner , we did that on 15 February 2001 , 15 November 2001 , 11 April 2002 , September 2002 and the ACP did that on 21 March 2001 .
So now we are going to vote on yet another resolution but , like Mrs Karamanou , I call on you to take real action , not only to save the life of this unfortunate woman , but also to save this densely populated African country from bloody conflicts that could create thousands of victims .
Mr President , there are too many resolutions which have not been acted upon , and sometimes we too , as Members of Parliament , are guilty of thinking we have resolved a problem just by producing a resolution .
I , however , am a woman , and among my role models are women who , because they had the courage to speak out or the desire to laugh or love , were barbarously tortured and burned alive in the name of God by the cruelty of pious , religious Christians .
Nonetheless , religious practices , cultures and traditions can be changed .
I come from a country where the crime of honour continued to exist even after the war , a country which only recognised rape as a crime against the individual in the seventies , when the feminist movement was in its heyday .
Today , we women are still the victims of discrimination in Europe , our sexuality is commoditised , but our right to exist has been won .
However , the suffering and injustice suffered by women and people all over the world seem to scourge our bodies and rend our souls now as never before .
Once again , in the name of a God who is presented as all-powerful and merciful , religions , traditions and cultures mutilate bodies , stone people to death , impose arranged marriages and mutilate the bodies of innocent children with infibulation .
We must prevent the killing of Amina Lawal , a woman who has dared to love and is condemned to being stoned to death for having a child out of wedlock .
We must prevent religion , when it abuses human rights , whether the victim is a man or a woman , being used as a law , even a law which is secondary to the laws of the State .
The Federal Republic of Nigeria has ratified the international human rights conventions . These conventions must have more than just theoretical significance : they must be observed and enforced in practice .
Nigeria has even adopted a Constitution which guarantees the right to freedom without torture or punishment .
On a number of occasions , President Obasanjo has stated that he is opposed to the death penalty being applied on the basis of Sharia law , but he cannot keep up these double standards forever .
It is true that the issues are complex , but now , the lives of many men and women are at stake - today , it is the life of Amina Lawal , yesterday , it was the life of Safiya Hussaini .
Yet how many other women and how many men are lying in prison or are charged and hanged ?
The European Union - and we personally - must make a total commitment not just to preventing Amina Lawal 's death but to ensuring that the international agreements are genuinely ratified .
We must therefore compel the Nigerian Government to act on its undertaking and provide all possible assistance , prevent Amina 's death and guarantee that a similar sentence is never pronounced again .
I genuinely believe that it is extremely important for there not to be double standards .
We must start from our basic principle , from the fact that it is essential for us too , here , to respect human rights - with regard to immigrants and many others - and so we must do everything possible to ensure that no more people die .
Mr President , in September last year Parliament adopted a resolution condemning the sentencing to death of Ms Amina Lawal .
Since then there has been strong international pressure from all sides to help Ms Lawal , and rightly so .
Of course , her case is exceptionally harrowing : a mother facing the death penalty .
The Lawal case been seen as a test case in and outside Nigeria .
Nigeria has no state religion and that is how it should remain .
Carrying out this death sentence would be a signal that different laws apply to Muslims in Nigeria than to Christians and that cannot be allowed .
The impression must also not be allowed to be created that violation of human rights and the death penalty are acceptable .
The Nigerian Government must ensure that they comply with international obligations in the area of human rights .
In less than two weeks Ms Lawal 's appeal against her inhuman punishment comes up .
Hopefully she will win that appeal , but if not , I would like to remind President Olusegun Obasanjo of his own words .
In January of this year , at the time of the riots around the Miss World contest , he said and I quote : ' no one will be stoned in my country ' .
My appeal to him is simple : keep your word .
The Nigerian Government has sufficient means to prevent this case from ending in tragedy .
We wait to see how the Nigerian Government will act after the appeal on 25 March .
We in Parliament regard human rights as a cornerstone of good relations between the European Union and other countries .
I express the hope now that the Lawal case will not bring dark clouds over relations between the Union and Nigeria .
Finally , Mr President , President Obasanjo was grateful to receive the Freedom Prize of the Liberal International a few years ago before he became president of that country .
Let him now continue to behave in keeping with that .
Madam President , Amina Lawal , an illiterate 31-year old Nigerian woman , is preparing to face death for the crime of adultery .
She claims she was raped by a friend and subsequently she bore a child .
The sentence of death by stoning , which is carried out by burying her alive up to her neck and then inviting onlookers to stone her , was delayed until after the birth of her child .
There are claims by locals that members of the local Sharia Court which tried her , have themselves had adulterous relationships which on occasions have resulted in the birth of children .
Sharia has recently been introduced in parts of Nigeria as part of a process of Islamicisation .
Christian groups have been critical of the Nigerian Government 's failure to affirm that such punishments are contrary to the federal constitution , although President Obasanjo has said that he will weep if the verdict is carried out .
The sentence has been delayed until 2004 to allow her to wean her child .
Nigeria will unquestionably be in my opinion in violation of a number of international treaty obligations including the Convention against Torture and the UN Convenant on Civil and Political Rights , to which it is a signatory .
Even in Iran , there has been no stoning for almost two years now , with the most senior judge recently declaring the punishment illegal .
This is not about the death penalty per se , which remains legal in international law for the most serious crimes .
It is about a disproportionate and gratuitously cruel punishment against a young mother .
It is not a feminist issue either .
Nigeria must understand that its relationship with the civilised world will not remain the same if the sentence is carried out and I for one will advocate expulsion from the Commonwealth and an immediate programme of selective sanctions and travel bans on Nigeria 's leaders .
I would also call on the Greek presidency of the Council to summon the Nigerian Ambassador and make plain to him the feelings we hold so strongly in this House against such an unjust punishment .
Madam President , the cases of stoning in the States of Northern Nigeria , based on the application of Sharia law by Islamic courts , are a flagrant violation of human rights which we must condemn with all our energy , as Mrs Karamanou has done very effectively this afternoon , on behalf of our European Parliament .
Firstly because we cannot accept the death penalty and secondly because the application of Sharia law affects defenceless women , accused of actions , such as adultery , which cannot be considered crimes ; and thirdly because , furthermore , in the case of Amina Lawal , she has not received the least legal guarantees during the trial .
The case of Amina Lawal is dramatic and urgent because , following several postponements , the sentence is imminent : 25 March .
But it is not the only case , Sarimu Mohamed , Safiya Hussaini , Bariya Ibrahima and Adama Yunusa have also been sentenced to prison following a series of international campaigns to prevent these stonings .
In none of these cases have any of the men involved in the adultery been punished .
The vulnerability of women under Islamic criminal law , torture and the degrading treatment they suffer represent an unacceptable violation of human rights and this should be reflected in the European Union 's relations with Nigeria and with any other country that applies the Sharia .
Nigeria has one of the highest rates of illiteracy in the world .
There are ritual mutilations , there are millions of people displaced for religious reasons and Islamic law is applied in certain States , clearly discriminating against a section of the population , and there is no reaction from the central government .
The European Union , in accordance with the Treaties , which clearly lay down the principles governing our relations with third countries , and despite Nigerian oil , must use all its diplomatic powers to prevent the application of the death penalty imposed on Amina Lawal and condemn all the consequences of the possible stoning .
More than a million and a half people have protested to the Nigerian authorities and , thanks to this popular action , other stonings have been prevented , but the issue at the moment is to save Amina Lawal and to this end Sharia law must be abolished and , where necessary , hunted down .
Madam President , the stoning of women must be stopped now .
It is outrageous that there should still be places in the world in which the stoning of women is a lawful and accepted form of death penalty .
The Amina Lawal case again makes it necessary to take every possible measure to emphasise the EU 's rejection of such barbaric and inhumane methods .
Nigeria is not the only country in the world in which such cruelties take place .
Stoning must of course be banned in every country of the world , but let the obviously appalling case of Amina Lawal be an opportunity to register our unshakeable opposition to the stoning of women .
In Nigeria , the difference between nationally and regionally applicable legislation must be brought to an end .
It is shocking that there should be no guarantee of Amina Lawal 's ever appearing before a national court , even though the Nigerian Constitution guarantees her life and dignity .
It is important for us here in the European Parliament to take the opportunity we have to express our abhorrence and to keep exerting pressure on Nigerian society , for it is not merely an issue of the completely unacceptable discrimination between men and women that is the result of Sharia law in a range of countries , but an issue of ordinary humanity and decency .
There is still a long and tough struggle to be undertaken to ensure that human rights are both accepted and observed in every country of the world .
Madam President , once again Parliament is led to , and strongly obliged to condemn the appalling situation of a woman named Amina Lawal , who has been sentenced to death by stoning in Nigeria for having exercised her freedom .
What can I say , what can I add to all that has just been said by my fellow Members , except to reiterate my condemnation of the appalling situation of a woman which justifies as still necessary the fighting that takes place on international women 's days .
This intolerable situation forces us to restate our radical opposition to the death penalty and forces us to remember that a court of justice , whether in Nigeria or in any State in the world , cannot be based on religious principles and deny all the principles relating to absolute respect for human rights and respect for human dignity .
This , I am sad to say , echoes the obscurantism of the Middle Ages that our countries also experienced .
We must condemn again and again this intolerable situation of a woman , confirming the importance we attach to the principle of secularity as the principle of major organisation in modern , democratic States .
Madam President , Commissioner , the Nigerian Government should declare that the application of the Sharia by a regional court of justice is counter to the Constitution of its country .
In this regard , we would remind it , in particular , that respect for human rights is a fundamental element of the agreements concluded with third countries .
Apart from the situation of Amina Lawal in Nigeria , all those men and women in the world whose fundamental rights are denied expect the European Union to turn the resolutions that we adopt , sitting after sitting , in this House , into action .
I also fully agree with the questions raised by Mrs Karamanou .
Apart from adopting resolutions , Commissioner - although this is also addressed to the representatives of the Council - what are we actually doing ?
Madam President , honourable Members , the Commission does , of course , share Parliament 's concerns about the sort of punishments inflicted in northern Nigeria under Sharia law .
In a whole array of cases , among them that of Amina Lawal , the Commission has made representations to the Nigerian Government , and our President Prodi himself has made a direct approach to President Obasanjo , who has also expressed his opposition to these punishments and pointed out that every complainant has the right to take his or her case to the Supreme Court .
The Commission also welcomes the statement made last year by the Nigerian Minister of Justice , to the effect that it was not right to discriminate against Muslims by imposing different sentences on them for one and the same crime .
As various Members of this House have already mentioned , Amina Lawal 's appeal is due to be heard on 25 March .
Amina Lawal has been allowed legal counsel and will also have the opportunity to take her appeal to an even higher court if necessary .
We are , through our delegation in Abuja , following the progress of this case as closely as possible , but we refrain from direct references to cases that are still sub judice , preferring to bring pressure on the Nigerian federal government to at last abolish the death penalty for all offences .
Sharia law is a complex and delicate issue in Nigeria .
The position is also very problematic in terms of constitutional law , because the state 's Sharia law is in contravention of both the constitution and the international obligations entered into by the Nigerian federal government .
Socially speaking , Nigeria is divided between the Muslim north and the Christian south , and the elections that are to be held next year mean that the issue is politically highly charged and very sensitive .
A study funded by the Commission has concluded that Sharia 's application in criminal law is made even more problematic by the fact that the criminal laws are badly framed and applied without consistency by poorly trained judges .
The EU has elaborated a Common Position on human rights issues in Nigeria , drafted representations by the Troika on the death penalty , and made an official statement to the Commission on Human Rights .
The closest possible attention is being paid to Nigeria 's adherence to the principles of the Cotonou Agreement .
The Commission is also itself immediately involved and , last year , concluded with Nigeria a Country Strategy Paper and a cooperation programme with Nigeria , key areas of which include human rights and good governance , and in which provision is also made for support to be given to civil society .

Nigeria is , moreover , one of the focus countries of the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights , and a range of projects in support of governmental and judicial reform is shortly to be adopted .
It is in this way that we hope to be able to have a positive influence on the way in which the Nigerian federal government and Nigeria 's federal states understand and put into practice fundamental human rights , under which influence it is to be hoped that things will take a turn for the better .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a moment .
Madam President , I wish to inform you , on behalf of the Group of the European Socialist Party , that I am tabling an oral amendment which would lead to the name ' EFTEC ' being added to paragraphs 9 and 16 . This is the name of a Swedish company experiencing problems similar to those of the companies referred to in the motion for a joint resolution .
Is there any objection to the application of this oral amendment ?
( Parliament gave its assent to the application of the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
EXPLANATION OF VOTE
Resolution on the closure of businesses ( B5-0160 / 2003 )
The Moderate delegation has today voted in favour of the resolution on the closure of undertakings after receiving EU financial aid .
We Moderates find it gratifying that , with this resolution , the European Parliament is attending to the harmful consequences that often arise in connection with the EU 's Structural Funds .
We believe that the Structural Funds lead to a large and unwieldy merry-go-round of subsidy which , when it is used to aid undertakings , causes unemployment to be transferred between the EU Member States and a distortion of competition for individual undertakings .
What , instead , is required as a basis for creating more jobs are deregulation , lower taxes and fewer barriers to trade .
If the European Union is to have any possibility of achieving the Lisbon objective , the Structural Funds ' aid activities should cease as soon as possible .
Madam President , this morning , I asked for the posters hanging from the windows of certain Members ' offices to be removed because of the damage they do to Parliament 's dignity .
Now , just before the vote , there are still numerous posters hanging on the walls .
If we permit this , it will catch on , and Parliament will end up at some point looking like an advertising pillar or a load of hoardings covered with posters .
That is not in the interests of this honourable House .
I ask that action be taken with the utmost rigour .
Mr Knolle , we are going to contact the competent departments to ensure that the instructions have been applied .
That was the last item on the agenda .
I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned .
( The sitting was closed at 5.25 p.m. )
Welcome
I should like to welcome to our distinguished visitors ' gallery Mr Rolandas Paksas , the President of Lithuania , who today in Brussels makes his first official visit outside Lithuania since his recent election .
The sole item on today 's agenda is the war in Iraq .
( Various Members on the centre and left held up placards denouncing military intervention in Iraq )
Colleagues , I know there are very deep feelings on this matter , but I ask that today , as a Parliament , we act with decorum and dignity in the light of the seriousness of the situation .
Mr President , I endorse this statement .
I believe we need a resolution in order to define Parliament 's position on a war that is going to destroy a nation .
( Applause from the left )
I wish to point out to you that the convening of a meeting like this one is at the discretion of the President , but subject to consultation with the Conference of Presidents .
There has been an agreement to hold this extraordinary sitting today .
Next week we will have the opportunity to hear Prime Minister Simitis and President Prodi , and , if the groups and the Members so wish , they may express themselves then in the form of a resolution and a vote .
The decision taken by the Conference of Presidents on today 's sitting was for a debate without a resolution .
I shall follow that decision and respect the procedures involved .
I give the floor to Mr Papandreou , President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , honourable Members , I know that feelings are running high today and I realise how important the initiatives taken by the European Parliament over recent weeks were , as we all tried to help bring about a diplomatic and peaceful resolution to the crisis in Iraq .
Feelings are running high because , when diplomacy ends and war begins , it is a sad , disappointing moment .
As the President said , the Iraqi crisis has been the cause of numerous heated debates within our House , within the international community and within the UN .
We have been working on a common basis , towards a common objective , as expressed on at least two different occasions , at the External Relations Council and later , at summit level : the objective of disarmament and full compliance with UN resolutions and , at the same time , the need to exhaust all diplomatic efforts before resorting to violence .
The Greek Presidency supported this objective ; we took initiatives and we met all our permanent and non-permanent members of the UN Security Council on numerous occasions .
We also had several meetings with the leaders of the United States , Kofi Annan and the inspectors .
Both the presidency and other members of the Council acting on our behalf made numerous trips to the Arab countries in the Middle East , where we and Mr Chris Patten , who travelled with us , met the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Arab states and the leaders of the Arab League in Sharm el Sheik .
We organised an important initiative to send a specific message to Iraq on behalf of the Arab League which got started but unfortunately petered out , and discussions at home about where we go from here , what we do next and how we deal with this crisis were also fraught with difficulty .
This is not the time to go into details , nor is it perhaps the time to apportion blame as to which opportunities the international community took advantage of and which it did not as it tried to foster a peaceful solution to this conflict .
However , what I would say is that we had a heated debate which will have important results and serious repercussions on future developments .
We need to examine the implications of this crisis within the European Union and the international community and the UN and decide how to tackle them .
I should like to point out that the stands taken by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs when they met the other day highlighted these disagreements , these differing perceptions as to what constitutes a just war . Differing opinions were expressed about the expediency of intervention , about the repercussions of intervening or not intervening and about stability in the region .
And yet , within these disagreements the President spoke of - and why try and hide the fact , they are a matter of public record - the presidency , all of us , especially the Council and the European Parliament , now need to decide where we go from here .
Because the fact of the matter is that hostilities have now begun .
One of our prime considerations as we decide what to do next , as Mr Cox quite rightly pointed out , is that the crisis should be used as a springboard for serious thought .
That is what both we and the overwhelming majority of European Union citizens want ; serious thought about institutional reform and the basic political will to unite behind a single foreign policy , a European Union foreign policy which speaks with a united , effective voice on international affairs , at international level , on the international stage .
Secondly , we need to examine the problems the Gulf will face in the immediate future , problems such as a possible humanitarian crisis .
To paraphrase ? ofi Annan at the Security Council yesterday , the international community will perhaps finally unite around the fate of the Iraqi people .
In truth , at the meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs , at the Council meeting the other day , which was an informal but nonetheless important session , a number of approaches were proposed which will need to be examined and which will guide us as we decide where we go from here .
First of all , we have to address the huge humanitarian problems which the war in Iraq will create , especially its repercussions on neighbouring countries and the problems which the European Union itself may face from a wave of refugees .
A second important consideration is the need to secure the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq .
A third important problem is the stability of the region as a whole .
A war can destabilise and cause problems for neighbouring countries , one of which , Turkey , is a candidate country of the European Union .
We had the opportunity at the European Parliament in Strasbourg a few days ago to debate the Kurdish question and the fear that this crisis has perhaps opened up another front in the war .
At the same time , however , we need to consider what the repercussions of this war will be , what repercussions it will have on Turkey itself , because we need to safeguard its progress towards Europe and its reform movement .
Another important consideration for the region , for stability in the Middle East , is the Middle East problem and the peace process itself .
As far as this process is concerned , the European Union is unanimously behind the so-called roadmap , which it wants not just published but implemented as quickly as possible .
Whatever happens in Iraq , we need to highlight the supremely important role of the United Nations in the overall process .
Luckily , there is unanimity here too .
Even if we were unable recently to keep the UN at the forefront , let us try and do so from now on and ensure that the UN has the standing it deserves .
I think that , within this , we shall face another two important issues .
First , trans-Atlantic relations , relations between the European Union and the United States .
As we all know , trans-Atlantic relations have been through - is still going through - a serious crisis .
Of that there can be no doubt .
It is therefore time for an honest discussion of today 's real problems and challenges , an honest discussion of how we intend to deal with major issues , from weapons of mass destruction to the environment , poverty and inequality ; now is the time for honest dialogue with the United States , a dialogue which , we hope , will help us find a way of really cooperating on security , on promoting real peace and on real global governance based on the common values of the European Union , values which we share in the European Union , values which underpin the Community in which we live .
The fact that we have been cooperating very closely with the Arab world over recent weeks is also extremely important .
This cooperation , Mr President , honourable Members , has shown that the conflict in Iraq is not and must not be a cultural war or conflict .
On the contrary , we must strengthen these ties with the Arab and Muslim world . We need an in-depth cultural dialogue here , a cultural dialogue which will pinpoint the problems of mankind for which we are jointly responsible and allow us , within this joint responsibility , to discuss the best ways of dealing with these issues and the common values which will guide us as we do so .
I should like to say here that I have a feeling , perhaps a ray of optimism on this dark and difficult day , that it is the will of the Member States and , I believe , of our citizens , that the crisis in Iraq - which has given rise to so much discussion and will surely continue to do so over coming weeks and months , perhaps even years - should now be used as a springboard by the European Union for drawing important conclusions about its own institutions , about our role , about the challenges we face and about how we can deal with this situation more effectively .
All I can say is that this is the feeling I had , that this is the will which was expressed during discussions at the External Affairs Council the other day .
A feeling that , even though we are of course bitter and disappointed about our failure to agree on Iraq , we should not let this divide us and we should focus on where we can take unified action by analysing these problems and moving on .
I am sure that this message , this objective will be supported by the European Parliament , which has fought long and hard for the common foreign policy , a stronger European presence on the international stage and the integration of the European Union , and which will play a decisive role here .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much , I look forward to receiving your comments .
Mr President , as you said earlier , last week the Parliament debated the crisis in Iraq for almost four and a half hours .
It was a very good and responsible debate .
One week on , from the Commission 's point of view , I am frankly not sure what I can usefully add to what I said last week , but that sort of consideration has very rarely encouraged politicians to keep quiet .
( Laughter and applause )
President .
Or even university chancellors !
Patten , Commission .
But at least I will spare the President this speech in Latin !
I can offer briefly one or two additional thoughts which I hope will provide some context for the rest of this debate and which , I am sure , Mr President , you were entirely right to call with the agreement of the presidents of the groups .
This debate takes place against an extremely sombre background .
Whatever the outcome of the war that has started in Iraq - and we must all pray that the military phase will be as short and as bloodless as possible - there can be no denying that this has been a very bad passage for the common foreign and security policy ; a very bad passage for the European Union as a whole ; a very bad passage for the authority of the UN , for NATO and for transatlantic relations .
I just pause to make one point about transatlantic relations .
Most of the things that we want to achieve as Europeans , we are more likely to be able to achieve if we are able to work with the United States .
( Applause )
It is equally the case that most of the things that America wants are more likely to be achieved if America can work with the European Union .
( Applause )
And finally , it is unarguably the case that the world is better served in terms of prosperity , security and stability when America and the European Union work together .
( Applause )
So the future of transatlantic relations is a matter of real concern to all of us and it was of course entirely appropriate that the Foreign Minister referred so eloquently to that issue during his remarks .
The Greek Presidency made heroic efforts to maintain a common position .
The European Council 's declaration of 17 February was , in my view , extremely well judged .
Member States agree about the threat of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ; they agree on the need for full and effective disarmament of Iraq ; they agree that the United Nations must remain at the centre of the international order ; they agree , indeed , that force should only be used as a last resort .
However , they disagreed - all too publicly - about when that point had been reached .
How can we now pull things together again ?
How can we emerge not just healed but strengthened from the trials of the last few weeks ?
We should remind ourselves how closely and effectively we are cooperating - not just within the European Union but across the Atlantic - on a host of international issues .
We should redouble our efforts .
In the Balkans , for example , we are working flat out for economic and political stabilisation .
I was in Serbia last week and I witnessed the determination of men and women there to ensure that that the fragile stability that prevails should not be set back by the despicable murder of Zoran Djindjic .
I hope that at the European Council later today and tomorrow , heads of government will renew their pledge to maintain the momentum of development and of association between these countries and the European Union .
We must also maintain unrelenting concentration on Afghanistan , on which we had a donors ' meeting here in Brussels at the beginning of the week : a recognition of how prominent a part we are playing under UN auspices in the reconstruction in that country , which still faces appalling problems .
After the fighting of 2001 , the European Union pledged that it was there for the long haul , to help deliver stability and sound government .
This House helped to ensure that we put resources behind that pledge .
We must remain true to it .
I repeat what I said to this House last week , that we must also maintain the momentum of our own enlargement .
The decision to bring in ten new Member States is not some whim , which might be called into question by unrelated events .
It is a strategic choice for our continent .
And it is a choice of historic proportions .
We must press forward undaunted , just as we must press forward with the work we announced in our paper last week on Wider Europe .
That communication set out a vision about how our neighbours , not just to the east but to the south , too , can expect to share in our prosperity and stability if they are ready to align themselves on our values and on our legislation .
Our proposals for ' Wider Europe ' mean the creation of a common economic and social space where all countries enjoy full membership of the internal market and , potentially , share in the four freedoms .
We must press forward , too , with the Middle East peace process .
It is encouraging that the President of the United States is now ready to proceed with the road map towards a two-State solution that was prepared , I have to say , several months ago within the international quartet .
But we must ensure that this means the urgent implementation of these ideas , not a long discussion with the parties about their validity .
Such discussions have proved to be endlessly frustrating in the past , as the parties have sought to impose incompatible conditions upon their cooperation .
We really cannot allow this peace process , once again , to be subject to conditional sequencing so that in practice there is no peace but more bloodshed .
( Applause )
More immediately , the whole European Union must strive to build on what we share in our approach to the conflict now beginning in Iraq .
The Commission has been working hard behind the scenes , in cooperation with international agencies , to contribute to the humanitarian assistance that may be needed .
I have discussed these issues myself in Jordan , Turkey and Iran in recent weeks .
ECHO , the Commission 's Humanitarian Aid Office , has reinforced its presence in the region .
There are now five permanent expatriate technical assistants in the Amman Regional office covering Iraq and the whole of the Middle East , an additional expert based in Jerusalem and a seventh one on standby in Amman .
ECHO has also kept regular contact with the main humanitarian organisations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees .
Since January this year , ECHO has carried out three missions to Iraq itself to assess the situation and prepare for possible operations .
It has also conducted several missions to neighbouring countries .
Besides the EUR 15 million that had been earmarked for humanitarian operations in Iraq in 2003 , the Commission has , of course , delegated authority to approve fast track aid for a further EUR 3 million in less than 72 hours .
If there were a crisis in a neighbouring country , it would be possible to agree another EUR 3 million for that purpose , too .
Depending on the scale of the needs , we may need to apply for additional funds for humanitarian purposes from the emergency reserve .
On the basis of previous experience - ECHO has been providing humanitarian aid to Iraq since 1992 - we expect that the Commission 's contribution is likely to be focused on health , on water and on sanitation .
Some international organisations and NGOs are also predicting food shortages , with disruption of the Oil for Food programme .
That is something we may need to look at in due course , if the problem emerges .
In all this effort , ECHO will work closely with UN agencies , and will participate in on-the-spot information exchanges .
I should like to add one point here .
Nobody in this House , I am sure , under-estimates the courage and commitment of our humanitarian aid teams in the field .
I think all of us have good reason to be proud of them , proud of the work they have already done in that region and proud of the work which , alas , they have to do in all too many parts of the world .
( Applause )
We must also do all that we can to help Turkey cope with the political pressures generated by recent events , and to help Iraq 's other neighbours , too - from Jordan and Syria to Iran .
As I said earlier , during my recent trips to the region I had a chance to gain a better understanding of the impact that war on Iraq could have on these countries .
The Commission will continue monitoring and assessing the situation closely and would look , with the Council , at possible EU responses .
In the present circumstances , I am bound to say that I am extremely pleased that we have taken the initiative to develop our relationship with Iran , not in an ill-informed way , not overlooking the disagreements we have with that country .
I think trying to develop our relationship with Iran makes considerable sense .
In an article earlier this week a respected newspaper columnist reminded us that after the plagues and misfortunes had streamed from Pandora 's box , Hope remained behind to assuage the afflicted .
So perhaps we should hold onto hope that the war will be over quickly , and with minimum casualties - a point felt especially strongly , whatever your views on the conflict , by all those with fellow countrymen and women engaged in the fight .
( Applause )
We should hope as well that it will be possible to deliver humanitarian aid quickly and effectively , under international auspices , where it is most needed .
We should hope that the political and economic reconstruction of Iraq can begin soon , again under international auspices .
A point I made explicitly last week - perhaps the House will excuse me for repeating it - was that if post-war Iraq is managed under a UN mandate like East Timor , Kosovo and Afghanistan , I hope that it will be recognised in those circumstances and that part of the credit for that should go to those who have insisted on it from the outset .
We should hope , then , that reconstruction under international auspices can begin , guaranteeing Iraq 's territorial integrity and providing for Iraqi ownership of the process .
We should also hope that those who believe that the real choice in the Arab world lies between pro-western despotism and anti-western democracy are wrong ; hope that the regional repercussions will be benign - or , if they are damaging , that they will be contained ; hope that the current crisis will serve to galvanise the Middle East peace process after a desperately bleak period in which things have drifted backwards ; hope that those who believe that this war will strike a blow against international terrorism - rather than stoking the flames of it - are right ; and hope , finally , that those many institutions and relationships which have been tested in the fire in recent weeks , including the European Union and the common foreign and security policy , will emerge strengthened by a renewed recognition of how badly we need the apparatus of international governance .
I should like to leave the House with this last thought : the challenge that we face today , the challenge that we will face in the coming weeks and months , goes far beyond what Winston Churchill once called ' the thankless deserts of Mesopotamia ' .
We face a very clear choice in the coming months .
Are we to go back to the way the world was run , or not run , in the nineteenth century - a world of rival national sovereignties and balances of power ?
Or do we try to rebuild the institutions and habits of global governance which have been so painfully constructed in the last half-century ?
That is the clear choice which is going to face us .
I know which side of the argument I come down on .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , these are grave times .
The chronicle of a war foretold is becoming reality .
On behalf of my group , the Socialist Group , I profoundly regret the failure of the peaceful approach and I hope that there is no mass destruction of the civilian population , bringing a trail of death and destruction to a population a half of which is under fifteen years old .
The Iraqi people are suffering a twin punishment : the punishment it suffers under Saddam Hussein , and the additional punishment of an unjust war .
In the face of this extremely serious situation , we once again call on the governments of the Member States of our Union and of its future members not to participate in a unilateral pre-emptive war which is morally and legally dubious and which is contrary to the wishes of the majority of Europeans .
( Applause from the left )
Our group would like once again to call on the European Council to meet today to increase its efforts , to overcome the current division and to find a single European voice .
Our Union is a community of values governed by law and the Member States are obliged to abide by the solidarity and mutual commitments laid down in the Treaties and which lie behind the CFSP .
Our current situation is really very difficult .
The European Union is divided , the United Nations is in deadlock and we are witnessing the philosophy of the unavoidable war .
However , we must not indulge in pessimism or defeatism .
Mr Michel Rocard has rightly said that none of our governments questions that Saddam Hussein is a dangerous war criminal , who in the past has sought to acquire weapons of mass destruction by any possible means , that his word and his signature cannot inspire confidence and that the dictator must be subjected to the justice of the International Criminal Court - something which this Parliament voted for in January with the opposition of the PPE-DE .
This is something we must persevere with .
The difference between us is in the rhythm and the means .
In other words , we must be able to ask ourselves why we Europeans have become so radically divided .
And that is our responsibility .
And in this regard I share the view of the President of the Party of European Socialists , Robin Cook , who said in the House of Commons that our interests are better protected by means of multilateral agreements and by a world order governed by rules rather than by unilateral actions .
( Applause from the left )
Ladies and gentlemen , the question is not whether or not we are friends of the United States .
We are loyal partners and not servants .
( Applause from the left )
The difference at the moment is that we do not share the Bush Administration 's doctrine of pre-emptive attack .
And I do not accept that Jimmy Carter is any less American because he argues that this war is unjust .
That is absolutely absurd .
( Applause from the left )
And there is a further element , and that is that the current United States administration wishes to redraw the entire map of the Middle East , a century after the two European colonial powers - Great Britain and France - carved up the Middle East with a ruler and pen , and one only needs to look at the map .
There is no place for this in today 's world .
And what is absolutely obscene is that we are told , as we all know , that the market for the reconstruction of Iraq is already shared out - and at the head of the queue is the company which was presided over by the Vice-President of the United States until two years ago .
This is unacceptable .
Commissioner , my group will vote for humanitarian aid administered by civilians in Iraq .
With regard to reconstruction , we will have to discuss this , but it should not fall to us to pay for the damage caused by others , as is happening for example in the case of Palestine .
( Applause from the left )
This is therefore a responsibility for the Commission .
And if you will allow me : I appreciate that , following 11 September , there is fear in the United States , but a great American , a great American President , Franklin Delano Roosevelt , at the moment when he launched the United States into the noble cause of liberating Europe - with the exception of my country unfortunately - said that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself .
And therefore we cannot live in fear and terror .
We must live in a positive way .
And when we call for dialogue with other cultures , I must say to you , Mr Poettering , that dialogue with Islam - not only with the Arab people - must be based on something positive , and the great Arab poet from my country , from Cordoba , Ibn-Hamz de Córdoba , said rightly that the flower of war is infertile , and that is something we must bear very much in mind .
( Applause from the left )
Dialogue cannot begin on the basis of threats and war .
Allow me to add , in relation to what happened in the Security Council - and there are many countries which have refused to bow to pressure - that , as Robin Cook has also said , we cannot ignore the essential fact , and that is that , if we really believe in an international community based on binding rules and institutions , we cannot simply forget about them when their results do not suit us .
This is an essential point .
If we believe in the United Nations , we must support it and we must strengthen it .
We cannot unilaterally take the responsibility of saying that what has been done so far makes no sense .
If we all want peace , if we are against bloodthirsty tyrants , if we are in favour of an active policy of destroying weapons of mass destruction , we must be able , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to unite ourselves once again , and what my group respectfully asks is that you deliver this message , this demand , supported by millions of our fellow European citizens , so that the European Council speaks clearly , and so that we are capable of uniting and also of seriously relaunching the Middle East peace process - which is absolutely essential - and ensuring our future as a strong , consolidated and capable European Union in our own eyes and in the eyes of the world .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , this is not a just war .
Liberal Democrats have consistently argued in this House that war would be justified only as a last resort , if inspections had failed and if it were explicitly authorised by the UN Security Council .
We prefer the force of argument to the argument of force .
Nonetheless , much as we abhor Saddam Hussein 's regime , we deeply regret that as we breakfasted in Brussels the bombs were falling on Baghdad .
I hope , for the sake of the Iraqi people and for the sake of our troops doing their duty as professional soldiers , that this war will be as swift and as bloodless as possible .
In the absence of UN legitimacy and moral authority there is a duty on the countries prosecuting this war to do so in a way that is consistent with international norms and conventions .
That means not using disproportionate force , not using the cluster bombs that drop small mines around the place , not using the incapacitating gas such as that used in the theatre in Moscow , not using the devastating MOAB bomb where air burst and mushroom clouds caused mass destruction .
They might also take care not to litter the Iraqi desert with depleted uranium .
( Applause from the ELDR Group )
Once this war is over it will be imperative that the United States and the United Kingdom shoulder their responsibilities in rebuilding rapidly a peaceful , stable and prosperous Iraq for the inhabitants who have suffered so terribly under our sanctions regime .
This will require the lifting of sanctions and immediate humanitarian aid .
It means uniting the different communities of Iraq and the building of stable institutions to secure the future .
Beyond that , they also need to establish a criminal tribunal for the crimes of the Iraqi regime and they must give back control of the oil fields to the Iraqi people .
If those countries can bring the same conviction and determination to the solution of the Israeli-Palestine conflict and the same zeal to eliminating their own weapons of mass destruction , as they demand of the Iraqis , then we might make progress .
It is important that the US does not act unilaterally in deciding the fate of Iraq .
Once this war is over , the European Union must be a standard bearer for humanitarian values .
We must be broadminded and generous and assume fully our responsibilities in the rebuilding of Iraq .
This is not the moment to haggle with the USA over the cost of reconstruction .
Europe must play its part with no hidden agenda .
As our heads of state and government meet this weekend they must discuss how we can limit the economic fallout of the war for Europe 's economy , how the ECB can stand ready to act swiftly to restore confidence in our currency if needed , and how governments can show a renewed commitment to the reforms needed to revive Europe 's economy .
They must also discuss , and be prepared to discuss when the crisis is over , why Europe has failed over Iraq .
It could yet be that this crisis will prove a turning point if our heads of state and government finally accept the need for a common foreign policy and a single EU seat at the UN Security Council , because Europe 's troubled tribalism means that Washington wins the day .
If there is a lesson to be learned from this crisis in London , Paris , Berlin and Madrid , it is that if we had a common foreign and security policy our world view would prevail .
Mr President , as dawn broke over Baghdad this morning , the people were awoken by the awful , deafening sound of the first bombs falling on the city .
These people were the very men , women and children who some of us saw going about their daily lives , met and questioned just a few weeks ago .
We are haunted by their faces at this terrible time .
They know that 3 000 missiles will be dropped on Iraq from the first phase of the war .
They are expecting to see , or perhaps to see once again , the fierce and unrelenting attacks on their country by terrifying fleets of F15s , F16s , B1s , B2s , B52s , Awacs and Apaches .
President Bush brazenly refers to notions of honour and moral principles and appeals to God , when he has taken the most inhumane and inexcusable of decisions .
He has decided to interrupt the peaceful disarmament of Iraq in order to launch an attack on a country worn down by previous wars and by a criminal embargo , where , we have been informed , 50 % of the population is under fifteen years of age . President Bush plans to launch an attack against this country involving 600 fighter planes , 70 warships , 6 aircraft carriers , columns of tanks and 300 000 soldiers .
It is possible that some of the 600 journalists embedded in the armed forces will bring us pictures of popular rejoicing . Perhaps we will see Iraqi people welcoming their liberators with sweets and flowers .
This is what we have been promised by George W. Bush and Kanan Makiya , a prominent figure amongst pro-American Iraqi exiles .
According to the New York Times Magazine , this advisor to the President , who has lived in Cambridge since 1968 , apparently spent much of his meeting at the White House in January explaining to his distinguished host that there are two types of Muslims in Iraq : Shiites and Sunnis .
This just shows the depth of knowledge of this country and consideration of its future at the very highest level of political power in the United States !
Can it really be true that these are the people who intend to decide on peace or war , instead of the international community ?
What are they offering the Iraqi people ?
The eviction of Saddam Hussein ?
The Iraqi people will doubtless not mourn the loss of their dictator .
But then what ?
Will there be a long-term American military occupation of one of the largest and most emblematic of Arab countries ?
Who can truly believe that this would be accepted ?
Furthermore , what are they offering the rest of the world ?
Will they pursue battles with other rogue states ? This is what General Wesley Clark , the former head of NATO forces in Yugoslavia , has led us to believe .
To paraphrase his words , he said that if our ultimate aim is to put an end to the threat of terrorism , Iraq will be just one battle in a wider campaign .
Do we really know the extent of the destabilising chain reaction we are initiating in the region ?
This will pose a threat to the whole world .
A superpower with the greatest supremacy the world has ever known is openly affirming its imperialism , even if this means exacerbating divisions , increasing worldwide unrest and nurturing terrorism .
History will note that public opposition to this irresponsible policy was mobilised and expressed strongly throughout the world .
History will note that courageous people , including the leaders of the Churches , made their voices heard .
History will note that some governments dared to raise their voices in opposition and stand their ground in the face of pressure , slander and even threats .
What will we remember about the role of Europe in this historic situation ?
I must say that I have not heard any comments this morning on the fundamental issue .
Will the European Union dare to demand the immediate end of this unjust , illegal and dangerous war ?
What will it have to say about the fate of the Iraqi people , ?
( Applause from the left )
... including Kurdish and Iranian refugees who may be threatened by this war ?
Whether or not there is unanimity between all the Member States , there are stakes that Europe can and must win , whatever the circumstances .
What is at stake is the fundamental basis of the international system , in place since 1945 , and the law it embodies in the eyes of all democracies .
Europe must therefore express its view on the new strategic doctrine of the Bush administration , which exalts military force , justifies a unilateralist approach and legitimises pre-emptive war .
The European Union must strongly oppose the very grave precedent set by the American Secretary for Defence in failing to rule out the use of tactical nuclear weapons or nerve gas against Iraq .
The European Union must also unequivocally condemn the irresponsible decision , taken unilaterally by a group of countries , including two Member States , to start a war without the approval of the UN Security Council , and against the will of the overwhelming majority of its members .
The European Union must commit itself in a much more proactive way to restarting the Middle East peace process , to find a just and lasting solution to the Palestinian problem .
Now , in allowing the war against Iraq to go ahead , we are allowing the situation in the Middle East to deteriorate to the lowest possible level .
The President of the Arab League has warned that we are opening the gates of hell .
Parliament is the only European institution to have made its stance on this war clear .
( Applause from the left )
I would like to remind you of the terms of the resolution we adopted on 30 January this year . Parliament reaffirmed its commitment to peace and the rule of international law .
We voiced our full support for the work of Dr Hans Blix and Mr ElBaradei .
We expressed the opinion that the violations of resolution 1441 thus far identified by the inspectors did not justify military action . We voiced our opposition to any unilateral military action .
We expressed our view that any pre-emptive attack would contravene both international law and the Charter of the United Nations . We stated that such action would result in an even greater crisis involving other countries in the region .
This , at least , will provide our President with the basis of a clear , explicit and strong intervention to make at the European Council today .
But even then , we shall not have heard the last of this .
In light of the extremely serious situation developing before our very eyes , which may seriously deteriorate , we must assume our responsibilities and turn the tide of war .
Old Europe must prove itself capable of setting out a vision of a new world .
We must listen to the urgent pleas of our fellow citizens .
This is what they expect of us .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking you for holding this debate , this extraordinary sitting .
A similar sitting was held at the start of the first Gulf War .
Mr President , Mr Bush 's declaration of war is illegal . The British Government is just splitting hairs in its pathetic attempts to justify military attack .
The United Nations has not failed .
It has represented the view of world public opinion correctly .
The existing procedures , with all their limitations , would have been more than sufficient to prevent the outbreak of war , to ensure the continuation of the inspections , and we are convinced that they would have brought about the disarmament of Saddam Hussein and - why not - his trial by an international court too , if only the United States and the United Kingdom had abided by the rules ,
if only the other US vassal States , especially the current and future Members of the Union , had given the law precedence over gratitude towards the United States , which is understandable but belongs to a bygone age and was owed , in particular , to a much higher calibre administration than that currently in power .
The future heralded by tonight 's attack is a future of war .
We are all wondering who is next on the list in President Bush 's electioneering programme , for his list has nothing to do with the violation of international law or Security Council resolutions .
In 35 years , at least 106 resolutions have been violated : 31 by Israel , 23 by Turkey , 18 by Morocco , 16 by Iraq and so on .
This completely arbitrary action , the lack of credibility of President Bush 's speeches on democracy and the law now leave us bewildered and require us to act .
We are not Americans , we are Europeans , and today we must face up to the fact that a mockery has been made not just of international law but of European law too .
We believe that all the provisions of the Treaty have equal status and must be respected , including Article 19 , which compels the European members of the Security Council to uphold the positions and interests of the Union . This they have clearly failed to do .
( Applause )
We would like the Commission , the guardian of the Treaties , and Parliament to say so loud and clear .
The European Union , Commissioner Patten , cannot be reduced to a humanitarian agency ,
( Applause )
and Parliament cannot be reduced to a humanitarian agency advisory board .
We consider that the United Kingdom and Spain 's support of an attack to which even their own public are opposed is rash , illegal and incomprehensible .
( Applause )
We feel that the inconsistent behaviour of the Italian Government , which is to hold the next Presidency of the Union , of which it is a founder Member , has added to the prevailing confusion , but we also feel that France and Germany have also violated Article 19 in failing to seek agreement with the 15 Member States or with the Greek Presidency , which has been attempting to establish a role worthy of that name for the European Union right from the beginning .
We refuse to accept the choice now forced upon us by this situation : a choice between a position that is right but wholly ineffective , like the position of France and Germany , which failed to prevent war , and a position that is wrong , like that of the United Kingdom and Spain , which bewilders the people , facilitates war and paves the way for further wars .
If the European Union had had a permanent seat in the United Nations , if it had been compelled by shared institutions and binding rules to adopt a unified position right from the start , we dare to believe even now that war would not have started last night .
This is the challenge before us , before the Convention , although it does not always appear to be aware of the fact .
There are , however , more urgent , pressing signals we must send out , and the first concerns the Middle East .
Irrespective of the belated announcement on the roadmap , we do not believe that the Bush administration genuinely intends to bring about peace in the Middle East , to bring Israel 's military operations to an end .
It will clearly be up to the European Union to make sure that the road map is genuinely implemented .
Mr President , we are expecting an initiative in this regard .
The second message concerns ourselves .
It would be a serious , very serious mistake to postpone the Euro-Mediterranean Forum due to take place in Crete at the end of the month .
That would be another unnecessary sign of impotence , which we really cannot afford at this time .
( Applause )
Presidents , ladies and gentlemen , this morning I feel both sad and uneasy .
I feel sad because , as previous speakers have already said , war is always a sign of failure and because , unfortunately , what is happening is bound to fill us with sadness and also leave us dissatisfied .
I feel somewhat uneasy , however , because I actually believe that we have all been to some extent taken for a ride .
For weeks and for months , we were concerned with making the efforts necessary to achieve the disarmament of Iraq by peaceful means , whereas in reality , the United States ' decision for military intervention had , in my opinion , been taken quite a while ago .
To be persuaded of this , one only has to read the report issued by the James Baker Institute last December , which laid out what the principles of US policy towards Iraq should be following the war .
I therefore believe that the decision to use force was taken several months ago .
We were encouraged to discuss disarmament by peaceful means and this gave the United States the time to muster its forces .
Having said that , the question we are facing , as Commissioner Patten said a short while ago , is not whether we in Europe want to be with the Americans or against them ; whether or not we want to get on with the Americans .
The issue is much simpler than that : do you want , do we want , a Europe that is independent of the United States ?
If the answer is ' yes ' , then this question must be put to the people , and we have clearly seen , in recent days , that the people wish to make their voice heard and to give their answer .
It is the people alone who will allow us to move ahead with the construction of an independent Europe , in other words a Europe that is not an adversary of the United States , but its partner on an equal footing .
We are told today that Iraq is dividing the European Union .
This is not true , ladies and gentlemen !
The Iraqi affair is merely revealing the true picture .
The European Union is deeply divided .
Some European States will always give the alliance with the United States priority over the construction of an independent Europe .
That is the reality of the situation .
It is because we and our governments have never had the courage to hold a debate on this subject that we have seen the spectacle with which we are all familiar .
This is the fault neither of France nor of Germany .
It is the fault of all the leaders of the countries of the European Union over the last forty years , who have never got to the bottom of the problem .
We shall have to resolve to do this .
If , however , we wish to see an independent Europe , we must also realise that this will come at a price .
We cannot want Europe to be independent and at the same time depend fully on the United States for its security , because it is the US that has to bear the brunt of mounting military operations in the event of serious problems .
If the European Union wishes to exist , it must be given the means to do so .
This is how things are ; this is the reality of the situation !
Everything else is incidental .
It is all well and good to hold meeting after meeting , and for the European Union to see itself as some kind of super-NGO , but given its history , its ambitions should be somewhat different .
Mr President , like most groups , the EDD Group is divided .
Some of us consider war inevitable , some of us do not .
Our common task is to limit it as much as possible and warn neighbouring states not to interfere .
Let us pray that this war will end as soon as possible to avoid more innocent people becoming victims .
Let us then draw lessons from this and look forward to a lasting peace in the whole region , including peace between Israel and Palestine .
The Member States of the EU can help with aid for development , and the opening-up of our markets should bring prosperity to the region .
That approach may be the only means of avoiding an escalation of terrorism .
The lesson to be drawn is that we all support the United Nations and are willing to reform it to ensure that our common peace-keeping institution is capable of keeping the peace .
Kofi Annan wants a rapid reaction force to intervene for peace .
Why do we not go for that instead of making a common EU military force ?
In conclusion , it is clear that a common foreign and security policy decided by qualified majority is not a solution .
In the European Council there is no qualified majority amongst those supporting the war , neither is there a qualified majority amongst those opposing it .
The group of five has a blocking minority , and the group of 10 has a blocking minority .
A common foreign policy following new rules on qualified majority would be a basket with nothing in it .
The only realistic approach is for the EU to continue the consensus and leave questions of war and peace to the United Nations .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , for ten years you have done nothing to prepare for a situation post - Saddam Hussein , to establish the protection of life and law in Iraq and the Middle East , and now , thanks to you , here we are discussing what to do after the war .
The war is a present to us from law-abiding Europe , your Europe .
Allow me to say that we non-violent , Ghandian protesters will fight from this moment onwards to ensure that war and other measures employed do not continue for one minute after Baghdad has been disarmed , not one minute !
Will we have the strength ?
We are not going to shout ' Peace ! ' and then murder it as we did 70 years ago .
You say we are acting unlawfully ?
As unlawfully as de Gaulle .
You are as law-abiding as Vichy !
We are acting as unlawfully as the Iraqi resistance , as unlawfully as the European resistance .
We tell you now that we are going to throw ourselves into battle without delay and fight for peace founded on freedom and the rule of law .
Cowardly Europe , Vichy 's Europe !
It is not the Europe of those who suffered fighting fascism , the Europe of Altiero Spinelli , the Europe of Ernesto Rossi , the Europe of those who genuinely gave us the right to look the heirs of Lafayette in the eye too , which you are failing to do with your outdated fascist , communist , papist contempt for the world of international liberal and religious reform !
Mr President , the thoughts and prayers of my British Conservative colleagues today are with the men and women of my country 's armed forces on whom has fallen the heavy and dangerous responsibility of disarming Saddam Hussein of his weapons of mass destruction .
The international community has long recognised the threat that Saddam poses for the security of our world , but our institutions have sadly failed to implement its decisions and bring about Iraqi disarmament as the UN has demanded in 17 resolutions .
I have to say that , listening to this debate , I quite wonder whether some people ever intended that these resolutions should be implemented .
Today is not a day , however , to argue our differences over the reasons for this .
As the Commissioner has said , there are lessons which the UN , NATO and Europe will have to learn for the future .
That includes the practical reality of reaching a full European consensus when there clearly is division - there is even division in this debate .
It is because our first responsibility is for the defence and security of our people and the preservation of our democratic values - the very values which defend the freedom to participate in demonstrations such as those we have seen throughout Europe in recent days - that my party has given its clear support to the British Government and helped the Prime Minister , Tony Blair , to secure a major and decisive vote of confidence in our Parliament last Tuesday evening .
Now that the war has started , the eyes of the world have clearly moved elsewhere , but I welcome the publication of the road map to peace in the Middle East and believe it should not be treated in the cynical way in which it has been referred to in this debate today .
If we are committed to peace in the Middle East we should all welcome that announcement .
I also welcome the recognition of the role of the UN in post-war reconstruction in Iraq .
I am very encouraged by what Commissioner Patten had to say today about reconstruction after what I thought was a rather different message last week .
There is no doubt that we enjoy peace , democracy and freedom of expression because European history has told us that the last generation , including the United States led by Roosevelt , fought to preserve these freedoms .
Failure to confront Hussein now would create dangers to those freedoms in the future .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , the unilateral attack by the United States demonstrates once again that the United Nations has not been a valid instrument .
The European Union has also demonstrated that the common foreign policy has not been common .
Perhaps we should remember 30 August 1954 when a European Union of defence became impossible .
I regret the letter of the eight members .
I also regret that the Spanish Government has expended more energy justifying the use of arms than seeking diplomatic solutions to the conflict .
I am glad that the Catalonian Parliament has adopted a resolution in which it asked the Spanish Government to support the role of the Security Council so that the work of the inspectors may continue , so that the use of force outside the context of the United Nations may be rejected , and I am glad that the demonstrations in the streets , in the city of Barcelona and in other main cities in Catalonia , have demonstrated that our country is against war and in agreement with its Parliament .
Mr President , war has begun and we have had the first ten Iraqi deaths in Baghdad .
These are facts .
From now on weapons will be doing the talking and words will become weapons ; they are no longer reliable .
Let us look at the facts and the real agenda that is being employed will become clear .
What must our agenda be ?
Our peoples are deeply disillusioned , Mr President-in-Office , because Europe with its powerful institutions has been unable to avoid this war .
Our European politicians will have to answer to their people for their impotence .
Our European politicians will have to find solutions if they are to provide a real answer for this in the future .
Secondly : war kills , and in particular innocent citizens , women and children .
We in the European Union must try to relieve the misery and ease the suffering .
War destroys and , as Mr van den Berg has said , we shall therefore have to build an international framework for reconstruction .
Thirdly : people know where the war begins , but no one knows where it may end .
The Kurds in Northern Iraq fear the loss of what little freedom and autonomy they have built up so painstakingly and at the cost of so many lives .
They again fear finding themselves between the hammer and the anvil .
Will the Kurds be sacrificed to do Ankara a favour ?
The Turkish Kurds are fearful of being militarily overwhelmed .
The Kurds in Northern Iraq fear permanent occupation .
The Iranian opposition fears that the mullahs will take the opportunity to destroy them .
Will the European Union see the opposition in Iraq being completely sidelined ?
In the Middle East the frustrations will flare up higher than ever .
Only a solution with a Palestinian state , which is clearly coming , can bring these frustrations to an end .
Mr President , with the United Nations ruled out of the game , with NATO rendered powerless , and with the European Union coming unravelled , the revelation of the day , ladies and gentlemen , is not war , or to be more precise the international ' rat hunt ' , which it is claimed began tonight , although this claim is wrong because Iraq has been bombed every day for the last twelve years by the empire - or rather by the empire and its flunkeys .
Nor is the revelation of the day the folly of the empire , this American empire to which we Europeans , like cowards , have been handing the keys to the world for years , whilst remaining fascinated , despite their shift towards totalitarianism , by their culture , their images and their language .
No , the novelty of the day is that the age-old dream of multilateralism and collective security , which inspired the entire twentieth century , has been shattered .
Like the League of Nations once did , the UN is crumbling into insignificance .
The international community is nothing but a hollow formula for supporting the empire and its Anglo-Saxon flunkeys .
All that remains are States and only France , assisted by Belgium and Germany , remains to save Europe 's honour .
Consequently , in this slightly ridiculous debate , there is only one thing to say : ' The European Union is dead !
Long live the sovereignty of the world 's nations !
Long live the Iraqi nation !
And long live France ! '
Presidents , so nothing has been able to deter the American Government and its British and Spanish accomplices from unleashing a pre-emptive war against Iraq , on the pretext - which everyone knows to be false - that Iraq poses an imminent threat to the United States and even to the whole world .
In fact , as Mr Coûteaux has said , the United States has already , since the end of the Gulf war , been undertaking military operations , especially from the air , against Iraqi targets , causing losses to the civilian population , and has done so in peace time .
At the same time , the US is guilty , through having imposed a brutal embargo , of a genuine genocide which , according to the UN itself , has caused the death of more than one million Iraqi children .
The intention , which is today being cynically declared in the first few hours of the conflict , of assassinating Iraq 's political leaders , represents a new stage in the descent into barbarity .
From now on the leaders of the coalition can be neither indignant nor astonished when they become the prime targets of terrorist reprisals .
This crisis has proved the senselessness of the European Union , torn apart by the opposing positions of its members , and has also proved that with average-sized powers and unable to become a major power , it is possible to create an organisation with no power at all .
Those in our countries who are striving for peace should call , as was done at the time of the Korean War , for an extraordinary session of the United Nations General Assembly to be held .
Perhaps the only thing that could be done there is talk , but that will at least be doing something to achieve peace .
Mr President , we all regret Europe 's failure in this crisis and the fact that the existing instruments for coordinating our foreign policy have shown themselves to be ineffective .
There is no question that our group wishes the European Union to have an autonomous position in the world based on the defence of legitimate interests , but also on values such as democracy , respect for human rights and freedom , in other words , everything that the regime of Saddam Hussein has destroyed in his own country and everything we share with the United States .
And therefore my group advocates strengthening the transatlantic link which has united us at other times in our history , which have also been difficult , as the President of the Catalonian Government has said .
Despite the obvious differences within the European Union , there are certain things which I believe , now more than ever , we are obliged to do together .
We must increase our efforts to contribute to the search for peace in the Middle East , and to eliminate the points of tension in the Maghreb and , of course , provide humanitarian aid during the conflict and then assist in the human , political and economic reconstruction of the country afterwards , as the Presidency of the Union has pointed out .
I would ask the European Commission to reflect on whether it was hasty in some of the statements it made in this regard .
At times like this it is easier to look the other way , it is easier to hide behind a banner than to confront tyranny .
Sometimes it is more profitable as well .
What we must do is respect the opinions of others .
However , experience has taught us , Mr President , that force is the only response to oppression , and we are only servants of our democratic convictions .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , if we had to choose between US democracy and Iraqi dictatorship , the choice would be easy .
If we had to choose between the transatlantic alliance and the dictators , the choice would be easy .
As it is , we have to choose between Kofi Annan and George Bush , we have to choose between Prime Minister Simitis and President Prodi , who are the leaders of the Union , and Tony Blair and José Maria Aznar .
Kofi Annan represents the law , Bush does not .
Prime Minister Simitis and President Prodi represent the Union , the others do not .
In whose name did George Bush deliver the ultimatum to Saddam Hussein ?
In whose name did Tony Blair and José Maria Aznar disregard the document signed at the European Council on 17 February ?
We had scheduled the Euro-Mediterranean Forum for next week in Greece , Mr President , as you know , to discuss peace , social progress and peaceful coexistence .
Many members of the parliaments of Arab and European Union countries are asking how they can discuss the forthcoming Euro-Mediterranean parliamentary assembly when bombs are falling on Baghdad , when Kofi Annan , the law and the UN have been brutally sidelined by George Bush 's arrogance , when we are at the start of a war that is unilateral , pre-emptive , unjust , illegal and , as has been said , immoral and criminal .
Even if the dictator falls soon , the arrogant nature of this action will remain . In 1991 , there was the UN .
In 1995 and 1998 , the UN , NATO and the European Union were unanimous . In 2001 the entire world supported George Bush and the United States in the fight against terrorism .
The President of the United States has wasted a huge amount of political and moral capital , he has dealt a blow to the UN , he has divided the European Union , he has widened the Atlantic and he has made relations with the Arab world more difficult .
A great deal of damage has been done .
In effect , Mr President , war broke out on 17 September 2002 , when the new strategy of the Bush approach was announced to the world .
There was a country , the United States , which had great power , which grew out of the war to free Europe , Africa and Asia from fascism , out of the fight against communism during the Cold War , and now this power is in danger of becoming domination based on the use of force .
The United States has thus discarded its historical role and , this being the case , it could be the start of a serious crisis , a crisis which , as Norman Mailer said , could affect democracy within the United States , and if it affects democracy within the United States it could also affect democracy in Europe too , and our freedom could be under threat as well .
Therefore , President Cox , Mr Papandreou , tell the Council clearly , make it quite clear to the Council today and tomorrow that Europe has lost with George Bush 's war .
We have lost .
Even if the dictator falls , I must stress , we have lost .
The Europeans who are true friends of the Americans , of the citizens of the United States , cannot support George Bush .
After the Second World War , we decided that never again would there be an Auschwitz , never again would there be a war .
We must build this new Europe and give it a new Constitution which retains these two pillars : never again an Auschwitz , never again war .
( Applause )
Mr President , despite the errors , the culpability and the geopolitical inconsistency of the US policy , Europe must not lose its capacity for farsightedness or fail to realise the severity of the threat posed to us by Baghdad .
Have we forgotten September 11 already ?
European foreign policy , if there is such a thing , cannot be reduced to the fine , ineffective action of narrow-minded pacifists , who have never genuinely condemned Saddam Hussein or the use of weapons of mass destruction in their demonstrations .
Even today , we have heard honeyed words spoken to the Arab world .
I ask you : have you seen or heard Arab television ?
It proclaims loud and clear what the crowds of Arabs , including the immigrants living in our cities , want to hear .
Yet when Saddam Hussein draws the menacing sword of Islam and proclaims Jihad , it is we Europeans who will be his direct , closest target .
May God prevent a disaster in London , Milan or Brussels such as that caused by Arab fanaticism on September 11 in Manhattan .
May God protect young Europe and the young Europeans who , I am afraid , will be fighting in the front line or , like our fine Alpine troops , working for peace in Afghanistan .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , every war is a moral defeat for politics , and , in this instance , war is also an expression of Europe 's weakness .
The good news associated with this is that this war will mean the end of Saddam Hussein , who has so many people on his conscience and who would wreak even more havoc .
Even so , many of the public have doubts when considering whether this good objective justifies the sacrifices involved .
Let us just consider the problems related to the region 's stability , the issue of the legitimacy of a war started by unilateral actions , and the consequences for the United Nations .
My own doubts about this have not been dispelled , either .
We now have to be prompt in providing aid for the people in the aftermath of war and for the purpose of stabilising the region .
This is where we Europeans have to make the effort , and we have to get the quartet down to work with a view to resolving the problems in the Middle East .
Especially , though , we have to do our own homework .
None of Europe 's governments appear to be coming out of the present situation in a particularly good light , and we should recognise that it is only together that we have a part to play in matters of war and peace , that the Convention must therefore come to a successful conclusion , and that foreign policy , too , must be founded on decisions by a qualified majority , in order that Europe may soon speak with one voice .
This must also be the basis on which we again strengthen our transatlantic ties , which bind us to the great democracy on the other side of the ocean , but these must be founded upon our own strength , on which any partnership must be dependent .
Then , I believe , the democracies on both sides of the ocean will be able to make it their concern to establish a just world order , for no world order can be established by violence .
Other ways and means must be found to create this world order , and this is something we must achieve together .
Mr President , having won less than a quarter of the electorate 's vote , George W. Bush is the least well-supported president in US history .
Although he is in power , he does not represent the American people , to whom Europe owes a great deal and with whom we share so many values .
It is precisely these values that Bush is scorning , with his warmongering cronies and his disregard for Europe .
The primary victims of this war are the pre-eminence of international law , the necessary respect for all human life and the need to work towards a fairer , more peaceful world , which imposes the essential requirement that force be used only as a last resort .
Bush wanted this war .
His target is indisputably an unacceptable regime , but there are other dictatorships that also deserve to be eradicated .
The universal reign of democracy and human rights , however , will not be established through the use of weapons and cultural violation .
President Bush will certainly succeed in bringing down Saddam Hussein 's regime by military force .
It will , however , be at the cost of many innocent victims and significant collateral damage in Iraq and the surrounding area .
Those , like the stock markets , who are expecting a short , clean , clinical war should recall why Bush Senior , who did have the backing of the international community , did not at the time take military action to the point of overthrowing the Baghdad regime .
In fact , Bush Senior knew that he would get bogged down in a quagmire , that the fall of Saddam Hussein would lead to ethnic and religious confrontations that could not be managed from outside .
The risk of an extremely costly , prolonged conflict is clear .
Such conflict would be punctuated with terrorist incidents and suicide attacks , leading to further division and a consequent spiral of violence in the region and beyond .
The economic cost as well as the human cost could exceed the intrinsic cost of the war , which is estimated at USD 100 billion .
The world economy has been experiencing a minor recession for the past three years .
The financial markets have seen stock losses exceeding a trillion dollars .
Banks , insurance companies and pension funds have been weakened .
International trade has slowed down .
Civil aviation , tourism and other economic sectors will suffer on account of the climate of insecurity and the speculative explosion in the price of certain raw materials , particularly oil .
If consumers in the United States and Europe were to lose confidence , internal demand would collapse and lead the global economy into a prolonged recession .
Not only will the weapons conflict cause desolation and ruin in Iraq , it will also affect the social and human condition of hundreds of millions of men and women all over the world .
Mr President , history will look harshly upon those who have chosen military action over a promising diplomatic process supported by the United Nations .
Mr President , I refuse to be considered to be Saddam Hussein 's friend - for he is and will always be a criminal - just because I am in favour of peace .
I am opposed to this war because it is taking place outside the context of the UN , and if we reject the grace of God there remain only the law of the jungle and the law of the strongest ; there remain only moral , legal and political illegitimacy .
In this context , the decision of certain governments to allow US troops to use their airbases and air space , as even the renegade Italian Government has done , is in contrast with the general principles of international law enshrined in the United Nations Charter .
Therefore , I and my party - l 'Italia dei valori - which immediately opposed this conflict vehemently , are now taking a stand against the wily tricks of the governments which claim not to be warmongers but which are helping those who are warmongers : a role which is usually reserved for those abetting criminal acts .
Hitherto , these governments have assured us that they would respect the will of the UN , but now that the UN has refused to authorise the attack they have already broken their promise .
Clearly , Mr President , they were thinking , as they are thinking now , about the future distribution of the spoils of war and they hope , like all puppies begging at their master 's table , that some crumbs will fall from the United States ' table .
Mr President , we see how , after months and years of negotiation , diplomacy has failed to disarm the Iraqi regime peacefully .
However , given the regime 's nature , that laudable objective was , no doubt , impossible to achieve , Saddam Hussein having an inordinate tendency to interpret any desire for peace as evidence of the weakness of those with whom he is dealing .
There are thus many things that we might find regrettable about the approach that has been adopted .
First among them would no doubt have to be the way in which the European Union itself approved the intervention in Kosovo in 1999 .
That created a precedent , for the operation was carried out without reference to the UN , even more so than the current intervention in Iraq , which can at least invoke Resolution 1441 .
Today , however , we must draw a line under our regrets .
Let us not allow ourselves to be led astray .
Primary responsibility for the present situation rests with the loathsome regime of Saddam Hussein , who , as past events have demonstrated many times over , brings the scourge of war in his train much as clouds presage storms .
Now , we must do everything possible to safeguard both the Iraqi civilian population and the future of an Iraq liberated from tyranny .
With this in mind , Mr President , the European Council meeting this afternoon would do well to recall these objectives and unite around them .
Mr President , in today 's debate I believe we are faced with a double frustration .
Firstly , the frustration that peace has regrettably not been possible .
And I would like to say that peace is not the exclusive domain of any political group , of any Member of this Parliament , or of any government .
Peace is a universal value which is expressed and lived by an individual according to the ethical conscience of that individual .
There is also frustration , Mr President , at the insufficient role played by the European Union in this conflict .
But we can confront this fact in two possible ways : by means of a simplistic , fruitless and internecine debate , criticising ourselves for the insufficiencies and irrelevancies of our presence or , as the President-in-Office of the Council said , by drawing conclusions that will prevent us from repeating the same mistakes in the future .
And it is clear that , in view of our lack of capacity , Mr President , there is currently no alternative in the field of defence and security to the Euro-Atlantic alliance , whether we like it or not .
Furthermore , Mr President , as has been said here this morning , the problem of the Iraqi crisis does not lie in Washington , in London , in Madrid , in Paris or in Berlin : the problem is in Baghdad and is called Saddam Hussein .
Mr President , we must mobilise all our resources .
We must turn need into a virtue and try to turn the discord of the present into harmony in the future .
A future , Mr President , which nobody is going to hand us on a plate , a future which we must fight for and in which we can exert an influence for better or for worse .
And in order to make a success of that future we have two alternatives , Mr President : we either realise our greatest dreams of a united Europe , a Europe of unity in diversity which speaks with a single voice , or we will have to learn to live with our worst frustrations .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , this war was a foregone conclusion .
Popular protest was ignored and UN backing dispensed with .
Question one : where to now ?
Where is the world going and where do we stand , as representatives of the people and as responsible men and women , simply responsible men and women , witnessing these highly dangerous developments ?
Question two : if this dangerous turn of events is merely , I repeat merely , met by our wishes and / or intervention for this war to end as quickly as possible , what next ?
What other foregone conclusions will be applied using the same modus operandi , with us again hoping they will end quickly ?
President Bush maintains that he is fighting the dictator and the dictatorship , which he compares with the democracy which he and all of us serve .
Question three : is our democracy so superior that we have to despise the reactions of people all over the world , trample all over international law and dismiss the contempt shown for the UN and its Security Council ?
Is this the difference between democracy and dictatorship ?
Is this the difference between dictators and democrats ?
Question four : this old Europe , as Mr Rumsfeld so disparagingly calls it , is making a huge effort to demonstrate that , with peace , democracy and solidarity , it can move forward and set the world an example in how to resolve international differences peacefully .
Are we going to allow plans or foregone conclusions about its divisions or weakening unity to be imposed on us on the long hard road towards reconstructing our future by being tolerant and relaxing our reactions ?
I have posed four questions which bring me to a very simple conclusion . Forceful reaction to friends and allies dragging the world to ruin on the grounds of the misunderstood interests of a superpower which has lost the plot and asks no more than that we should bungle along with it !
We too have responsibilities for this world , rooted in the democracy we serve and defend .
Down with war !
Long live peace between nations !
Mr President , I am afraid that all endeavours to bring the Iraqi crisis to an end without using force have failed .
Thus , an intervention is being carried out which , I would point out , is based on at least three United Nations resolutions : 1441 , 678 and 686 .
I share Mr Poettering 's opinion on Saddam Hussein : it is he who is responsible for the current events .
He could have avoided armed conflict by putting an end to his bloody dictatorship , as was suggested to him until yesterday afternoon not just by many Members of Parliament but by the Government of Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries too .
We cannot compare President Bush to Saddam Hussein .
We cannot compare the President of the largest Western democracy to a bloodthirsty criminal autocrat who has annihilated all trace of democracy in Iraq and is the only dictator to have used weapons of mass destruction .
I am afraid that Europe has shown itself to be divided on this matter .
It is our immediate duty to seek to restore unity to the Union .
Today 's European Council , Mr Papandreou , can be the start of a new endeavour to give Europe a single foreign policy and a single defence policy .
We can take practical steps to reinvigorate the European action , Commissioner Patten , once the Iraq conflict is over .
The Union , together with the United Nations , must take the lead in building the new Iraqi democracy .
It will thus have a major role to play which involves , not least , taking powerful , coherent measures to combat terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
However , this politically strong Europe will have to be an interlocutor on an equal footing with the United States , another major leader in international politics , although we cannot , as President Prodi said , hope to build the Europe of tomorrow from a position of opposition to the United States .
Moreover , a number of criticisms have been made of the Italian Government which do not deserve a reply , for they are unfounded and were coarsely expressed in the manner of those who always give partisan interests precedence over national and European interests .
Mr President , it has to be noted that there is no legal justification for the decision by the United States to resort to immediate war , as the desired objectives could have been achieved by other means .
The inspections produced evident results and , as Mr Blix himself said , opened the way to genuine disarmament by Iraq without the need to engage in armed conflict .
President Jacques Chirac and French diplomats have not ceased their unequivocal condemnation of Saddam Hussein 's regime .
Moreover , they have constantly expressed the concern that Security Council resolution 1441 should be given its full meaning , repeatedly proposing that the inspectors be given further material or legal resources .
The position maintained by France is shared by a large section of the international community , and in the Security Council , the sole legal body authorised to legitimise the use of force on an international scale , there has never been a majority sufficient to authorise an early recourse to war .
I am horrified by the thought of the consequences of such a war in terms of human lives , both those of the Iraqi civilian population , which has already suffered particularly greatly , and of the British and US armed forces .
In the event of a chemical or biological attack , France will give them every support in the form of humanitarian aid .
A conflict such as this , however , jeopardises the efforts made over 50 years to build a world founded upon law and collective security .
This conflict both greatly endangers the political stability of the Middle East as a whole and creates the risk that terrorism will again inflict devastation on a global scale .
All we can do is hope that it will come to an end as quickly as possible .
On this sad day , I am extremely proud to be French , for my country has been unstinting in its efforts to attempt to avert this futile war .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the time for illusions is past , and now we must face reality .
Saddam Hussein 's criminal regime must be disarmed .
That is what most of us in the House want , and to that the United Nations has committed itself in almost innumerable resolutions of its Security Council .
Most of the indications are that it would not have been possible to disarm Saddam Hussein without the use of military means , whether another four , eight or twelve months had been spent attempting it .
What matters now , therefore , is this war be brought to a speedy conclusion , sparing , if at all possible , those not actively involved in it .
My sympathies today are with the soldiers who must come through this war , as well as with their families and with those who will be the victims and will have suffering to endure .
I believe that one of the illusions that we must cast off is the role of the European Union .
The part it has played in this crisis has been a lamentable one , for it has been divided and lacking any capacity for action and or any influence on the objectives it purportedly seeks to achieve .
That is not the least reason why the European Union must , in the post-war period , undertake to make a substantial contribution towards enabling the people of Iraq to establish a state and a social order that are of their own choice and that is prepared to live at peace with the world .
It is obvious , though , that the Europeans have failed .
When will Europeans at last learn that the world will listen to them only when they speak with one voice ?
Mr President , this morning , then , the war began that must lead to genuine disarmament in Iraq and that is designed to put an end to the reign of terror that has been conducted there by Saddam Hussein over many years .
It is deeply regrettable that the United Nations Security Council has not been able to bring about such disarmament despite 17 resolutions since 1991 and the many teams , with hundreds of inspectors , that have been in Iraq since then .
Saddam Hussein has already waged three wars : against Iran , against Kuwait , and against the Kurds , using chemical weapons in his own country .
These wars led to millions of deaths and produced millions of refugees , 50 000 of whom live in the Netherlands .
Meanwhile , there are strong indications that these chemical and biological weapons have also been placed in the hands of terrorist organisations .
What those groups are capable of , we saw on 11 September in New York .
That is why , politically , I support this action and why I also wish to express my loyalty towards the many soldiers , from Europe too , who have to complete this difficult task .
I was still a child when American , Canadian , British and Polish soldiers risked their lives in order to liberate Europe and my own country in 1945 .
Since then , I have often wondered how many millions of lives could have been saved if we had intervened as early as in the 1930s .
That is how I see this action now , as an action designed to prevent much greater disasters in the future .
I wish to express my sympathy for the Iraqi population which has already suffered so much but for whom there is now perhaps a light at the end of a long tunnel .
Finally , there will be a very great need , once this war is over , for the healing of wounds .
Iraq will need a very great deal of help .
EU Member States will have to reflect upon their behaviour during the last week in the Security Council .
We shall have to reach out to those in the Arab world , for this war is not directed against them but against the evil in Iraq that must be stopped before it is too late .
That is what this conflict is about and that is why , politically , I want , in common with the Dutch Government , to support those countries which last night began this action to disarm Iraq .
Mr President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , the summit is due to meet tonight . It will discuss exactly what we have discussed here this morning .
Your president , Mr Pat Cox , will have the opportunity to address the meeting on behalf of the European Parliament and we await his comments with interest .
I can , however , assure you that the Greek Presidency will pass on the views expressed in this Chamber , this Chamber of democracy , where European public opinion is represented , to this evening 's meeting .
Here too the perceptions have differed .
This is a strength , not a weakness .
It is the basic principle of democracy .
Our wager , our challenge is to find the synthesis from this democratic thesis and antithesis , the common will to move forward .
The presidency also assures you that it will do its job to help achieve this aspiration and reach this synthesis .
We know , as do the Fifteen , that we always have a responsibility to approach and achieve this common will .
Numerous members of the European Parliament spoke of the need to heed the voice of the citizens of Europe and their unity and common will .
Perhaps , as we discuss the future of Europe , we should consider how to empower this voice , the citizen 's voice , in our institutions and decisions and how to ensure our citizens are more seriously involved in the overall process .
Nonetheless , numerous common messages emerged from these different perceptions .
Of course , the first was acute disappointment at the failure of diplomatic efforts .
The second was the need for our humanitarian presence .
Commissioner Chris Patten spoke about this .
And regardless of one 's stand on the war , it is , I think , morally and politically correct to say that the European Union will not turn its back on any humanitarian problems which this conflict may cause .
We have to turn our attention to the Iraqi people .
Hunger , refugees , the cold , possible problems in northern Iraq , vulnerable groups , displaced persons , these are all problems waiting to happen .
I should like to emphasise that we already enjoy excellent cooperation with the Commission and Chris Patten on these issues and , as he quite rightly said , the European Union can be proud of its record here .
Even if we have aspirations to be a more important piece on the international chessboard , we should be proud of the important humanitarian work carried out by the European Union in all four corners of the world , wherever it is needed .
Thirdly , numerous references were made to reconstruction .
This word is a word which many Member States have been loath to use or discuss , either because , first , the war has barely started and , secondly , because they are understandably reticent about calling on the European Union to pay for the damage when the party is over , especially when , in this particular war at least , the Union did not approve .
But here again we have an important responsibility .
First of all , a responsibility for the fact that we want any developments in the region , and in Iraq in particular , to be directed centrally , to be directed by the UN , and if we are involved in reconstruction we can insist that the European Union will only make a substantial contribution if the United Nations is involved and directs the process , whatever that process may be .
Consequently , we have a responsibility to ensure that the UN has the lead role and then , of course , we also have a serious responsibility to play our part in the reconstruction process , whatever that process may be , as and when the fighting stops .
We also have a serious responsibility , as many of you pointed out , towards neighbouring countries .
We are in contact with them and I think that here too , especially as regards the candidate country , Turkey , that it needs our help , especially as it progresses towards accession , and that it is bound to be affected one way or another by the crisis in Iraq .
In the Arab world , several Members pointed out that dialogue here is difficult at the moment .
I would say the opposite is true , because the European Union has authority in the Arab world .
The initiatives the European Union is taking , our constant understanding with them , have shown that there is no cultural divide .
Even the citizens shouting for peace in our streets have proven that .
The invitation extended to the presidency of the European Union by the leaders of the Arab world to visit Sharm el Sheik was not a happy coincidence .
I also welcome the initiatives taken by the European Parliament to arrange meetings with parliamentarians , regardless of when they take place .
This dialogue is essential if we are to start a debate on fundamental issues , fundamental issues which will avert possible future crises , issues such as poverty and economic cooperation , human rights and democracy , the role of women , security and how we can work together to fight terrorism , illegal immigration and numerous other problems .
Of course , the fact that we are advancing this peace process in the Middle East jointly with the Quartet , and with the unanimous backing of the European Union , the European Parliament and the Fifteen , is appreciated by all the forces working for peace , by Israel and by the Arab world .
Finally , an important message emerged about our relations with the United States .
Numerous speakers emphasised that the point is not whether we are for or against the Americans .
That is not where the problem lies .
Whether we are friends or not is not the point .
As Mr Crespo and several other speakers said , we are partners and partners need to talk on equal terms .
Talking on equal terms means , as Mr Poettering said , that we ourselves need a strong Union .
We need a single voice and we need to be able to take on more and more responsibility in international affairs .
We need to give serious consideration to the future development of our defence and foreign policy and we need systematic dialogue with the United States .
As a brief aside , when we met a few months ago , members of the Foreign Affairs Committee in Congress went for me hammer and tongs on the subject of the International Criminal Court and our position .
I discussed the matter with them , I expressed the views of the European Union and I realised that they do not really know what we are thinking , what our stand is and why we think this court is so important .
I do not know how many I convinced , but they certainly went away thinking more about our position than before .
I also know that Mr Pat Cox has already taken initiatives to start a debate between the European Parliament and Congress and I welcome these initiatives , which I think should be supported and , of course , intensified .
We have to work with the United States if we want a multilateral approach to problems and I did not hear anyone speak out against multilateral cooperation within the international community .
A multilateral approach to today 's problems which , in the final analysis , means safeguarding a simple principle , the principle of the ' strength of law ' rather than the principle of the ' law of the strong ' .
That is what the European Union is .
A community of values .
A community of principles .
That is what unites us .
Different nations , different languages , even different traditions , but with a common will based on principles , based on these values .
And it is on the basis of these values that we are building the Europe of the 15 , the Europe of the 25 , then of the 28 or even perhaps more , if we include the Western Balkans .
We have done a massive amount of peace work on the basis of these principles .
We are continuing this magnum opus by enlarging and promoting our international role .
And we can ensure that Iraq and how the problem of Iraq has been dealt with will be the exception in the international community rather than the rule , thereby safeguarding global intergovernmentalism , which there is an increasing call for , and the application of the basic principles which we embrace and serve , be it in the Council , the European Parliament or the Commission .
We may have our differences , ladies and gentlemen , but we shall emerge from this crisis - this is the message I get from my colleagues and from our citizens , whom we all honour - decisive , with renewed political will , determined to build a stronger , united Europe .
Whether this will come about today , tomorrow or in a few months ' time , I do not know .
But the momentum is there . The momentum is there and I think it is our responsibility to help put flesh and bones on our debate in the Convention on the future of Europe and , of course , later , at the Intergovernmental Conference , so that we can talk of a Europe which will foster democracy , progress and peace both on our own continent and throughout the world .
So I am opti