Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 18 December 2008 .
I would like to wish you all , ladies and gentlemen , a Happy New Year and a successful 2009 which will hopefully bring us nearer to European unity .
May we be successful in promoting peace in the world .
I would now like to make a statement .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , the Conference of Presidents has asked me to make a statement on the events in the Middle East .
The debate will take place on Wednesday afternoon in the presence of the Chairman of the Council of Foreign Ministers , Czech Foreign Minister Schwarzenberg .
I mention this because it was not quite clear .
We have put a lot of effort in and found him very willing to be with us , although he will have to travel to South Africa on the same day , if only for a limited time I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Czech Presidency most sincerely for this .
Ladies and gentlemen , whilst we are holding a plenary session at the start of the New Year here , people are once again dying in the Middle East .
Personally , and I am sure the same goes for most of us , I find I have a painful sense of déjà vu when I see the pictures on the television .
In the name of the European Parliament , I would like to express my deepest regret on the escalation of the Gaza conflict between Israel and Hamas .
I say quite categorically : it is not acceptable for people to suffer , for violence to continue and for United Nations employees to come under fire .
How far must the spiral of violence go until sense and reason prevail ?
The violence must cease immediately on both sides .
The firing of rockets on Israeli towns and cities by Hamas is completely unacceptable and deserves the harshest criticism and we must not forget that it was Hamas who ended the ceasefire .
Yet the proportionality of the means employed in the response must not be disregarded .
All people in the Middle East have the same worth .
The inalienable right of a state to protect itself does not justify violent actions , the primary consequence of which is the suffering of the civilian population .
The people in the Gaza Strip must be given urgent help .
A Palestinian is worth the same as an Israeli or a European or an American - all people on this earth are equal .
We must not allow a worsening of the humanitarian situation !
As responsible politicians , we must be prepared to decisively contribute to finding a permanent way out of this spiral of violence in the short term .
Attempting to reduce security to purely military aspects is doomed to failure , in my opinion .
Therefore , there can be no exclusively military solution to the problem in the Middle East .
A political solution must be reached in the end .
Above all , this means learning lessons from the failure of the previous approach .
Therefore , it is a matter of taking measures that are not only viable but also , and above all , sustainable .
Over the past few days I have been in contact by telephone with the Israeli President , Shimon Peres , the President of the Palestinian Authority , Salam Fayyad , the Speaker of the Knesset , Dalia Itzik , and of course with the EU High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , Javier Solana , who has been in the region for quite some time now .
I have also been in contact with the Vice President of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly because I am currently Chairman of that Assembly , the President of the Jordanian Parliament , Abdel Hadi Al-Majali , the President of the Italian Chamber of Deputies , Gianfranco Fini and the President of the Moroccan Parliament , Mustapha Mansouri
I have always made it clear in all these conversations that the European Parliament is fully behind the demands formulated by the Council of Ministers on behalf of the European Union and confirmed by the resolution of the Security Council of the United Nations on 8 January 2009 .
It is depressing that this legally binding resolution of the Security Council , from which the Americans abstained so that it could be carried , is disregarded by both sides in the conflict , which is to say both Israel and Hamas .
An immediate and permanent ceasefire must come into force .
This ceasefire must be achieved with the mediation of Egypt and the involvement of all players .
Immediate and unhindered access to humanitarian aid must be ensured and the United Nations Work and Relief Agency ( UNRWA ) enabled to continue its humanitarian activities unhindered .
And I would also like to say : not just for three hours a day !
When even the humanitarian organisations and the United Nations have to stop their work because the warring parties do not observe their neutrality , we have reached an unacceptable low point with regard to international law and humanity .
The third requirement is to intensify the peace process .
The only viable basis for permanent peace is , and remains , a two-state solution with Israel and Palestine as sovereign states within secure borders .
The European Union , together with the members of the Quartet on the Middle East , with moderate Arab partners and with all participants in the conflict , must bring about a rapid resumption of the peace negotiations under the umbrella of the United Nations .
However , a comprehensive solution also clearly requires reconciliation and , in particular , a reconciliation between the Palestinian factions .
Today we must question the method we have used so far in what we have called the ' peace process ' .
We could still assume until a few weeks ago that we were on the right track with the negotiations despite the well-known difficult environment and barely discernible progress .
The international community and , first and foremost , we , as the European Union , have supported these negotiations through our strong commitment and we have given financial aid to create the basic conditions for establishing a Palestinian state .
But was this commitment politically strong enough ?
We must ask ourselves this question .
In the meantime , we are again in the process of escalation .
It is understandable that , in times of crisis management , we tend to think in the short term .
We actually need an immediate ceasefire right now and a complete withdrawal of Israeli forces , as required by the UN Security Council .
Experience over recent decades has taught us that peace in the Middle East cannot come from the region alone .
However , it also true that it will not be possible without reconciliation between the hostile parties in the conflict .
Therefore , the international community must be prepared to promote peace in the Middle East more than ever before so that the bitter events of past decades do not remain bitter experiences for decades to come .
International forces can and must help to secure a ceasefire .
Therefore , we must all make efforts to ensure that the Egyptian-French plan to institute an international mechanism to secure Gaza 's borders will be a success and it must , of course , be dependent as a priority upon a cessation of the smuggling of arms and rockets into the Gaza area .
The European Union had already announced in its action strategy paper at the start of the Annapolis process that it is prepared to become involved in this way .
But let me highlight one thing in particular : deployment of European and international security forces may not guarantee a ceasefire in the short term .
It must pursue a clear political objective of creating the required trust for the conclusion of peace talks by guaranteeing security for Israelis and Palestinians alike .
This means that by the deployment of some troops , which is only viable with a solid mandate , political influence will be increased on all sides in order to find a peaceful solution .
We need not only the repeated commitment to peace which we have so often formulated as our goal in the past .
What we need is the willingness not only to aim for peace but to achieve it , and in fact before the hatred built up over decades escalates further and unleashes a conflagration .
In closing , I would like to remind you that 2008 was the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
I would also like to remind you how much we as the European Parliament have done to make this year a year of hope and we are setting political priorities that emphasise that the clash of cultures is not the law of nature .
Worldwide reactions to the war in Gaza show how quickly attempts at intercultural dialogue can be destroyed when they are overtaken by the reality of the images that we see daily on the news .
Worse still is the fact that this reality plays into the hands of extremists and fundamentalists whose goal is not peace but to continue the spiral of confrontation .
Violence breeds more violence .
This concept cannot be repeated often enough .
Dialogue and negotiations are the only way out of this crisis .
Both are not ends in themselves but must be conducted bravely with the aim that the people of Israel and Palestine can live in real security , in peace and with respect for their dignity .
( Applause )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Data protection ( appointment of the European supervisor and the assistant supervisor ) : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft of the agenda for this sitting , as agreed by the Conference of Presidents at their meeting on Thursday 8 January 2009 , in accordance with Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been circulated .
It has been requested that this draft be amended as follows .
Monday :
As Mrs Andrikiencannot be present this evening to present her report on the development of the UN Human Rights Council and the role of the EU , there will be a vote on this report on Wednesday , as scheduled , without a general discussion .
Tuesday : No amendments .
Wednesday :
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has moved to conclude the general discussion on the situation in Gaza with the submission of motions for a resolution .
Mr Cohn-Bendit will speak to justify the motion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , everyone is aware of the situation in Gaza .
That we should discuss it here in Parliament is perfectly natural .
However , we are calling for the Security Council to take a stand , we are calling for the bodies to take a stand , and for the European Union to take a stand , but we , in Parliament , we debate matters but we do not want to take a stand .
I do however believe that , faced with the urgency of the situation in Gaza , it is extremely important for this House to give its opinion and say exactly what it wants , in order to end the massacres currently taking place in the Middle East .
I find it unacceptable that this House should not have the courage or the lucidity to vote in favour of a resolution after our debate .
That is why our group is calling for the Conference of Presidents ' decision to be reviewed and for the debate that we must hold on the Gaza situation to end in a resolution , one that demonstrates the clear and firm position of this House , of a majority , so that the massacres in Gaza stop .
We want a resolution ; we must be aware that we have a political responsibility faced with the current situation , and this political responsibility must not be a mere debate , but a resolution , a resolution that clearly states what we want and what we denounce !
Mr President , we have , of course , given this matter a great deal of thought .
Perhaps Mr Cohn-Bendit overestimates the significance of a resolution , but with the Security Council 's resolution we have a basis which we should support and , as the President of Parliament has already said , we should require both sides to seek peace , to lay down their arms and to comply with the Security Council 's resolution .
I would , however , just like to add that this must be the gist of our resolution .
If this is so , we can support it .
In this context we would cooperate and in this context we would support Mr Cohn-Bendit 's motion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the recommendation of the Conference of Presidents is based on great wisdom .
We have , today , heard a statement by the President of Parliament who , if I am correct , was supported by all sides of the House .
This is an important basic principle and an important statement by Parliament .
We will receive a great deal of information over the next few days : through sittings held by the Committee on Foreign Affairs and by delegations and through communications received from the Presidency of the Council and from the Commission .
Therefore , we are not in a position to effect a resolution today , which will actually correspond in detail to how things stood on Thursday .
I spent two days last week on the Gaza Strip border and observed a great deal of the suffering of the people on both sides .
I believe that a ceasefire alone will not be enough .
The ceasefire must be linked to a cessation of weapons smuggling into Gaza in the future .
The details of the negotiations taking place in Egypt today , in particular , are of crucial importance .
We should not destroy this by a resolution perhaps shaped by emotions .
Therefore , I am in favour of the retention of the resolution from the Conference of Presidents .
( Parliament adopted the motion )
The deadlines are set as follows : Motions for resolutions 8 p.m. this evening , amendments and joint motions for resolutions Wednesday 10 a.m.


Thursday : no amendments .
( DE ) Mr President , I had another comment to make on the debate to follow on the gas dispute between the Ukraine and the Soviet Union and on the crisis ...
Russia !
( FR ) I apologise for bringing up the past , Francis ; I did not mean to do so .
( DE ) As far as this discussion is concerned : we would just like to establish and hope that all groups can agree that this debate should include a discussion on the fact that Slovakia wishes to illegally reopen a nuclear power station .
I only wanted to ...
( Heckling )
You are the right man for the job .
You can keep quiet , lad .
Quiet .
It is you .
I only wanted to be sure .
We are in Parliament , lad .
Would Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mr Ferber please stop their argument now .
You can continue it later .
Anything connected with these debates can be addressed in these debates .
( EL ) Mr President , as the question of Slovakia and Bulgaria is a serious matter , I too should like to request that you ask the European Commission , which is after all the guardian of the Treaties and the Treaty of Accession , to tell us exactly what is happening and why these two countries took this decision .
The Commission has certainly taken note , so this will be taken into consideration .
( The order of business was adopted )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( EL ) Mr President , allow me to inform the House about Turkey 's offensive behaviour towards Greece .
The constant infringements and violations of Greek airspace , the fighter planes flying low over inhabited Greek islands , the obstruction of safe shipping in Greek territorial waters and the interference in search and rescue operations in the Aegean , for which Greece alone is responsible , and the extensive assistance provided to illegal immigrants by Turkey augur badly for the stability of the area as a whole .
We need to condemn this offensive behaviour and the continuing strategic challenge to the sovereign rights of a Member State of the European Union , namely Greece , on the part of Turkey and send a clear message that its behaviour is jeopardising its European prospects .
( HU ) After the discriminatory measures which were introduced in 2004 relating to employees from the new Member States working in the European institutions , and which were ruled unlawful by a decision of the European Court of Justice in 2008 , I wish to draw your attention to a new discriminatory decision .
Four and a half years have passed , and yet the nationals of the new Member States still feel like second-class citizens .
What has happened , Mr President , is that a competition was announced last year for the post of head of unit of the Hungarian interpreters working at the European Parliament , a post to which the citizen of any Member State was eligible to apply .
The head of unit in the interpretation service is responsible not only for administrative tasks but also for overseeing the transposition of European Union terminology into Hungarian .
Mr President , it is appalling that of two eligible candidates , one Hungarian and one British , the British candidate was selected .
Could you imagine a post in the French-language service being filled by an English or a Spanish person ?
Mr President , this is unacceptable discrimination , and is causing serious damage with regard to the translation of European Union documents .
On behalf of every new Member State , I wish to register my protest .
You will , of course , receive an answer on this point .
Mr President , this afternoon we have listened to yourself and others make statements on the terrible situation in Gaza and on the need for an immediate ceasefire and the withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from Gaza .
I must say that , in this context , I agree with Mr Cohn-Bendit that Parliament should take a position - we cannot sit on the fence .
However , in a way it is a bit mundane to speak about bread-and-butter issues , having listened to all that has been said , but of course bread-and-butter issues concern all our citizens .
Last weekend in Ireland the announcement by Dell , that it was relocating 2 000 jobs , came as a body-blow to the community in the Mid-West and West of Ireland .
At a time when we are experiencing a global financial downturn , this is especially difficult for workers directly employed by Dell and for its suppliers etc .
In this context , the European Globalisation Fund could prove to be especially important to help retrain and reskill workers and to assist in the promotion of entrepreneurship for self-employment .
It is crucial that the Irish Government makes an immediate application to the Globalisation Fund , so that workers can have some faith in the future and see that the EU is working to assist all workers and , in this case , those in the West and Mid-West of Ireland .
- ( PL ) Mr President , we have just reached an agreement pursuant to which the flow of Russian gas will eventually be restored to several Member States of the Union whose supplies had been cut off .
It is worth highlighting the solidarity between the Member States on this matter , although sadly this was not evident from the very outset .
The various countries held very different opinions on this issue .
Fortunately , however , we made an effort to present a united front at the end .
As we are to debate the subject in two days ' time , I should like to highlight two points .
Firstly , this issue makes it quite clear that Russia deals with wholly economic issues as if they were purely political instruments .
Secondly , this issue also makes it clear that we must develop a common energy policy as a Union .
That is what we need , rather than individual energy policies for the largest countries , such as those building pipelines under the Baltic Sea on their own initiative .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in a global era of the unhealthy dominance of Coke and crisps , I wish to raise my voice in defence of Hungarian grape and wine growing in the Carpathian basin , which is of international significance .
As a result of incorrectly interpreted EU directives , European funds nowadays go to supporting those who grub up their vineyards , and it is not unusual for those who plant new elite grape varieties to be punished .
The Carpathian basin , within the territory of historical Hungary , was at one time the site of one of the largest grape-growing areas in Europe , extending over some 600 000 hectares .
In 1948 there were still 260 000 hectares of wine grapes in Hungary , but today that territory has shrunk to 40 000 hectares .
How much longer will the Carpathian basin 's wineries , vintners and the natural environment continue to be destroyed in this way ?
Wine , wheat , peace !
I wish to invoke this Hungarian folk greeting to wish you a blessed new year .
Mr President , I rise on the issue of Palestine .
I note that in your earlier remarks you have been somewhat coy in your positioning on Israel : 900 Palestinians dead , a third of whom are children , and yet we cannot find it in ourselves in this Chamber to utterly condemn Israeli brutality .
This onslaught is not alone disproportionate ; it is entirely unjustified .
It is not driven by Israeli security needs ; in fact , it is a cynical and clinical attack not on Hamas , but on the Palestinian population .
I think that Member States now have a moral obligation to flex the full extent of their diplomatic and political muscle with Israel to end this violence .
Tiptoeing around the Israeli administration will not work ; it has never worked .
Israel must now understand that there are indeed consequences for its actions .
Therefore I call on all MEPs to demand the immediate suspension of the Euro-Med Agreement and indeed all preferential trade arrangements between the EU and Israel .
Equally , we must resist any attempt to upgrade relations between the EU and the State of Israel which lays siege on Gaza and brutalises the Palestinian people .
The rhetoric of human rights , which so often echoed this Chamber , must now be honoured in word and deed .
That is the only prospect for a successful peace process in the Middle East .
The complexity of this issue can be seen just from the length of time you took for your speech .
You exceeded your speaking time by 50 % .
The debate will take place on Wednesday afternoon .
Mr President , my constituency last week was devastated by the announcement , as Mrs Harkin has said , of the loss of almost 2 000 jobs in the Dell factory .
This also means the loss of probably 2 000 more jobs that depend on Dell production in Ireland .
Dell is moving production to Łódź in Poland with the help of almost EUR 52 million in state aid .
Can the Commission assure me that the state aid , which Poland is using , is within the competition rules of the EU , and can it assure me that sufficient aid from the European Globalisation Fund will be available to prepare the dismissed workforce for new employment ?
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , two days ago four schools in the city of Burgas found their walls daubed with racist slogans .
They had sprayed on their walls things like : ' Turn Bulgarians into soap ' and ' Death to the giaours ' .
' Giaour ' is a derogatory Turkish expression used during the time of the Ottoman Empire to refer to non-Muslim subjects and those of non-Turkish origin .
In the Turkish mind a giaour is considered to be subhuman , which makes it the most offensive racist insult in the Turkish language .
' Giaours ' is the same word used by the former minister of agriculture Nihat Kabil and the Turkish administrators in the Ministry of Agriculture to refer to the Bulgarians who had joined the department , following which they gave preferential treatment to the Turks .
Ladies and gentlemen , let this incident be a warning to you about what the Turkish mentality is like in the 21st century .
This example alone shows that Turkey has no place in the European Union because it is a racist , xenophobic country which supports and promotes racism and xenophobia in neighbouring countries .
This case shows that Bulgarians are not only not the source of hatred , but that they are victims of hatred and ethnic intolerance .
The European Parliament has always taken a vigorous stance against racism and ethnic intolerance .
I appeal to you , as Members of this House , to do it once again and support our written declaration condemning Turkish racism against Bulgarians .
Thank you Mr President .
I commend the efforts of the Czech presidency to handle the present gas crisis but just mediating one crisis after another is not the solution .
The EU cannot remain in a babysitter role ; that of an enfant terrible .
One conclusion is clear : counting on a mutually beneficial strategic alliance with Russia as a reliable provider of energy is a strategic miscalculation .
The root cause of the current crisis is not Ukraine , but the crisis within Gazprom itself , which has failed to live up to its own commitments .
For eight consecutive years , gas production by Gazprom has been stagnating at the same level .
This is the typical result of political state control over production .
Not being able to deliver gas at the same time to Russian customers and meet commitments abroad has probably brought Mr Putin to initiate the political crisis and point to Ukraine as a scapegoat .
This makes it all the more important for us to concentrate upon finding new energy sources .
. - ( HU ) Mr President , fellow Members , the economic crisis that many people initially took to be scare tactics on the part of the media has now reached Europe ; it afflicts countries , regions , local communities , enterprises and with them families and workers .
Two of our fellow Members have already spoken of this .
The consequences of the recession do not affect all of us equally , as the Commission reminds us in its Communication .
The negative impact is multiplied exponentially on the fringes of Europe and society .
In order to prevent the present situation from turning the principle of decent work into empty words and to help us avoid an explosion of poverty , we must focus our efforts on our resources .
This is why I welcome the Commission 's Communication , as well as Commissioner Špidla 's dedication to raising awareness and his urging Europe to make efforts to protect the most vulnerable social groups at this time of declining economic activity .
The Commission 's differentiated approach gives reason to hope that a unified Europe will not mean enforced uniformity , especially not during a period of crisis .
I hope and expect that it will receive the support of the European Parliament in this regard .
Mr President , nowadays we are faced with a paradox .
Although a majority of European consumers have repeatedly stated that they are against GMOs , surveys show that they do buy GM foods when they are available in supermarkets .
Many consumers are just not aware that GM food is sold in Europe or simply fall into the trap of illegible labels and end up not knowing what they buy .
A possible solution would be to allow the absence of GMO in foods to be mentioned on the label .
But currently there are no common provisions on GM-free labelling , leaving the Member States the freedom of choice .
This leads to confusion of consumers and distortion of the internal market since , while some countries have already introduced non-GM labelling provisions , others refuse to allow this kind of information to be given .
People want to make food choices based on their own values and not according to safety assessment studies .
If we care about consumers ' concerns , then we should be transparent all the way and give them a real choice .
Therefore I call on the Commission to provide the legal framework for voluntary GM-free labelling at European level .
- ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity of appealing to the Council to take appropriate action , pursuant to Article 13 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , in order to combat discrimination on the grounds of ethnic origin in Lithuania .
Three politicians from the Polish minority were elected in the recent Lithuanian parliamentary elections .
The Lithuanian authorities subsequently tried to deprive them of their parliamentary seats .
The reason given is that these persons hold the Karta Polaka .
This is a document confirming that the holder belongs to the wider Polish nation .
It is intended to help preserve Polish culture and national identity amongst persons of Polish origin the world over .
The Lithuanian authorities , however , consider that it involves loyalty to a foreign country .
This is obviously ridiculous and outrageous .
In addition , it amounts to discrimination for reasons of ethnic origin , and also involves violating the rights of a national minority , which is behaviour unworthy of a Member State of the European Union .
I trust the Lithuanian authorities will reflect on the matter .
- ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Bernd Posselt , who represents the Bavarian CSU party here in Parliament and who also leads the Sudeten German Society has proposed that the Czech Republic abolish the so-called Benes Decrees during the course of its presidency .
This is an outrageous demand and one that cannot be fulfilled by the Czech Republic .
We surely know that the Decrees came into being after the Second World War in accordance with the views of the victorious powers and they replaced legal standards until a proper parliament was elected .
It is therefore not a question of some sort of cancerous growth on European parliamentary order , as he has claimed .
In my opinion Mr Posselt 's organisation resembles a cancerous growth as it acts in direct opposition to the aims of modern European integration pursued by the EU .
While Mr Posselt is attacking the Czech Republic , there are thousands of German citizens living and working there happily and there are large numbers of former Sudeten Germans who have retired there .
I am myself an example of the fact that in today 's Czech Republic there is no anti-German aggression since I was elected as a German citizen to represent the Czech Republic in this Parliament .
Mr President , the gas crisis has left hundreds of thousands of households across 17 European countries without heating during freezing temperatures .
Eastern and central Europe have been affected the most by the dispute , which has shut down factories and schools .
Even if Kiev and Moscow sign the EU-brokered deal after hours of talks with EU officials , Gazprom says that the deal to restart gas supplies to Europe via Ukraine will be delayed as it has not received a copy of the agreement .
The team of technical experts sent by the European Commission will check flows into Ukrainian pipelines from Russia and , even if the gas starts to flow in Ukraine , it may take about 36 hours to reach EU Member States .
As a result , Europe needs a single policy on energy security in order to avoid future conflicts and it needs to diversity its sources of energy supplies .
I welcome the intervention of Parliament in the dispute and hope that an agreement will be reached as soon as possible in order to avoid a deepening conflict .
( SL ) Last year we celebrated the 40th anniversary of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty , and the year before that in this House we adopted a resolution which called upon the Bureau , the Council and the Commission to strengthen their efforts towards more effective multilateralism and more stringent implementation of this treaty , which we know has curbed the proliferation of nuclear arsenals , but , unfortunately , failed to bring about a reduction in their numbers .
The resolution also called on the United States of America to withdraw their nuclear warheads from European territory and on the United Kingdom and France to halt their nuclear missile programmes .
As I only entered this esteemed House in November last year , may I ask to what extent and in what way these calls have been answered or , rather , how successful these efforts have been , given the fact that a new project for the deployment of a US anti-missile shield in the Czech Republic and Poland is being revived and that this very project is , as anticipated , generating new tensions between the West and Russia , as well as images and threats of a renewed and dangerous nuclear arms race ?
( RO ) The debate about the gas crisis has been passionate , including this evening 's session .
Every speaker is saying how serious and dangerous the European Union 's level of energy dependency is .
Everyone is saying the same thing : that the solution is to continue to reduce our dependency on single sources of energy .
We must not forget however about another necessity : to save energy .
It is difficult to say at the moment what the level of energy wastage is in the European Union .
Some analysts even mention a figure of a third of total consumption .
This means , as an example , that if Romania imports around 14 million tonnes of oil equivalent in Russian gas annually , almost one million tonnes of oil equivalent are wasted annually due to defective insulation in blocks of flats .
Unfortunately , Community legislation is not suitable for supporting the resolution of this problem because it limits incomprehensibly the European funds which can be allocated to projects for renovating heating systems .
I think we should ask ourselves the following question every day : What is simpler ?
Looking for new sources of energy and new transit routes or remembering that we can use simple methods to save a good part of the energy that is being wasted ?
( SK ) This year we celebrate the 10th anniversary of the euro and on 1 January 2009 Slovakia became the 16th member of the euro area .
My country has surrendered a part of its identity , but it has done so with pride .
Just as we treasured our own currency , we have started using the euro and the majority of the Slovak population is quickly beginning to regard it as its own , too .
We adopted the euro after only five years of membership in the EU and as Prime Minister Fico said on New Year 's Day , we could see the euro as a lucky talisman bringing us stability and the potential for Slovakia to develop even more vigorously in this time of economic crisis .
I would like to praise everyone who contributed to the adoption of the euro in Slovakia and to acknowledge the positive attitude of the Slovak public to the new currency .
I wish all Slovaks good luck with the euro as the symbol of an integrated and prosperous Europe .
( EL ) Mr President , as no debate is to be held on it in Parliament , I should like to highlight the importance to the European Union of the proposal for a Council directive implementing the Agreement concluded by the European Community Shipowners ' Associations and the European Transport Workers ' Federation .
This directive , which concerns the work of seamen under the Maritime Labour Convention , will allow seamen in the European Union to secure decent working conditions .
This sector needs to be promoted , because it contributes towards development and productivity .
The seas that wash the shores of the European Union are very important to international trade and young people should see a future in seafaring professions and come to the assistance of shipping .
( DE ) Mr President , the background to my speech is the illegal transportation of puppies discovered in Austria at the beginning of October 2008 .
Since the beginning of October 2008 I have been trying to get speaking time in the one-minute contributions and I am pleased that I have finally succeeded .
It is interesting that Mr Rogalski has been allowed to speak three times in the meantime .
However , now to the matter in hand .
The Austrian police stopped a truck containing137 puppies .
The vehicle manifested serious defects and the animals ' passports were forgeries , as the dogs had not reached the legally required age for transport .
The journey started in Slovakia and was due to end in Spain .
This case is not unique and it brings to our notice once more that profit-orientated organisations are constantly evading current animal protection provisions in Europe in a criminal fashion .
In Europe we really need comprehensive inspections of animal transportation and corresponding threats of fines in the event of non-compliance .
The EU must jointly adopt European minimum standards in animal protection , which must be implemented and monitored by all governments .
This would also compel those countries , which have been completely inactive in the field of animal protection to date , to introduce specific standards .
( SL ) The bloody and relentless massacre of Palestinians in Gaza is a symbol of human powerlessness and double standards and an injustice which cries to heaven .
Does the Palestinian death toll really have to reach four figures before international factors use the mediation mechanisms which have been at their disposal from day one of the conflict ?
The European Union imagines itself to be an active force in international relations and a global political player .
But is it really ?
Can we actually call ourselves an active force , when the Israeli army , in spite of all its sophisticated intelligence support , attacks a school , which is funded by the European Union , packed with civilians ?
Can international humanitarian law be said to exist , when the Israeli army forcibly moves Palestinians to a house which it shells intensely the next day ?
I have been to Israel many times , including to Sderot , I know a lot about what is going on there , but this Israeli action is disproportionate , excessive and inhumane .
This action is immoral , perverted and bizarre , because it essentially constitutes a pre-election campaign .
This is a bloody pre-election campaign .
Mr President , may I take this opportunity to back the case for European Union funding to support the European Special Olympics Games , which are being held in Warsaw in 2010 , and the Special Olympics World Games , which are being held in Athens in 2011 .
The Commission allocated EUR 5 million in support of the Special Olympics World Games when they were held in Ireland in 2003 , which was such a wonderful occasion and a pleasure for so many of us who were present .
We in the European Union must be to the forefront in supporting volunteerism in sport .
Let me add that there is a written declaration on this issue that MEPs can sign this week outside the Chamber , and I would urge all colleagues to sign this declaration in support of EU funding for these very important Special Olympics Games .
- ( CS ) Happy New Year , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my frank amazement over the irony of fate that the Czech government , which is well-known for its specific approach to the question of negotiations with Russia , has not yet torn asunder its veil and heaped ashes upon its head .
It has even postponed negotiations with Russia over energy security .
I am yet more shocked by the position of the European Commission .
It is threatening Slovakia and Bulgaria with sanctions and we have even heard that Mr Cohn-Bendit also recommends sanctions if the decommissioned nuclear power station blocks are brought back into operation .
I would like to recommend to the Commissioners and spokesmen of the European Commission that they get some warm clothing , switch off the heating at home and explain to their families that they are acting out of solidarity with the Slovaks and Bulgarians .
Or perhaps this was just a bad New Year 's joke ?
( EL ) Mr President , I too should like to comment on the question of natural gas , given that we have become witness over the last ten days to the conflict surrounding this issue , a conflict in which many of the Member States of the European Union who are dependent on natural gas for their energy have been caught up , causing problems for citizens , businesses and industry .
Through discussions between the two opposing sides , which have been fraught with suspicion , mistrust and conflicting announcements , and the intervention of the European Presidency and the Commission , it would appear that some sort of a solution has been found .
It is clear that , regardless of intentions and apportionments , the problem may arise again unless measures are taken .
We therefore need to examine the question of reformulating the European Union 's energy doctrine by adding other sources of energy .
The European Parliament should also send a clear message that the European Union will not be held to ransom and should participate in the debate to plan alternative routes for a safe and continuous supply of natural gas .
The objective of reducing energy requirements by 20 % by 2020 will not be achieved under unstable and insecure circumstances .
( RO ) The European Union must make it a priority to draw up a common energy strategy and an action plan aimed at improving the Union 's energy security .
Ukraine 's action in cutting off the supply of natural gas to EU Member States has highlighted the EU 's dependency on its traditional suppliers .
Furthermore , the low temperatures this winter have caused serious operational problems to electrical power suppliers who have registered record consumption levels .
The EU needs to devise a European strategy for modernising its energy grid , boosting energy efficiency and diversifying its energy supply sources .
The implementation of the Nabucco project , the construction of liquefied gas terminals in European ports , investments in safer nuclear power stations , boosting energy efficiency and increasing the use of renewable energy must feature among the joint priority actions aimed at increasing the EU 's energy security .
The European Commission , along with the European Investment Bank and governments of the Member States , must identify and guarantee the financing of these priority projects .
Madam President , I wish to raise the issue of Zimbabwe .
It seems to me that if Zimbabwe is not on our television screens , then we do not really concern ourselves with some of the issues that arise there .
Recently we had the case of Jestina Mukoko , Executive Director of the Zimbabwe Peace Project and a board member of the Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum , who was abducted and held incommunicado for 21 days before reappearing at Harare Magistrates Court bearing signs , it might be said , of torture and ill treatment - all for the crime of being a human rights campaigner .
Ms Mukoko is currently being held in solitary confinement at the maximum security prison , and her future , like that of so many campaigners , aid workers and ordinary citizens before her , remains in jeopardy at the hands of the Mugabe regime .
Many words of concern and condemnation have been spoken in this Chamber and in other , national parliaments , yet the nightmare for ordinary Zimbabweans continues unabated .
I believe that it is time we reasserted our interest in this and demand from the Council and Commission that action be taken once and for all to bring to an end the criminal activity against people who are campaigning for human rights in Zimbabwe .
Madam President , I welcome the statement by the President this evening on Gaza and , indeed , the decision of Parliament to have a resolution on the issue to urge an immediate , unilateral ceasefire by all sides in the Gaza conflict .
With over 900 now dead , the futility of politics-by-war is painfully evident .
You must insist that Israel stop the killing .
Gaza is the largest prison in the world , with 1.5 million prisoners ; it is now also a slaughterhouse , unfortunately , with men , women an children dying simply because they are Palestinian .
What possible crimes could the Palestinian children , who are dying in this conflict , be guilty of ?
What possible excuses have we Europeans to continue to do business with Israel while it callously continues to slaughter innocent people ?
The European Council must stop making excuses , stop the bickering and unite in concerted action which will bring this slaughter to an end .
There can be no question of upgrading Europe 's relations with Israel so long as it fails to engage in constructive dialogue with all the representatives of the Palestinian people .
- ( PL ) As an organisation of countries bound together by common values , the European Union should use all the resources at its disposal to prevent the spread of hatred .
The French operator Eutelsat , however , has seen fit to broadcast a programme from the Al-Aqsa TV station , which has links with Hamas and openly calls for attacks on the civilian population of Israel .
By so doing , Eutelsat has once again demonstrated that ethical business is a concept quite foreign to those responsible for the management of that company , especially if we bear in mind that the independent Chinese television company NTD TV has been prevented from broadcasting for months .
Despite appeals from many quarters , the Eutelsat management remains unwilling to revoke its decision , which was in any case taken under pressure from the Chinese Government .
The surprising and totally amoral choices made by the management of Eutelsat raise concerns as to whether the intentions of those in charge are purely business-orientated .
( PT ) Madam President , Israel 's attack on Gaza is a war crime and a crime against humanity .
What is happening is a tragedy : 900 Palestinians , including large numbers of children , have died , and thousands have been injured .
We have to demand an end to the attack on Gaza .
We have to demand an end to Israel 's blockade , which is turning Gaza into a concentration camp .
That is why we join all those people from every country and every continent who demonstrate against the massacres : all those people from every country and every continent who are angry and go out to the streets and say ' No more crimes ! '
It is crucial for the European Parliament and other responsible European Union bodies to demand an immediate end to the attack on Gaza and an immediate end to Israel 's blockade .
- ( CS ) Thank you , Madam President .
I have recently been struck by the way that several Czech insurance companies have discontinued the provision of bonuses paid to women who take out compulsory car insurance policies .
This step was justified with reference to the new anti-discrimination law coming into force .
We see again and again how some politicians and non-governmental organisations adopt a rather exaggerated position over the question of gender equality .
One such exaggeration constitutes a denial of actuarial mathematics which proves day in and day out that men and women behave differently in various aspects of their lives and therefore carry different levels of insurance and other risks .
To deny such differences is not to fight for equal rights but rather to fight for the conformity and sameness of both sexes .
Such a fight would be both futile and ridiculous .
Men and women vary from each other precisely because the two sexes complement each other in a useful and beneficial way in everyday life , in partnerships and in society .
Madam President , a new opinion poll commissioned by the Campaign for an Independent Britain has just been published .
Most of those surveyed said that the European Union is out of touch , corrupt and is poor value for money ; 83 % of those polled want UK law to be paramount and , therefore , to revoke the supremacy of EU law ; and 71 % want a referendum on continued British membership .
Unfortunately , there is not much chance of that , given that the Labour Government will not even give them a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty , which it promised in its election manifesto .
The British people want free trade , friendship and cooperation with Europe and the world , not to be governed by the European Union .
If there were a genuinely fair referendum that asked the British people if they want ever-closer political and economic integration with the EU or to leave , an overwhelming majority would vote to leave .
Madam President , I would like to raise my concerns about the ever-increasing lack of scientific rigour in the draft proposals presented to this Parliament by the Commission and , indeed , in some of the reports and amendments for which we as parliamentarians are responsible .
Good science gives way more and more to populist and emotive responses , often dressed up as the precautionary principle .
Take the issue of the plant protection products .
We have abandoned the scientific principle of risk assessment .
There is no detailed EU impact assessment and there is a lack of scientific definition of endocrine disrupters and an inconsistency of treatment between it and the REACH Directive .
We are bringing EU legislation into international disrepute and undermining its credibility by this growing lack of scientific rigour and lack of good science .
( BG ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the gas crisis which Europe finds itself in at the start of 2009 is quickly assuming the proportions of a disaster for Bulgaria , which does not have an alternative to relief gas supplies .
I will not discuss the disgraceful , short-sighted decision taken by the Bulgarian Government that has made my country a hostage in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine , as this is obvious to everyone .
What is more important now is for us to decide what measures to take to overcome the crisis .
In this case , this may mean that Bulgaria has to find an alternative so that it can break its external dependence .
This is why I believe that it is essential for Europe and Balkan countries , like Bulgaria , to follow the example of Slovakia and make the decision to restart blocks I , II , III and IV at the Kozloduy nuclear power plant .
At the moment , this is the only option Bulgaria has , enabling it to gain a modicum of independence and reduce both the direct damage and the damage that will be caused by using fuel oil at the moment as a substitute for gas .
( RO ) Given that this year , 2009 , has barely started , I would like to tell you all that , in my view , it is not any ordinary year .
2009 marks two decades since the end of the Cold War and since all the walls were knocked down that divided countries and Europe itself into east and west , with freedom and democracy on the one side and totalitarian regimes on the other .
As a Romanian MEP , but also a Romanian citizen who has known what dictatorship is , I believe that these two decades have marked a transition for some of us and acceptance for the rest .
I equally believe that , in spite of the current climate , 2009 should be the year when our actions as well as the European Commission 's actions should be targeted at a single Europe for all Europeans .
A Europe in which each of its 500 million citizens feels that their rights are guaranteed , that there is a real sense of solidarity , that no one can ever be discriminated against again , that no one needs to ever feel like an outsider or tolerated in a united Europe , that we are all European citizens who feel the same way , no matter where each of us was before 1989 .
- ( PL ) Madam President , the European Parliament has dealt with matters relating to the environment on many occasions .
I should like to highlight an issue brought to my notice by schoolchildren concerned about the natural environment .
The rates paid for scrap metal , paper and bottles made of synthetic materials are falling dramatically .
It is becoming unprofitable to collect such material .
In addition , many cities have done away with the containers into which it can be sorted , or have ceased emptying them .
Recycling paper has been much in the news recently .
The current situation in Poland in this regard may be summarised as follows .
Those engaged in collecting scrap paper maintain that the prices are too low and that it does not pay to handle it .
On the other hand , those who produce paper using recycled paper claim that the latter is too expensive for them and that the current prices mean it is not worth their while investing in equipment for processing it .
I therefore appeal for environmentally conscious action to resolve this problem .
As things stand at present , children are collecting scrap paper because the activity has educational value , but the paper is then being dumped on communal tips .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have done my utmost to ensure that as many speakers as possible take the floor .
This item is closed .
Framework for Community action to achieve a sustainable use of pesticides - Placing of plant protection products on the market ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Christa Klass , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the framework directive to achieve a sustainable use of pesticides ( 06124 / 5 / 2008 - C6-0323 / 2008 - ;
by Hiltrud Breyer , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the placing of plant protection products on the market ( 11119 / 8 / 2008 - C6-0326 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Vassiliou , Commissioner Dimas , ladies and gentlemen , today we have the result of many discussions and negotiations , which were , at times , conducted with great emotion , and we will have the opportunity to vote on this tomorrow .
We have not made it easy for ourselves .
We have struggled to find the right solutions in our negotiations with the Council and with the Commission .
We have established that science does not always point us in the right direction with clear findings .
Further scientific support will be necessary in order to analyse the effects of this new legislation .
First of all , therefore , sincere thanks to all those who contributed to this positive result with constructive proposals , my fellow members here in Parliament , the European Commission , the French Presidency of the Council - it is a pity that the Czech Presidency of the Council is not here this evening - but thanks also to the staff .
With the current Directive on the Sustainable Use of Plant Protection Products we are taking a giant step towards more commonality in European environmental and consumer protection .
Sustainability as the overall concept for European agriculture will guarantee healthy food and a healthy environment .
For the first time , the handling of plant protection products will be harmonised at European level .
The basic principle ' as much as necessary , as little as possible ' assumes comprehensive , sound knowledge .
Plant protection products are , in fact , medicine for plants .
They must be used correctly in order to be effective - the right product and the right dosage at the right time .
This also includes the consideration as to whether chemical plant protection is necessary or whether mechanical measures would be better .
The selection of the best technology and tested application equipment will protect the environment and the user and contribute to the success of the operation through good harvests .
The Member States will establish measures in their national action plans to reduce the use of plant protection products .
Risk reduction is the primary objective .
The use of the general basic principles of integrated plant protection will become mandatory for the entire European Union from 2014 .
Compliance with the stipulations of the Water Framework Directive is top priority .
The Member States will establish buffer zones adjacent to bodies of water , which must be adapted to the conditions of the soil properties and geographical circumstances .
The use of plant protection products by local authorities and in protected areas will be minimised or stopped , if necessary .
There are regulations for checking equipment and regular maintenance intervals will be set .
Risk reduction means that professional users must obtain sound and ongoing training in the use of plant protection products .
Private users , who have no specific training and can cause damage in private gardens through incorrect usage , must be informed by well-trained salespersons on the use and risks when purchasing plant protection products .
This directive will mean that previously differing regulations in the individual Member States will be adjusted to a high , common level .
The proposed measures will benefit the environment , consumers and users .
Identical conditions throughout the European Union will guarantee identical safety standards and identical production conditions .
Substances that are proven to be detrimental to health will not be licensed , on that we are in agreement .
However , a ban must be based on scientifically sound findings and not on political dogmas .
Exposure must also be taken into consideration because with pesticides , like many things in life , it is the dosage that creates the poison hazard .
A headache tablet is a blessing , but if you take 20 it becomes dangerous , even life-threatening .
We have reached a good compromise .
It will harmonise the environment and economic policy and I hope that we can emphasise our requirements in a unanimous vote tomorrow .
I will allow myself just one more technical point , which is to say that an error has crept into Article 14 Paragraph 4 .
Reference is made to the Internet portal mentioned in Article 4 Paragraph 3 ; but there is no Paragraph 3 in Article 4 .
This should be rectified .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , this agreement represents a milestone , a milestone for European health protection and consumer protection but also for the environment and the economy .
First of all , sincere thanks to the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent collaboration .
Many thanks also to the staff involved and to the Commission , to you , shadow rapporteur and Mr Dimas , and also the French Presidency of the Council , but also thanks to fellow members who were not intimidated by the completely exaggerated figures from industry .
We have adopted 200 amendments at first reading in the European Parliament and attempted to decisively improve the common position with this agreement .
We will end this unscientific , never-ending game of numbers , this hocus-pocus surrounding limit-setting , with the clear cut-off criteria .
Nobody can quantify the risk .
Therefore , safety can only be achieved with an outright ban .
Pesticides and other substances that are carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic for reproduction have no business , no business at all in foodstuffs .
We will ensure successful environmental protection with the cut-off for persistent , bioaccumulative toxic ( PBT ) substances .
I am particularly pleased that we have succeeded in implementing and anchoring initial clear criteria for endocrinal substances , and I have confidence in the Commission 's responsibility to come up with more criteria in the next four years .
However , I am also particularly pleased that the European Parliament has succeeded in anchoring bee protection as a licensing criterion for the first time .
Leading scientists in France and Germany have estimated the economic value of pollinators at EUR 150 billion per annum and the damage at up to EUR 310 billion if we lost bees as pollinators .
Therefore , I ask you quite particularly to reject , tomorrow , any amendments that have been submitted .
They would dilute this compromise .
This is a compromise to which the Council has already given its approval .
It used to be common practice not to attempt to attack a joint compromise again .
However , I am pleased that we have jointly achieved an improvement for immunotoxic and neurotoxic substances because , in a Europe that purports to be a knowledge-based society , we cannot afford to allow the development of a child 's brain to be impaired primarily through neurotoxic substances in the long term .
We can say quite clearly yes to harmonisation , however , without restricting the laws of the Member States and we will allow them flexibility with regard to procedures in the matter of licensing .
The triple legal basis also shows the high value we place on health and we have formulated exemptions from the ban with many restrictions , linked to a substitution plan , for example , so that the exception does not become the rule but vice versa .
I am also pleased that we have succeeded in including animal protection in this regulation and that we were able to establish more transparency , although I would have expected more courage from the Commission .
I hope that we will have more access to the application protocols and be able to introduce an electronic field pass .
It is not only a milestone for environmental and consumer protection in Europe , I think it is also a magic moment for Europe .
It is a magic moment for Europe because this decision to phase out highly toxic pesticides is unprecedented and it is unique worldwide , and we can thus put the European Union in the fast lane for ground-breaking health protection and Europe will be the trailblazer worldwide .
This regulation will also create added value for citizens who know that the European Union is primarily on the side of consumers and health and has not bowed down to industry .
Furthermore , it is also a win-win situation for the industry , which will receive innovation incentives to produce better and safe products in the future .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , first of all I should like to thank and congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Klass , the rapporteur , Mrs Breyer , and the parliamentary Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on their excellent work on the proposals on the framework directive on a sustainable use of pesticides and to revise and improve the regulation .
The fact that agreement was achieved at second reading is particularly gratifying .
This agreement safeguards the environmental integrity of the Commission 's initial proposal and sets even more ambitious environmental targets for certain important points .
We are aware of the fact that the use of pesticides is a matter of particular concern to citizens .
That is why we needed , firstly , to make the current legislative framework stricter by amending the 1991 Directive on the placing of specific products on the market and , secondly , to plug the gaps at Community level in the use of these products .
In achieving agreement on the directive , the European Union has proven that it has the political will to take effective measures to protect public health and the environment .
Parliament helped to make the directive more ambitious than the Council 's common position on certain important points .
Now the Member States will be obliged to prepare national action plans with quantitative targets both to limit the risks inherent in the use of pesticides and to reduce the use of certain products .
This was not easy , as the rapporteur had to persuade the Member States that , under certain circumstances , the best way of limiting the risk is to limit the use of specific pesticides , which she did with success .
The agreement reached represents significant progress in the protection of public health and the environment in the European Union .
The European Commission is therefore in a position to accept the compromise package of amendments in order to reach agreement on the directive at second reading .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all , I wish to thank the rapporteurs Mrs Klass and Mrs Breyer , the shadow rapporteurs for their constructive approach to the proposal , the French presidency , and all of you who have contributed to the successful conclusion of the second reading of the Commission 's proposal .
Plant protection products play an important role in agriculture , horticulture , forestry and gardening .
However , they can also have an impact on human health , animal health and the environment .
We therefore need to ensure they are regulated in an effective and balanced way .
In the preparation of the initial proposal , the Commission held extensive consultations of stakeholders from all sectors concerned and it carried out a comprehensive impact assessment .
The top priority was - and still is - to achieve the highest possible level of protection for human and animal health , and the environment .
I am pleased to see that this is also reflected in the outcome of the discussions between the EU institutions .
The draft compromise before us today would strengthen this high level of protection through several provisions .
Clear and strict criteria would be set for the approval of active substances .
Producers , suppliers and professional users would have to keep records to be made available upon request to third parties , such as neighbours , other residents or the water industry .
Member State authorities would have to tighten controls on marketing and use , and the Commission would audit Member States ' controls .
Duplicative testing on animals would be completely avoided .
To promote sustainability in agriculture , safer alternatives would substitute the more hazardous products .
In order to ensure comprehensive information , the Commission may also look into the issue of availability of existing alternative products to substances being known as endocrine disruptors .
This would happen , of course , without prejudging the safety requirements of the Regulation .
As part of the overall compromise , I would like to propose the following text in relation to the risk assessment to bees : ' When revising the data requirements for active substances and plant protection products , as referred to in Article 8 ( 1 ) ( b ) and ( c ) , the Commission will pay particular attention to study protocols allowing a risk assessment which takes into account the real exposure of bees to these products , in particular through nectar and pollen . '
The draft compromise would create an even safer framework for the use of plant protection products in the European Union , and would strengthen our environmental safeguards , and the protection of our citizens ' health .
It also reflects the Lisbon Strategy , as it would reduce red tape .
For example , the approval procedure would become shorter and more efficient .
Furthermore , Member States would no longer work in isolation since mutual recognition of authorisations would become the norm rather than the exception .
This should reduce fragmentation of the internal market and create wider availability of pesticides for farmers .
Finally , I would like to emphasise that it is fully compatible with , and complementary to , the proposal for a directive on the sustainable use of pesticides , which falls under the responsibility of my colleague , Commissioner Dimas .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioners , firstly I should like to thank the rapporteurs , the Commission and the institutions , especially the French Presidency .
They have worked hard to reach this compromise , which strikes a balance between human health and agricultural production .
As far as farmers are concerned , harmonising the systems of the three zones will make it easier to access the products , and a fund for minor uses , as envisaged and guaranteed by the Commission , will mean that we have products placed on the market that are designed for minor cultivation and gardening purposes .
We therefore have a guarantee that , by 2020 , all substances with a proven harmful effect , such as CMRs and endocrine disrupters , will no longer be authorised to be placed on the market .
It follows that this proposal should significantly reduce the diseases and the many types of cancers for which a link to pesticides has already been scientifically proven , together with the degenerative diseases whose effects have also been proven .
One very important aspect that should be pointed out is that every effort will now be made to ensure better compliance with bee protection measures .
The Commission has just made a declaration on this point .
I should like to know , however , whether the Commission will reconsider Directive 2007 / 52 under the aspects it has just listed .
Emphasis will also be placed on biological control methods and , in this field , this research , which has been supported and financed by the Commission , still needs to be marketed effectively .
Moreover I am confident that this text will serve as a welcome and necessary incentive to stimulate research and innovation among the major producers of conventional chemical pesticides .
With regard to the Commission , the report provides for interim reports , meaning that we have a guarantee that monitoring will take place .
I hope that the national bodies will also do their best to prove that this is a valid text .
Madam President , when the proposal from the Commission was published it prompted a headline in a major Danish newspaper .
The front page of the newspaper read ' EU threatens Danish groundwater ' .
In Denmark , we are very proud of the fact that we have a huge amount of clean groundwater that we can drink completely untreated .
Thus , the water that comes out of the tap is groundwater and we can drink it without having to treat it first .
If the Commission 's proposal were to have been implemented as it was originally presented , it would have meant that in Denmark we would have roughly doubled the number of pesticides on the market .
This would very likely have also resulted in many of them seeping down into the groundwater - pesticides that we have currently declined to use because they would seep into the groundwater , with the effect that we would be unable to drink the water before it had been treated .
Clearly , it would have been a disaster if the Commission 's original proposal had been adopted , and not only for Denmark .
Just as we , in my home country , have the groundwater that we want to look after , and that I choose to use as an example here , there are , of course , other countries with various other environmental and health-related matters that they would like to protect and the EU must never force a country to lower its level of protection .
I am therefore extremely pleased that we have succeeded - not as a result of the Commission , not as a result of the Council , but as a result of Parliament 's efforts - in ensuring a flexibility which , where there are special considerations , allows individual countries to say ' no ' to pesticides that they do not want , as of course should be the case .
Another very positive thing that I am extremely pleased we have adopted is that we will now have a ban on , and can phase out , some of the most dangerous substances contained in pesticides .
These are substances that have already been prohibited in other applications by means of the regulation , referred to as REACH , that we produced a couple of years ago .
These are substances that are so dangerous that we will not permit them in textiles , we will not permit them in electronic goods , we will not permit them in toys or in all manner of other applications , but they are still permitted in pesticides , which then end up in our food !
This is , of course , totally unacceptable and I am therefore extremely pleased that we will now be rid of these dangerous substances in pesticides .
A third thing that I would like to mention and that I think is extremely positive and something we can be pleased about is that we have now introduced reduction targets for the individual Member States .
We have introduced action plans through which the individual countries are to achieve both a qualitative and quantitative reduction in the use of pesticides .
Qualitative refers to the fact that there are clearly some substances that are more dangerous than others and we should , of course , be particularly careful with these substances , but it is also a good idea to reduce use in the quantitative sense , that is to say the overall use of pesticides , because this will obviously also result in a reduction in the use of these substances that end up in our countryside and in our food .
However , in conclusion I also have to say that there are things that could have been done much better .
Neurotoxic substances , for example .
These are substances that impair the development of children 's brains .
The fact that we are not phasing these substances out is , in my opinion , unambitious and a shame .
I also think that it is a shame that we have included the possibility of exempting these dangerous substances if industry can demonstrate the need to do this .
I think that we should have been more ambitious .
However , when it comes to the bottom line , I am pleased and satisfied .
This is a victory for health and for the environment .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , here we find ourselves , I hope , on the verge of adopting this pesticide package .
The two compromise texts that will be put to the vote in this House seem to me to be balanced and worthy of our support , and this for several reasons .
The advances for producers and users are significant : the simplification of the authorisation procedures through , among other things , a division into three zones and the mutual recognition that goes with it .
I should have liked to have had only one zone , to guarantee even more consistency on EU territory , but the Member States proved to be a little overcautious .
Increased training requirements for sellers and users alike - teaching them how to understand and handle pesticides better - are guarantees not only of better health protection but also of economic gains .
The advances for those who protect animals are also significant , not least through the pooling of data derived from animal testing .
The advances for health and environmental protection are very significant ; in the long term , the most dangerous substances will be replaced by less harmful ones .
I must address the very controversial issue of endocrine disrupters .
Until now there has been no definition of these .
No legislative text dealt with this question .
The compromise gives the European Commission four years in which to draft science-based proposals for measures intended to define endocrine disrupting properties .
This scientific definition will enable products to be classified according to their disruptive or non-disruptive effects and , in fact , will provide the industry with the scientific legal framework that it requires .
The compromise text also takes account of the issue of bees and of their crucial role in the ecosystem .
I believe , in fact , that the wording found in the compromise , combined with the European Commission 's declaration , represents a major step forward .
The effects of active substances not only on the overall development of bees , but also on nectar and pollen , will be taken into account .
I should like to reassure certain stakeholders who have cast doubt on the availability of active substances and products .
This compromise takes account of their fears .
The three-zone system guarantees Member States the possibility of authorising a larger number of products .
There is also the possibility of derogations .
As far as minor uses are concerned , Parliament has fought to have the Commission draft proposals in the short term to establish a European fund .
There is also the review clause , which calls on the European Commission to analyse the impact of this legislation on the diversification and the competitiveness of agriculture .
Last but not least - and this has been pointed out by my fellow Members - we are encouraging pesticide manufacturers to develop new and effective products that respect human health and environmental protection .
To conclude , I should like to point out that plant protection products are medicines for plants and thus should be used only in a controlled and judicious manner .
These texts recognise and are going to further accentuate the importance of integrated production when it comes to sound and sustainable agriculture .
The two texts that we have arrived at manage to strike a balance between health and environmental protection and the availability of products for farmers .
I should like to conclude by saying what a pleasure it has been working with you , ladies and gentlemen , on this very sensitive matter .
Our work has , I believe , been an exercise in listening , mutual understanding and cooperation .
Thank you , ladies and gentlemen , and well done in particular to our two rapporteurs , Mrs Klass and Mrs Breyer , who were excellent negotiators in the search for a compromise with the Council .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Madam President , we are speaking in this Chamber on the eve of a vote which is a critical one for agriculture , health and environment .
Let us be very clear : any one of us legislators who has identified and raised problem issues during this legislation process has done so out of concern for agriculture and future food supply .
Of course I am concerned about any overuse of pesticides and about their effects .
There is no doubt that rates of cancer have increased .
We have increased residues in our air , water and food , which affect our health and environment .
Also note , it is our farmers who are in most direct contact with pesticides .
The intention of this legislation , which I applaud , is to protect our citizens ' health and environment and agriculture .
As legislators , however , we must always seek out balance and base legislation on sound science .
We cannot and should not legislate in the abstract .
By moving away from the Commission 's original scientific , risk-based approach to a hazard-based one , we fell at the first hurdle .
Without a relevant impact assessment , which many of us requested repeatedly , nobody can state exactly how many substances will be banned .
Ireland has a unique temperate but wet climate .
This makes our potatoes and winter cereal crops susceptible to weeds and disease such as blight .
The removal of an estimated 22 substances , including Mancozeb and Opus , will affect product availability .
So , following the introduction of this legislation in 18 months ' time , what is the view ?
Pesticides which are already on the market under current legislation would remain available until their existing authorisation expires .
If in Ireland we can prove that a particular substance which should be withdrawn is necessary to combat a serious danger to plant health and that there is no safer substitute , this substance may be approved for up to five years repeatedly , despite the ban .
In theory this may work .
In practice we need to make this work .
In the present climate we cannot afford to decrease EU food production and be less competitive in our market-leading potential .
We need to push and urge industry to invest in alternative , biologically sound products which are equally if not more effective .
We have a precedent .
We have all seen the case of the use of a non-chemical , natural , cheap and effective remedy spray used to protect white grapes worldwide .
I welcome Parliament 's amendment which goes some way to protect bees , which are crucial for farmers and food supplies through pollination .
Finally , I would ask colleagues to support UEN Amendment 182 and to reject the package Amendment 169 .
The Commission , the experts , will come up with the proper scientific basis for endocrine disruptors in four years .
We cannot prejudice this scientific assessment with a non-scientific-based definition .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I actually wanted to speak about Mrs Klass 's report , but will now take the opportunity to respond to the previous speaker .
You should read the agreement !
What you just said was , we have introduced the amendment so that endocrinal substances will not be on the market for a further four years .
Your amendment will bring about exactly the opposite situation .
Please look at it again .
Perhaps you could withdraw your amendment tomorrow , as it conflicts with what you have just said .
What the pesticide industry wants is that we do not set any criteria .
Everybody in the House must , of course , ask themselves whether they have prostrated themselves before the pesticide industry or whether they are creating added value for citizens , health and the environment .
This is the crux of the matter and nothing else .
Otherwise , we have taken all measures to support agriculture as always .
The Danish example , in particular , is very impressive : it has succeeded , within twenty years and without loss to agriculture , in halving the use of pesticides , doubling water quality and halving the quantities of pesticide residues .
And now to Mrs Klass , many thanks for your work !
However , as a group we would , of course , have liked to have clear objectives and clear timetables .
Nevertheless , we hope , of course , that this will be a spur for Member States to generate competition amongst themselves as to who is the most prepared amongst them to really take plant protection and sustainable management seriously .
And , of course , we would have liked more rights for the residents of areas adjacent to agriculture .
I also hope , in this connection , that the ground-breaking judicial ruling by the British High Court to clearly encourage and support citizens in their requests for information may perhaps also be used to provide similar access for more citizens in their Member States throughout Europe .
I also hope that we have made a little progress towards more transparency .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the dialogue on these measures - the pesticides directive and regulation - has been very difficult .
Parliament rightly insisted on legislation that would be effective and suitable for the task .
There has been debate in Parliament , but above all strong resistance in the Council , and economic powers have been mobilised in force in defence of vested interests .
We should , in fact , be concerned with general interests .
Consumers should be able to eat foods uncontaminated by residues , citizens should be able to enjoy an environment unspoilt by these pesticides , and farmers should be able to work safely and towards a new quality of product .
There is an excessive use of chemicals in agriculture that damages all these things - our food , the environment and farmers are all forced to pay a high price for this industrial produce .
The abuse of chemicals is linked to an old model of agriculture , where value is placed on quantity rather than quality and where produce becomes disconnected from the land , the seasons and the workers .
It is a costly model for everyone , a harmful model also , because of the impact it has on the greenhouse effect .
The legislation we are adopting is thus part of a movement to establish a more modern , healthier model of quality agriculture that meets the needs of citizens and the environment , with a greater commitment to labour and generating greater income .
I have to report that our efforts have borne fruit , thanks to the perseverance of both the rapporteurs and all the experts who worked together with their counterparts in the Council .
The objective of reducing pesticide use , and not only the dangers associated with it , has been added to the list of commitments to be met under the respective national plans only .
This chiefly concerns high-risk substances .
If priority is thus to be given to non-chemical methods , to the defence and integrity of the soil and water supply , avoiding any contamination of common resources such as water , then individual countries must have a sense of this great responsibility to reduce pesticides and move to sustainable use .
Aerial spraying is virtually prohibited and - where there are no viable alternatives - local people must be notified in advance of the composition , times , intensity and schedule of the spraying .
Progress has thus been made with regard to rights to information too , and access to data via the Internet .
We did want the regulation to abandon the idea of three rigid zones , but the Council did not agree , and so it has been retained .
The outcome is nonetheless significant ; these are measures that will be adopted to fight the contraband in illegal , counterfeit and dangerous substances , as well as others .
We are taking a real step forward and I hope that the parliamentary vote will not come to blows !
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the debate about the sustainable use of plant protection products and their admission on the market is a particularly complex one .
It is difficult to strike a balance between good and bad .
Whilst chemical substances cause damage to the environment and health , our agriculture cannot function without them , since the risk of crop diseases would increase too much .
This , in turn , would have adverse effects on food production and the economy .
The most important task policy-makers and politicians have is to strike a healthy balance between sustainability and agricultural economics .
In my view , the present compromise proposals go some way to achieving this balance , I can endorse them .
I am delighted , for example , that the system of risk mitigation is being maintained , rather than relying solely on reduction in use alone , as , in practice , the reduction in use on its own does not always guarantee a reduction in risks .
There are cases where the quantity of pesticides may be reduced , but when the product is then used in higher concentration levels , this is of little benefit to the environment or our health .
I am also pleased that the admission regulation has not become as restrictive as proposed in this House at first reading .
Extra restrictions are now being imposed on the admission of products , and rightly so , but this will not harm agriculture to a disproportionate extent .
I should like to offer my sincere thanks to both rapporteurs for the cooperation and efforts in achieving this result .
Madam President , I have been deluged with messages from growers from all over the south-east of England who regard this proposal as near catastrophic .
It will result , they tell me , in smaller crops and in higher prices , and it will open the way for importers who do not have the same criteria imposed upon them .
There will be job losses , some units will become non-viable and production will stop .
There will be closures in my constituency because there are , in some cases , no alternatives to key substances used by specialist growers .
There has been hopelessly inadequate impact assessment in many countries except my own , and the switch from risk assessment to hazards has already been commented on .
If you are going to use hazards as criteria you might as well ban petrol and caffeine .
Even the science is against you ; pest resistance problems will be aggravated ; there will be a loss of biodiversity .
Integrated pest programmes have already decreased the need for pesticides .
What is important are the options , not quantity .
And you seem to have ignored the benefits of crop rotation .
You have no right to destroy one of the few sectors of British agriculture still thriving just to appease Danish disinclination to process drinking water from the ground .
( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , our rapporteurs have worked very hard on an agreement that deserves our support , primarily because it seeks to achieve ambitious environmental and health objectives but also because it remains agriculturally-economically rational , which means it has an eye for both the certainty of food supply and the viability of farming in the Union .
As ever , a compromise is about give and take .
I still find it difficult to live with the cut-off criteria because I would have preferred to have seen a selection on the basis of a scientifically underpinned risk analysis , although I have to admit that the derogation option keeps things workable .
On the positive side , I would mainly like to highlight the following points .
First of all , Member States have a margin when they determine the volume reduction goals .
Secondly , the Union has been divided up into three zones where admissions are mutually recognised , which brings us closer to a unified market with less red tape and earlier availability of better plant protection products .
Thirdly , I welcome the fact that Member States have sufficient flexibility to determine how buffer zones around watercourses are handled .
Finally , what is also to be applauded is that Member States can take measures to make it easier to use plant protection products for minor crops .
This is particularly important for countries practising intensive agriculture on small plots of land , and I therefore hope that the fund for minor users will be topped up sufficiently .
A good guideline for the use of plant protection products is : as little and as safely as possible , but as much as is needed for a safe and profitable crop .
If we recognise and monitor sensibly , if efforts are made for professional and informed use and if we also take into account that agricultural production takes place within a global market , we strike the right balance , and that is why this compromise receives our support .
- ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioners , firstly I should like to thank the rapporteurs .
We are conscious today that , although plant protection products have enabled a significant increase in agricultural production , in some instances they also have a very negative impact on health and the environment .
That is why , aside from the legislation that will be put in place , there is also an urgent need for an epidemiological register making it possible to measure the impact caused by the use of various pesticides according to the way in which professionals and their families , and , of course , consumers , are exposed to them .
In certain regions a particularly rapid increase in various types of cancer has actually been observed .
Children of users and , in particular , of farmers , are also affected .
Aside from this crucial issue of people 's health , it is also the impact on the environment that should be measured .
We are already aware of the harmful effects of certain chemical substances on groundwater and rivers .
I might also add , on this issue , that I do not believe that the proposal to refer the buffer-zone matter to the various national arbiters is a satisfactory solution .
Rather , I believe that the Commission will have to be extremely vigilant regarding this issue .
Today we are also seeing an increase in soil erosion , which could jeopardise the agricultural use of many areas of land across the European Union in the decades to come .
The fertility of this land is greatly diminishing .
The European Union is reacting to confront these risks ; that is good , but it should also support farmers in a move to reduce , if not eliminate , harmful pesticides .
The future common agricultural policy should integrate this objective and take better account financially of the link between high-quality production and agriculture .
Research into agronomy and ecotoxicology , as well as training for farmers , should be used to support new production methods and should be adapted to the specific characteristics of the territories .
I shall conclude simply by quoting the title of a film that has just come out , which concerns the theme of this evening and which is called : ' Demain nos enfants nous accuserons ' [ Tomorrow our children will accuse us ] .
Madam President , let me join those Members who consider the second-reading agreement a well-balanced compromise , given the complexity of the matter .
It shows the way for further improvements in the sector , towards more efficient and safer plant protection products , and is flexible enough to avoid situations in which the ban on certain pesticides would , in the final analysis , reduce the irreproachability of agricultural products .
In particular , I wish to welcome the improvement of the original Commission proposal aimed at avoiding the duplication of tests and studies and promoting non-animal tests .
I hope that this could have an impact on other , related sectors , such as plant protection product data requirements , which are right now moving through their own revision process .
Even if pesticides , in contrast to chemicals , are intended to be toxic and their safety assessment is therefore a special case , it does not mean that redundant animal testing should take place or that scientific knowledge cannot develop in ways that will identify further redundancies and that further potential reduction in animal testing will be possible in future .
It should be noted that development and registration of new agricultural pesticides or plant protection products can use upwards of 12 000 animals in dozens of separate and often overlapping tests .
- ( PL ) Madam President , pesticides are harmful to the environment and to animals .
I should like to point out that the conditions in which old pesticides are stored in many countries are such that the products represent a danger to the environment and to human beings .
It will be impossible for poor countries to deal with this matter without Union aid .
Sustainable use of pesticides is an important issue .
The provision of information and training for users is crucial , as is support for the latter by the agro-technical services .
Some experts believe that the quantities of pesticides used are many times greater than is actually needed .
This is commonest where small users are concerned , as these people lack the necessary agro-technical knowledge on many subjects .
Other important issues are placing the pesticides on the market , scientific research in this area and all types of action to reduce the impact of pesticides on health and the environment whilst still proving effective .
I should like to thank Mrs Klass and Mrs Breyer very much for the reports they have prepared .
I should also like to point out that these directives make a great deal of sense , provided that they are effectively implemented and become part of agricultural practice .
The Union for Europe of the Nations Group supports the directive .
( NL ) Madam President , the Directive on the sustainable and risk-reducing use of pesticides and the Regulation concerning the placing of pesticides on the market are both extremely necessary and useful .
The sustainable production and consumption of food is , after all , a basic human right .
There are two compromises between Parliament and the Council before us .
Our group will approve both documents , although we would have liked to have seen a firmer end result , of course .
In fact , I was rather taken aback by the attitude of , and fierce protests from , the farming lobby and the pesticides industry in relation to this dossier , given that the laws on which we will be voting tomorrow will guarantee better protection of man and the environment and will also , in the end , lead to more innovation and safe replacement products .
Nobody can maintain any longer the criticism levelled by the farming lobby that more than half of pesticides will disappear .
In fact , even agricultural organisations now admit that no more than 9 % of products will need to disappear , and even then not right away , but phased over a period of several years .
Crucial in this matter is , as before , the protection of public health against carcinogenic substances that can bring about changes in DNA , affect fertility or upset hormones .
The compromises that are before us on this subject are honourable , with due consideration for the farming world .
It has even been agreed that if a specific farming sector is at risk of running into difficulty , a separate plan may be drawn up to give that sector more time .
We are , in my view , presenting an honourable and acceptable compromise between ecology , on the one hand , and agricultural economics , on the other .
Madam President , there are plenty of examples of sound EU environmental polices which improve the lives of citizens across the Union and there are , of course , also many examples where unnecessarily bureaucratic measures come from the EU and restrict the potential to sustain our rural economy and way of life .
Unfortunately , I believe this pesticide package may fall into the latter category .
In raising my concerns on these measures , I want to make it clear that I do not have industry in mind but rather the farming community - farmers who , I will remind the previous speakers , have as much concern with human health as any other citizen and who bear no malicious intent in that regard .
This package lacks the sufficient scientific rigour which is needed both to defend our health and our economy .
The lack of a thorough impact assessment , taking into account effects on our environment , health , economy and the sustainability of our rural communities , is testament to this failure to apply sufficient rigour .
It is my fear that the package will have the opposite effect of the progressive intentions behind it .
The well-intentioned attempt to create a more sustainable countryside may ultimately undermine the countryside by imposing overly stringent rules on an already struggling farming population .
I have listened intently to the arguments made unanimously by farmers in Ireland , and I believe that they are right to be concerned with this package and that the long-term interests of our citizens and of the rural communities are not protected in these measures .
The trialogue position does represent an improvement on the proposal but more needs to be done on the Regulation by way of amendment to meet these real concerns .
in writing . - ( SV ) Madam President , It is rare for a committed eurosceptic like me to be able to commend a proposal and recommend that the House votes in favour .
The reason for this is that we are dealing with cross-border environmental problems and the ability of the internal market to function .
Nevertheless , the proposals tend normally to be unreasonably bureaucratic - not so in this case .
This proposal avoids unnecessary bureaucracy .
Our rapporteur is on the right track .
This report proposes strict and tighter controls .
The use of poisons such as alcohol and tobacco must be an individual decision .
Collectively , it must be possible for us to be protected against toxicity .
That is what is proposed .
The proposal offers flexibility , mutual recognition , division into zones and the national right to prohibit pesticides over and above those included here , which is absolutely excellent .
Pesticides that have already been approved are not being withdrawn .
I do , in fact , have reservations about that .
We should be very strict when it comes to poisons of this kind .
I would like to remind you of what our fellow Member , Mr Mote , said about there being a risk of citizens buying products from other countries once we introduce stricter rules in the EU .
I do not believe that that will happen .
It is important for it to be stated that a product comes from the EU Member States .
People will then choose to buy such a product in particular .
I therefore recommend that the House vote in favour of this excellent compromise .
- ( FR ) Madam President , I should of course like to congratulate our rapporteurs , then to commend the agreement that has been reached thanks to the remarkable work that they have accomplished with the help of the European Commission and of the Council .
We have here in fact what seems to me to be a particularly important agreement because it is a balanced agreement that takes account of everyone 's interests , that is to say , it takes account of the protection of consumers ' health - these consumers who become anxious as soon as pesticides are mentioned , who become concerned when they hear that pesticide residues contaminate fruit , vegetables and cereals .
The reduction objective contained in the agreement , with the abolition of carcinogenic and genotoxic substances , is therefore very important .
Protecting the environment and biodiversity , with the incorporation of the bee problem , protecting water and protecting our land are of course key aspects .
So too is protecting farmers , these farmers who are the first to be affected by the use of such pesticides , who will look on with satisfaction at the harmonisation of legislation and the simplification of procedures , and who will be able to continue to use certain substances that they require for agriculture , but for what we now hope will be a sustainable type of agriculture .
The chemical industry , which agriculture needs , also has a duty to evolve and to find alternative solutions .
With this text , there can no longer be any confusion between the concepts of danger and of risk .
Pesticides are obviously dangerous , but it is their methods of use that determine whether they pose a risk to professionals , consumers and the environment .
It is therefore important to ensure that professionals receive proper training , that the general public is given information and that a kind of school of best practice is introduced .
To conclude , I would say that import controls absolutely must be harmonised , since we cannot demand a number of things from our farmers and then continue to bring products into the European Union that do not comply with our legislation .
There would be a risk there of unfair competition .
Madam President , I do not know what is going on , but I am reminded of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin , one of whose most famous quotes is ' worse is better ' .
As I enter the last six months of my tenure in this place , I can see that is just what is happening .
Worse is better !
It is better from my point of view , because the sooner people realise just how damaging the EU is to their incomes , their livelihoods and food production , then we will be better off out - and that is what I stand for .
This report takes no cognisance of hazard or risk ; it cannot identify between the two of them .
Let me tell you now .
It is icy out there - that is a hazard .
There is a risk I will fall over when I walk home .
You can legislate for neither of them .
It will damage food production .
It will put farmers out of business .
It will make food prices higher , particularly in the UK .
I will be voting against this because worse is better and , when the message gets out , we in Britain will leave the EU .
( NL ) Madam President , I should like to thank the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs alike .
The compromise that has been reached is , to my mind , a step in the direction of more sustainable farming , and this is desperately needed .
Needless to say , pesticides play a key role in preventing diseases and plagues of pests , but chemical pesticides also pollute the environment and can be harmful to health .
This is why it is important to narrow the chasm between regular and organic farming in a responsible manner .
That is precisely what this legislation does , and it does so mainly via three measures that are important in this regard .
First of all , some of the most dangerous chemical pesticides are being banned .
Exceptions are allowed where no alternatives are yet available .
The cultivation of tulips is not at risk , therefore , but it would not do it any harm if the level of toxins dropped slightly .
Secondly - and this is at least as important - incentives have been included in the legislation to promote the development of more sustainable products and products for minor crops .
Minor crops are crops that are only cultivated in small amounts , such as tomatoes , Brussels sprouts and tulips .
Many horticulturalists feared that these crops would come under threat as a result of this legislation , but , fortunately , this fear has proved unfounded .
Quite the reverse , in fact , given that the regulation provides for the introduction of a special fund for the promotion of research into products that are suitable for minor crops .
A third measure that is also of significance is that Member States should , in this context , make plans to reduce the risks involved in using the remaining chemical pesticides .
The use of chemical pesticides is being reduced everywhere , but particularly in sensitive areas , such as close to schools .
That , too , is important .
These are all measures that benefit the environment and public health .
If it was up to me , I would have banned the neurotoxic substances at the same time , as these can influence the functioning of the human nervous system and so should not be sprayed on agricultural crops .

- ( FR ) Madam President , the people of Europe should be pleased today with the very sound agreement reached by the Commission , the Council and , of course , our rapporteurs , on this issue of pesticides , and , going by what I have heard in this debate , it has been reached in a climate of very intense and particularly effective lobbying in the United Kingdom and in Ireland .
It is a legislative package , then , that reconciles health and the environment with competitiveness and innovation , instead of pitting them against one another , as is all too often the case .
It is important to bear in mind that , although the some 800 chemical molecules concerned undeniably play a role in protecting crops against pests , there are many people today who are against exposing populations to avoidable health risks , and I am specifically thinking , of course , of farmers , who are more exposed than others to certain harmful substances , CMRs and endocrine disrupters .
The figures from the WHO are edifying : one million incidences of serious poisoning by pesticides , with some 220 000 deaths each year .
It is this philosophy that consists in using chemicals for everything , in causing a cocktail effect and in taking a short-term view of agriculture that is today being called into question .
A necessary change of direction is taking place which , tomorrow , if the compromise is of course accepted by our plenary , will formally bring an ambitious , realistic and resolutely modern pesticide policy into the world .
It is ambitious , because Europeans want , as we do , to get rid of dangerous products ; they also support a ban on aerial spraying and increased protection for public areas .
It is realistic , because economic life cycles are respected , two-thirds of the substances placed on the market are safe and are therefore authorised for 10 years , on a renewable basis , and manufacturers have no legitimate cause for concern .
To conclude , Madam President , this pesticide package is modern because the integrated management of pesticides is an essential strand of a new agricultural policy , one that , for Europe , involves having fewer , but better , pesticides .
- ( PL ) Madam President , I should like to highlight three issues in the course of the debate on the reports on the sustainable use of pesticides and placing plant protection products on the market .
Firstly , the provisions under discussion only concern two stages of the use of chemical products , namely their placement on the market and their subsequent use .
As yet , no appropriate regulations exist concerning the removal of such substances from the market and their disposal .
In my country , Poland , the disposal of plant protection products is a major issue .
Significant financial support is a priority , rather than additional legal provisions .
The local authorities on whose territory the dumps for substances of this type are located require financial aid to be able to dispose of them .
Secondly , it would be desirable if , pursuant to the principle of subsidiarity , the individual Member States had the final say concerning confirmation , restriction and denial of authorisation for the use of a chemical product on their market Thirdly , I would like to express the hope that the solutions adopted in Parliament will create a level playing field for all European farmers in relation to the use of plant protection products .
I trust too , that illegal practices involving the trading and use of these products will be reduced to a minimum .
- ( FR ) Madam President , the report 's proposals are along the right lines , and I should like to commend the rapporteurs on them .
Although it is true , as the Commission says , that pesticides mainly concern the common agricultural policy , it is no less true that such a directive should aim to have the environment and public health as its main legal basis .
Its scope cannot be reduced to a simple market-harmonisation or competitiveness problem .
Proof of this is the case of the French outermost regions of Martinique and Guadeloupe where , in the case of Martinique , 20 % of the land , 20 % of the island 's surface - that is , a surface area of 1 000 km2 - have been polluted indefinitely by the chlordecone molecule , the persistence of which is unknown .
This is a molecule that has polluted not only the land but also the surface waters , some groundwater areas and the marine waters of the coastal region , greatly damaging our economy .
Who is giving thought to the current public health problems ?
If it is not too late , I would advise Parliament to study the case of Martinique , which France is very aware of .
It is crucial for this directive to bring about a significant reduction in the use of chemical pesticides , not least through the promotion of sustainable alternative solutions such as organic farming and biopesticides .
This will be a credit to Parliament .
Lastly , let us not forget - and this has been pointed out many times - the ravages of pesticides on fauna , especially bees .
It is also important for Parliament to be vigilant concerning free-trade products , in particular agricultural products sourced from countries that are not rigorous in their use of pesticides .
Madam President , what we have in common here is a desire to protect health , but we should remember that it is the farmers who produce the good , fresh , nourishing food that is the basis of our health .
I come from a very wet country .
My farmers struggle continually with fungal infestation .
Fungi - unlike insects that come and go - come and stay .
To ban , or impose diluted , fungicides could make potato and grain farming impossible in Ireland , but this proposed legislation is already having another effect .
Already in our media there are articles promoting GM potato-growing as an answer to the EU restrictions on pesticides .
Which will be more damaging to bees and the environment : the continued responsible use of pesticides as practised by Irish farmers , or GM ?
We are told pesticides might disrupt DNA .
GM is based on disrupting DNA .
It is more necessary than ever that we start with a full impact assessment .
- ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the wake of the trialogue between the Council , Parliament and the Commission , the text adopted on 18 December on the pesticide package seems to be well-balanced .
Indeed it takes account both of the interests of farmers and of the necessary protection of the environment , protected areas included .
Having followed this matter closely , I am pleased with the result obtained , as it will allow farmers to pursue their economic activity without being penalised by the total elimination of pesticides and plant protection products , which will be strictly controlled .
I would point out in this regard that the producers of acid fruits and vegetables in my region of Normandy have been at the cutting edge of agro-environmental practices for several years now .
Fortunately the Council and Parliament have found an extremely useful area of agreement in this period of uncertainty , which has been made worse by the CAP 's closing balance sheet and by the threats hanging over the agricultural budget .
To conclude , we will always stand by farmers in defending their tool of work and their irreplaceable role in society , which consists first and foremost in feeding their fellow men and then in preserving the countryside and in developing the land to everyone 's satisfaction .
In the face of the irresponsible pressure exerted by ecologists , it is comforting that common sense has prevailed .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow we will vote on new regulations on the subject of plant protection , a subject that arouses a great deal of emotion in the populace .
This was also reflected in the deliberations in Parliament .
We would all like fresh , healthy , local food at affordable prices without hazardous residues from plant protection products .
The result achieved in the trialogue will create the preconditions for this .
The new Plant Protection Regulation is a great step towards more consumer and health protection .
Priority was given once more to scientific criteria rather than political dogmas when establishing the exemption criteria .
The result of the trialogue is a giant step forward compared to the result of our Parliament at the first reading .
Almost 80 % of all active substances will no longer be affected but only those that constitute a risk to human health or the environment , and this is on a scientific basis .
There will also be sufficient plant protection products available for sustainable management in the future .
However , substances that are really hazardous will also be banned .
In future , there will no longer be 27 national licensing authorities but only 3 licensing zones for licensing plant protection products .
The Member States within these zones must then mutually acknowledge their licences in principle .
The new Plant Protection Product Regulation will provide the harmonisation required for a long time with justification in the plant protection product sector .
We will then have a uniformly high level of protection without jeopardising sustainable agricultural production within Europe .
We will now achieve a real internal market , uniform competitive conditions and a great deal of progress towards health protection .
This is wonderful success for consumers and farmers . Thank you very much .
( RO ) The use of plant protection products in compliance with efficient farming practices is vital to be able to produce a sufficient quantity of good-quality food , which will offer a high level of protection to the consumer 's health and the environment .
Reducing the risks and impact associated with pesticide use and setting targets aimed at reducing how frequently these products are used will help guarantee sustainable farming .
The presence of a high level of pesticides in the food consumed in the European Union results from the dependency on these chemical products which , although necessary to help control any infestation and boost production efficiency , can have adverse effects on public health .
Some Member States , including Romania , are facing a high level of infestation affecting their agricultural land , with pesticide use seeming to be the best method for eliminating the pests .
For this reason , the proposals for implementing integrated pesticide management , the use of alternative substances and risk management will help yield suitable agricultural products which take into account the environment and public health safety , thereby reducing dependency on plant protection products .
At the same time , the large number of pests on Romania 's agricultural lands means that we have to use treatments sprayed from airplanes .
However , once the directive comes into force , these spray treatments will only be applied when there are no viable alternative solutions to combating the pests , in order to provide the environment with an adequate level of protection .
I am pleased with the compromise result , which has received the backing of the majority of political groups .
It will also ensure a balance between the availability of plant protection products and , by implication , a sufficient quantity of food products , as well as help maintain European farmers ' competitiveness and increase the level of protection for the environment and health .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , plant protection products were , and still are , essential agricultural resources .
Farmers require a minimum selection of plant protection products because it is a matter of protecting the indigenous cultural landscape , producing top-quality food and protecting resources .
Our debates about chemicals are too often conducted on a very irrational level .
We must think and act rationally if we are to achieve sensible results .
The effects of Parliament 's original position would have been fatal : a blanket ban on plant protection products would result in lower agricultural yields and , ultimately , rising food prices .
Therefore , I am happy that an acceptable compromise was found in the trialogue negotiations .
It is welcome that we have retained the three-zone ruling even with considerable exemptions for Member States .
A courageous step to a consistent internal market solution would look different at this stage :
Alongside the acceptable compromises achieved , we should not second guess a final definition of endocrinically effective substances but actually allow the Commission its four years to produce a scientifically-based definition .
Otherwise , we will overstretch the precautionary principle here .
I find it regrettable that we are not permitting any impact assessment of the agreement now reached .
- ( PL ) Madam President , our work on a further series of tasks aimed at regulating issues important for human health within the European Union is drawing to a close .
I believe that the compromises we hope to agree on are sound .
They should ensure that the restrictions introduced will promote health without threatening the development of European agriculture .
It is important to bear in mind , however , that all such changes aimed at tightening up safety conditions in agriculture result in significant cost increases .
The latter have to be borne by our farmers , who are simultaneously being required to improve their competitiveness on global markets .
Our farmers will have to pay more for safer pesticides .
I shall reiterate what I have said in the House on many previous occasions .
By all means let us introduce high standards for our farmers and food producers .
Let us also , however , impose those same standards on importers of food from outside the Union , otherwise our efforts to raise standards will prove counterproductive .
Madam President , I do not accept that we have yet got a balanced package on this matter .
For me this debate highlights two follies : first the abject folly of the EU , without pausing for even an impact assessment , dashing down the road of banning multiple plant protection products , not caring that there are no substitutes and that indigenous food production will drastically suffer , particularly in the cereal and vegetable sector , and thereby forcing ever-increasing dependence upon imports from countries who care nothing about these things .
Madam President , I have heard much talk in this debate about science , but what sort of science is it that does not subject itself to proper impact assessment ?
The second folly is that of my country in particular , which is perhaps the most affected by these proposals , having subjected itself to qualified majority voting in the Council on these matters to the point where we are now probably going to be impotent to resist them .
It is due to the idiocy of subjecting ourselves to qualified majority voting that we find ourselves in this position , and yet some under Lisbon would say we should hand over more and more subjects to that category .
( DE ) Madam President , this is a balanced compromise and therefore I will support it .
I would also like to say thank you , at this point , to all those involved .
The dossier was , as we are hearing in this debate , created with a great deal of emotion , but nevertheless it succeeded in reconciling the different protection aims which we are pursuing with this legislation .
Europe purports to be one of the most advanced plant protection legislative powers worldwide and that is a great plus .
It was important for us to find a balance between the protection aims in question and health protection , the internal market goals and , of course , environmental protection , but a balanced result between the specific protection aims has also been achieved .
It was important for us to observe the various principles , for example , that the whole thing was based on facts and scientific principles and not on emotions , secondly , that we stayed with the risk-based approach and not the hazard-based approach as before .
This is extremely important for the practicability of the whole legislative project and for its implementation at a later date .
At the same time , it should be remembered that we do not give preferential treatment to imports in the implementation and disadvantage national or European production .
But in this instance the Commission still has a great task ahead of it .
These principles were taken into consideration in a balanced manner , overall .
Therefore , we can live with the compromise .
As far as the details are concerned , it is particularly important for me that Member States are given the necessary flexibility and subsidiarity for groundwater protection , so that they are in a position to be able to respond to their specific circumstances .
The Netherlands cannot be compared with Germany or with Malta or Greece in this instance .
It is also important that the use of pesticides in Natura 2000 areas and in bird sanctuaries is reduced to a minimum .
Member States will have sufficient room to manoeuvre to implement this accordingly .
However , this is a compromise which should be supported by everybody .
- ( PL ) Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteurs on their excellent reports .
Time is short , so I shall only refer to the report by Mrs Klass and highlight certain shortcomings of the proposed directive .
The directive lays down a training and certification system for distributors and professional users of pesticides .
The proposed arrangements should , however , provide for mutual recognition between Member States of certificates confirming completion of training in the use of pesticides .
The directive also retains the regulations of the system of technical control and maintenance of equipment for the application of pesticides based on national legislation .
I believe it would be appropriate to regulate this matter at Community level .
If such control were based on international provisions there would be every reason for mutual recognition of the results by the Member States .
This is particularly relevant in relation to the exploitation of fields located in borderlands and to official plant protection action .
One final reservation I should like to mention is the failure to take account of the special circumstances of forest protection .
Forests cannot be maintained without aerial spraying .
( NL ) Madam President , as a Dutch MEP , I followed this legislation with due attention and care .
In my low-lying country , the situation is very specific .
Unlike other areas in Europe , it is impossible to work with buffer zones prescribed by Europe along all water courses .
This would not work .
It would make normal sustainable production in farming and horticulture impossible .
The Netherlands , however , is also known for its minor crops , including tulips , onions and chicory .
This is why we should pay specific attention to how the compromise is to be worded .
The compromise that is now being struck is a great improvement on the one in Mrs Breyer 's proposal , which was the subject of vote in the Commission .
As a member of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I voted against on that occasion .
There are now sound transitional provisions which , in combination with innovation and replacement products , can help industry along .
Moreover , this fund for minor crops that is about to be introduced will give these alternatives a shot in the arm .
Also , the three regulations , the three zones in Europe for recognition and admission are also much better aligned with actual practice .
I should like to add one area of concern , namely the admission of products from outside the European Union .
We lead the way when it comes to striking a good balance between public health and practical applicability , but what happens with external imports ?
This competitive position , along with the parallel import and parallel trade should , to my mind , be raised in the WTO , where matters of this kind are discussed .
We can endorse the proposal .
I should like to thank the rapporteurs and particularly Mrs Klass and Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges for their efforts in this respect .
All that remains is this one area of concern that matters to farmers , namely we are practising sustainable farming , but what about everyone else ?
This problem remains unresolved for the time being , and I would appreciate hearing your reaction to this .
( HU ) Fellow Members , food security is a major goal of the European Union , but this is a poor compromise .
Hungary will oppose this report in Council , and the Hungarian Members of the European Parliament do likewise , because it is damaging to European agriculture .
We face two particularly important problems .
The zone system is artificial and contrary to the European Union 's principle of subsidiarity , and , as the remarks of my fellow Member from the Netherlands have just demonstrated , it makes flexible response impossible .
It is further harmful to European agriculture because the level of risks increases , the danger of resistance increases , production costs rise , and because , as many of my fellow Members have mentioned , we will not be able to monitor the products of third countries .
For this reason , this directive poses extremely serious dangers .
Finally , the consequence of radical environmentalist perspectives is that restrictions on plant protection products will make way for GMOs , which would not be desirable in Europe .
Madam President , I would like to thank those who worked on these two important reports .
One would imagine from the contributions of some here this evening that the EU had absolutely no control currently on the marketing and use of these chemicals - we do !
We have strict rules at the moment and , indeed , rules on residues and food .
So I bow to neither side nor extreme of this debate this evening , particularly those who fail to see the need for plant protection products in food production and those who say that these two pieces of legislation are a disaster for farming and the food production in Europe .
I am a bit concerned about the comments of Commissioner Dimas when he says that people are worried about pesticides .
Yes , that may be the case , but the question is : how justified are these worries ?
What have you done as the Commission to point out to consumers that the vast bulk of our food is produced using products to give us quality , safe food ?
Yes , some ingredients used in chemicals are very hazardous , but the risks of using them depend on how they are used and depend on compliance with maximum residue levels ( MRLs ) in our food .
As far as I am concerned , those who use them are well-trained , in my experience , and we need perhaps to step up the training in other Member States .
Twenty-two substances are on the way out ; in Ireland and the UK there are huge concerns about cereal production and potatoes .
The questions are : will the agrochemical industry respond and produce new products ?
The Commission does not have the answer to that question .
Will the derogations work ?
What happens if there are no alternatives ?
I think that that needs to be addressed , because we in Ireland want to continue producing cereals and potatoes .
The question of imported food is a very real one , and I beg for five seconds extra on it .
If the Commission would work with EU food producers on this , we could make progress .
It is just not tenable that the Commission can sit here and say that we will ban the use of substances in Europe but that those outside the European Union can continue to send us food using those substances .
It is not a competitive position , it is not tenable , and I ask you to address it here this evening .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to make reference to the Breyer report .
It must be said that European farmers are fully aware that particular attention must be paid to human health and to the protection of the environment when using plant protection products .
However , the industry is deeply concerned because the European Parliament does not understand the impact that this regulation may have in the future .
Assessments of its potential impact indicate that , due to the unavailability of plant protection products in the future , it is going to be very difficult to control pests and diseases that affect the cultivation of many foods - specifically , all Mediterranean produce - as well as the cultivation of ornamental plants and cut flowers .
I am fully aware that the agreement adopted in the trialogue was the result of hard negotiation and I therefore have to acknowledge the work the rapporteurs have done .
Nevertheless , it must be recognised that the temporary definition of endocrine disrupters will result in the disappearance of a large number of active substances , particularly insecticides , which are of utmost importance to farming .
The producers must have at their disposal a sufficient quantity of active substances in order to effectively and safely combat any disease or pest affecting their plants , bearing in mind that often the danger lies not in the product itself but in its misuse .
For these reasons , the Spanish delegation of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports the proposals requesting an impact assessment and will vote in favour of Mr Sturdy 's amendments - which I have signed myself - relating to endocrine disrupters , and those in support of plant protection products being made available in an emergency .
Furthermore , if this regulation is adopted in the terms of the agreement reached , the outcome will be a reduction in food production and a rise in prices , which will result in our importing those same foods that we do not produce treated with the very products we are banning .
Madam President , on the Breyer report , I say to the Commission , why are you against an impact assessment ?
What is so vital or of so much concern that the Commission are opposed to an impact assessment ?
There is no scientific evidence to suggest that some of the products that we have been using are dangerous to public health .
Some of them are , but there are quite a few you propose to take off the menu that are not dangerous .
I am thinking particularly here of one called Triasol which is vitally important to the production of wheat within the European Union .
You have failed , and I mean this quite clearly , you the Commission have failed the general public when you failed to stop GMOs coming into the European Union , and the Commission admits this .
You have admitted the fact that you have failed to stop GMOs coming into Europe .
You failed when it came to the report that I did on maximum residue levels .
We have a member here from DG SANCO - the Commissioner is busy talking at the moment , but when she has stopped talking she might just listen to what I have got to say .
They have failed to control imports coming in with maximum residue levels of pesticides .
They are being found on supermarket shelves .
So , if we are going to ban these products within the European Union , what are you going to do about the imports coming in ?
Are you just going to say : well , it does not really matter - these products are going to be coming in anyway ?
Let us leave it and just assume that people will not bother about it ?
Farmers throughout the European Union have been the most responsible people when it comes to producing food and putting this legislation in place basically means saying to them that they are fools and they are not interested .
No farmer in his right mind would use a chemical which is dangerous to public health .
We have done a huge amount of surveys on this .
I leave you with one or two last thoughts on this .
We are about to ban battery cages for the production of eggs and yet you will give a derogation on that .
Yet that is fairly important to people .
I worry about the fact that you , the Commission , have failed so far to put in place all the legislation which we have .
It is vitally important here that you give the farmers the opportunity to prove themselves and prove the fact that these products are safe .
( SL ) There are some alarming health trends which are largely due to the irresponsible use of pesticides .
It is clear that an increase in health and a decrease in incidences of cancer is not possible when our food is becoming increasingly poisoned .
I am talking about one of the key environmental and health issues , and that is why only a change in the development paradigm can help us , not mere cosmetic actions .
The work carried out by my colleague Mrs Klass and fellow Member Mrs Breyer , in conjunction with shadow rapporteurs , is a step in the right direction , and I wish to express my full appreciation for that .
I am pleased to note that both reports identify a number of fronts for action , while also addressing the manufacturers , dealers and users of pesticides .
At the same time , however , we request the introduction of national action plans with quantified objectives .
It seems to me very significant that the notification of neighbours has been included , as this could make an important difference , not only for humans , but also , in particular , for bees .
This means that we can easily prevent harm , simply by focusing on those who might be causing it .
In this directive it is stipulated that Member States may include provisions on the notification of neighbours in their national action plans .
I would rather that it were stipulated that they must do this .
I am convinced that it is possible to allow plant protection with non-chemical , that is biological and mechanical , products to play a bigger role .

Madam President , Commissioners , can I say to you that less than a year ago we were debating in this Chamber what we were going to do about global food security , and was there enough food in the world , and we were terribly worried about it .
Here we are , less than a year later , debating this legislation tonight , which has the potential of actually reducing food production in the European Union ; and there is a morality about producing food because what you must remember is that if we in Europe do not produce food we can probably pay for it , but the developing world cannot .
Much of this legislation will affect our crops - not only wheat , as Robert Sturdy has said , but potatoes in particular .
We have had two of the worst summers that I have ever seen in the last two years in northern Europe .
We have needed fungicides to reduce blight and actually grow the potatoes .
And if people in Europe do not eat potatoes , what do they eat , Commissioners ?
They eat rice and they eat pasta both of which - and certainly rice - the developing world is very short of .
Further to what Robert Sturdy has said , many of these pesticides and fungicides we are using , if they are used properly and you have the proper withdrawal period , pose no problems , and by using these particular chemicals we can produce very good food .
And if you stand and tell me that you will stop imported food coming in that has been actually sprayed with these particular types of chemicals - you will not !
For the simple reason that , if they had been properly applied , you can actually test your wheat as much as you like as it comes through the port of Rotterdam , but you will find no residue there .
So I think we really do have to wake up to the fact that we in Europe need to produce food and we need to produce it safely , make sure that we reduce the amount of chemicals we use , which we are already doing , and we have got to make sure that we are training farmers to spray properly , which again we are also doing .
So , I would urge you : please , have a proper impact assessment , because it was two years ago you did your impact assessment .
We have had two of the wettest summers on record ; it is time for you to look again .
We really do urge you to have a proper impact assessment .
Madam President , Mr Struan Stevenson has offered me his two minutes as he is unable to be here .
May I take it is as PPE-DE time ?
My pleasure !
Madam President , exaggerated claims have made it difficult to ascertain fact from fiction at different stages of this difficult debate .
Yes , there is a need to control the use of agrochemicals - we all accept that - and , if not used sustainably , they can be hazardous to the user and the environment .
But , if used sustainably , and if the maximum residue levels and withdrawal period are respected , they are of minimum risk , and of none at all to the consumer .
The proposal to base decisions for approval of an active substance on the intrinsic properties of the substance - the hazard-based approach - rather than basing it on the scientific principle of risk assessment is a major concern .
Alcohol , pure alcohol , is a hazard .
If you drink pure alcohol , we know what happens .
But when sufficiently diluted at 4 % or 12 % or whatever - when used sustainably - there is minimum risk .
May I say that these are two different issues .
The EU impact assessment has been referred to .
The scientific definition , and lack thereof , of endocrine disruptors has already been referred to .
However , the positive note is that the derogation period will allow industry to invest in much-needed R & D and to develop new products and viable alternatives .
I would invite the agrochemical industry and their CERP community to look into and invest in this area .
The anomaly of allowing imported food products using plant protection products generally , while we will not allow our farmers to use them , continues to be one of the mysteries and one of the major problems we have with legislation of this sort .
However , on balance I think a lot of improvement is being made from the original proposal and I am inclined to support it .
Madam President , I wish to highlight the importance of explaining to affected stakeholders early on in the legislative process the reasons why it is necessary to regulate .
As a representative of a predominantly rural constituency , I have received a considerable number of representations from highly concerned constituents in the farming community on this particular dossier .
There is a general perception amongst this community that regulations are being arbitrarily handed down from Brussels without any input from the bottom up .
Therefore , I firmly believe that Member State governments need to do a lot more explaining of these matters with affected stakeholders , rather than taking the easy route of foisting the responsibility on the so-called Brussels bureaucrats .
After all , it is the Member States that have to implement these measures in the final instance , and it is the Member States that have the resources in terms of local representatives to explain these matters to farmers .
It is important that those who are producing food within the EU are not over-regulated compared to those who bring their produce onto the market from outside the EU .
Any proposal must have balance for consumers , farmers and the environment , but we must also make sure that the correct information is made available to all of the stakeholders .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , as a doctor I am acutely aware that it is our duty to European consumers to eliminate crop treatment substances that are shown to be harmful on the basis of scientific evidence .
At the same time I appreciate that the rapporteurs have managed to find a balanced solution to the new regulation which will motivate industry to seek and develop safer alternative pesticides .
Until then it will be necessary to grant the exemptions that are needed by countries with wet climates and southern countries simply must understand this .
I insist that the Member States and also the Commission perform thorough and uncompromising checks to ensure that food and flowers imported from countries outside the European Union have not been treated with banned pesticides and fungicides .
It is not simply a matter of measuring levels of residues in food .
We must not permit such unequal terms of competition for European farmers .
I also agree that the Commission should be criticised for failing to carry out an impact study as a result of which we are unfortunately unable to respond to all of the concerns raised by citizens over this regulation , although I am essentially in favour of it .
Madam President , the common agricultural policy has done enormous damage to British agriculture at enormous financial and economic cost .
Now we have these proposals on pesticides .
It is estimated that this directive could mean the banning of 15 % of pesticides .
It is estimated that such a ban would cut wheat yield by 26 % to 62 % , potato yield by 22 % to 53 % and some other vegetable yields by 25 % to 77 % .
This will have the effect of sending retail prices soaring , affecting worst those least able to pay .
I wonder whether the rapporteurs could give us the identity of just one person afflicted by , or who has died from , the effects of these pesticides ?
Probably not !
But I could tell you of lots of my constituents who cannot afford to pay more for their food bills .
( HU ) I am pleased that the Directive on the use of plant protection products has essentially placed this matter within the competence of Member States , especially as regards the size and designation of the buffer zone .
I am in favour of prescribing action plans at national level and support the proposal that the law should put the reduction in the use of such products at its core .
I am also pleased with the compromise reached on aerial spraying .
As regards the Directive concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market , the proposal is fundamentally sound inasmuch as it addresses the prohibition and gradual replacement of products that have seriously harmful effects on human health .
At the same time , monitoring materials arriving from third countries may raise problems .
I consider the authorisation of plant protection products in a 3-zone system unacceptable .
One does not need to be a plant protection expert to be horrified at the thought that Hungary , for instance , would fall within the same zone as Ireland , which has very different weather and agricultural production conditions .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to address a subject which has not yet been discussed today in this connection .
At the end of the day , we have again reached what it is to be hoped is a reasonable compromise in Europe .
But what have we done along the way ?
Let us remember the discussions over many months with some extreme accusations by one side against the other and vice versa .
All this has been devoured by the media with great enthusiasm .
All that in the media has led to consumers being undermined and everyone agreeing again that ' Europe is doing everything wrong ' and ' Europe is against rather than for the citizens ' .
Now , at the end of the day , we have reached a halfway reasonable solution , a compromise solution , but still one on which there will be a great deal of agreement .
What will be left then , on average ?
Little to nothing !
- ( PL ) This is the first time the European Commission , the Council and the Parliament have adopted such a thorough and wide-ranging approach to provisions concerning the quality and safety of food .
Tomorrow 's vote in Parliament will conclude three years of work .
Our task is to ensure that provisions are clear , safe , and knowledge-based , especially as regards such a sensitive area as food production .
That is why , together with a group of Members , we are highlighting the need for ongoing monitoring of the effects of the regulation adopted regarding the use of pesticides .
We maintain that provisions based on sound knowledge will create trust amongst consumers concerning the use of pesticides on a scientific basis .
The compromise reached will help improve the condition of the population 's health , but will increase production costs .
We should keep that in mind when discussing financial resources for the common agricultural policy .
We also wish to enquire whether imported food will comply with the strict provisions that apply within the Union .
I appeal for support for Amendment 179 , Amendment 180 and Amendment 181 , which we tabled jointly with other Members .
Madam President , I have to say I have grave concerns about this proposal that is before us here tonight and the effects it will have on the future of our agricultural industry .
I want to put on record that I support the amendments put forward by Mr Sturdy , which I have signed , and which I am happy to support .
I think they will at least help give the industry some support in the future .
Yes , we do need and we do require legislation , but it must be good legislation .
We do not need to damage production in the process .
We need a strong impact assessment to know what effects this will have , and this is what is required and what is needed , and this we do not have at present .
We must have more facts and not fiction , and we certainly should dwell on the facts .
There is no point in Europe legislating itself out of business because we cannot control what is imported in .
This is where the Commission have total double standards on what they impose within the European Union and what they allow into the European Union , for all that will happen is that people will go outside .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , I should like to thank everyone who took the floor during today 's debate for their very constructive speeches .
On the basis of the agreed text , which is a compromise and a very successful compromise , the Member States are obliged to prepare national action plans setting out quantitative targets to limit risks .
Under these national action plans , the Member States are also obliged to monitor the use of pesticides which have on occasion caused specific problems and to set targets for reducing the use of certain pesticides .
This represents significant progress which , in addition to protecting the health of European citizens and the environment , will bring about financial benefits , due to the reduction in national health spending , and the benefit of a reduction in the use of pesticides under the new legislation .
Apart from national action plans , the proposed compromise package also contains a number of other important aspects .
The principle of prevention must be applied .
Within the framework of integrated pest management , priority is given to other , non-chemical methods of plant protection .
Protection of residents and bystanders has been improved , in that national action plans may include provisions concerning information for persons who may be exposed to spray drift , while land sprayed from the air must not be adjacent to residential areas .
All pesticide distributors , not just those who sell to professional users , must ensure that some members of their staff have a special certificate of aptitude - which of course , as one Member commented , will be mutually recognised - to provide information on pesticides and are available to provide advice to customers .
Only certain categories of small distributors will be exempt from this requirement .
As far as the ban on aerial spraying is concerned , a compromise solution has been found on the processing of exemption requests .
Exemptions will follow a two-stage procedure .
Firstly , the preparation of a general aerial spraying plan , which will be subject to express approval by the authorities , followed by the submission of special individual requests for aerial spraying , which will be subject to the conditions on which the general plan was approved .
To close , I should like to add that the Commission is satisfied with the outcome of negotiations and is therefore in a position to accept all the proposed compromise amendments .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , thank you all for your very fruitful participation in this very interesting debate .
The Commission has attached particular importance to this file and I have been personally committed to the highest level of public health which it seeks to achieve .
There have been long and difficult discussions during the trialogue which the rapporteur has steered with great dedication and skill , and I thank her for that .
The Commission supported the common position and can now support the proposal as it emerges from the second reading .
All the innovative aspects of the proposal have been retained , in particular the approval criteria , which will ensure that dangerous substances which pose a high risk to public health are eliminated or substituted by safer alternatives , improved mutual recognition , and the substitution of some products by safer alternatives .
Let me reply , however , to some of the comments that have been made here .
According to the Commission 's estimate , only 4 % of the substances currently on the market would disappear because they are endocrine disruptors and only 2 % because they are carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic to production .
The total number of active substances which are currently on the market and which possibly would not be approved under the new regulation is expected to be less than 25 substances .
This evaluation has been confirmed by a report from the Swedish Chemical Agency and is also in line with the revised impact assessment from the UK Pesticides Safety Directorate .
Moreover , I would like to point out that the new criteria will apply to substances already approved only upon renewal of their approval , and for most of them the renewal date is 2016 .
The industry will therefore have ample time to develop other safer substances .
I would also like to make reference to some comments made about imported food .
Let me remind you that , as from 2008 , we have the regulation on maximum residue levels which is fully applicable .
If an active substance is not approved for use in plant reduction products in the EU , the maximum residue level for this substance is set at the level of detection .
This MRL is valid for EU production , but also for imported food and feed .
There are , however , several reasons why an active substance could not be approved in the EU , and the possible risk to consumers is only one of them .
Others can be linked to environmental issues or the protection of workers , which fall under the sovereignty of third countries where the pesticide is used .
In these circumstances the use of the pesticide could not be acceptable for us , but the treated crops would not necessarily pose a risk to EU consumers .
The third country which wants to export commodities treated with such substances to the EU may therefore ask for an import tolerance as long as it can submit data proving that there is no risk to human health from the consumption of these commodities and that these data are favourably evaluated by EFSA and formally adopted in EU legislation .
This is the position regarding imported goods .
Coming back to the directive which we are hopefully about to adopt , the Commission considers the final compromise to be properly balanced , to achieve the objectives of health and environmental production , as well as to ensure the availability of pesticides to farmers .
We now look forward to the formalisation of the second-reading agreement .
This is certainly a very good way for the European Parliament and the Council to start a new year , and good for our citizens as it benefits their health .
It is also , we believe , beneficial to our farmers as it ensures their own production through specific measures , such as the promotion of safer products .
What was achieved is important .
It was achieved by all of us together and serves as an excellent example of how interinstitutional cooperation can directly benefit our citizens .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is now possible to identify a sugar cube in Lake Constance using state-of-the-art analysis .
However , we must also ask ourselves how we deal with these new discoveries , what we do with them .
We now need objective risk assessments to find a balance between the justified health and environmental requirements and the justified concerns of business and food safety , including within a worldwide comparison .
The questions , which colleagues have asked , have not been adequately answered by the Commission , in my opinion .
It is not enough to say that four substances no longer apply or two substances no longer apply and there are only 25 substances in total .
No , we wish to have an accurate economic assessment , an assessment that not only fulfils economic criteria but also health criteria .
We still need an evaluation .
The Commission must now thoroughly analyse the effects of this new legislation so that we know what effect it will have at the end of the day .
We must continue to monitor this , as scientific discoveries will always continue .
The compromise which has been reached brings a new direction in European plant protection policy .
It brings more common action Europe-wide and it requires targeted measures from Member States , which guarantee the sustainable use of plant protection products .
As rapporteur , I thank you for your support .
We have managed to find a good compromise from different starting positions .
I would like more positive thinking for the New Year .
One thing that can be said is that I did not have enough positive thinking : plant protection products will ensure healthy and sufficient food and a healthy cultural landscape for us in Europe !
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , I , too , would like to give my thanks for a lively debate .
I would like to emphasise once again that I am still of the same opinion ; this is a milestone for environmental and consumer protection and , most of all , it is a magic moment for Europe .
Europe is now in the fast lane .
Europe is showing that it is the world 's trailblazer .
This decision to phase out highly toxic pesticides is unique in the world and the European Union can profit therefore from this .
Now , with regard to the arguments put forward again and again in this debate that the matter of imports has not been clarified : that is incorrect , the matter of imports has indeed been clarified .
With the ban on these highly toxic substances , they will become illegal in Europe .
That means that when we have imports - let us take fruit and vegetables as an example - these imports must , of course , comply with European legislation and , specifically , by means of the Regulation on Maximum Residue Levels .
If substances , such as pesticides , that have been banned in Europe are found in the residue quantity test , then the product is illegal .
This means that bananas coming from Costa Rica and treated with carcinogenic substances that we have put on the index and that are therefore banned are illegal within the European Union .
This is clarified quite clearly in the Regulation on Maximum Residue Levels .
Therefore , there is no reason whatsoever to encourage further dissent , panic and fear !
All I can do is point out , once again , and thankfully the Commissioner has already highlighted this , that while the initial PSD study indicated that 80 % of pesticides would disappear from the market , this figure has been considerably reduced in the meantime .
Unfortunately , you did not mention this correction in the PSD study .
Therefore , please stop creating this fear and dissension .
Let us now really celebrate the success we are all here hopefully achieving for the benefit of the citizens of Europe , for the environment and for health protection .
( The President cut off the speaker )
- Mrs McGuinness , you have a point of order .
Madam President , this is on a point of order , because I think people are talking and not listening .
I heard what the Commissioner said on the food import situation .
I think you are missing the point and I think , with respect , our rapporteur is also missing the point .
Farmers in Europe will be banned from using particular substances .
Their cousins outside the European Union can use these products .
We will not find residues in the food that comes in .
We are talking about a competitive disadvantage for EU producers .
Perhaps at another point , we could address the real world rather than this vague ether we are currently in .
Sorry for the anger .
- The joint debate is closed .
We are not going to re-open the debate .
Mrs Breyer has the floor .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I and the Commissioner both explained the situation very clearly .
If you do not listen - or perhaps you do not want to hear that we have solved the problem because it does not fit in with your campaign against this regulation - then I am at a loss !
But I will state again that the problem is solved .
In the European Union you cannot market a substance that is not allowed to be marketed in the European Union .
Full stop .
- We are not going to re-open the debate .
I would encourage you to continue it in the corridors , if necessary .
The joint debate is closed , and the vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I support the compromise of the Breyer Report on the placing of plant protection products on the market because it will provide for greater stability and security for farmers and food producers .
However , the compromise agreement states that the new legislation would only gradually replace the existing EU law , and that pesticides already approved under current rules would remain available until their existing authorisation expires .
Products that contain hazardous substances are to be replaced within three years if safer alternatives exist .
If voted , the report will be a step towards better health through environmental protection and a means of allowing the EU to move on to a better system without further delays .
I welcome the compromise text on the sustainable use of pesticides and I would like to congratulate Mrs Klass for the fine work she has done .
In my view , we have before us a balanced text , which will ban the use of certain harmful pesticides , but without harming European farming .
Furthermore , I would like to say how pleased I am to note that among the non-chemical methods of plant protection and pest and crop management suggested , the use of GMOs does not feature as an option .
They could have been included among the non-chemical methods .
In this case , an avenue would have opened up in the future for marketing in the EU food products containing GMOs .
The compromise text proves to us that this is not the case .
Once again , the European Parliament is saying a categorical NO to the use of GMOs .
Therefore , the united voice of 58 % of Europe 's citizens is making itself heard again .
On this occasion , we also have the Member States on our side , represented by the Council .
The regulations governing pesticides are important as a means of reducing the risks involved with pesticide use to the population 's health and the environment .
However , the measures adopted with this aim must be reasonable and take into account both production quality and achieving maximum harvests .
In the current economic crisis , boosting food production may be one solution .
As Mrs McGuiness noted in the report presented at the end of last year to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the price of wheat has risen by 180 % in two years , while food prices in general have risen globally by 83 % .
These high prices are generated by the stringent standards which we impose on European producers .
Without disputing the need for better regulation of pesticide use , I still feel that one of the measures proposed will lead to a reduction in the number of plant protection products available on the EU market .
The upshot of this will be a fall in productivity in certain sectors , such as the cereals sector .
Certain provisions of this legal act will affect producers due to the fact that they entail a ban on the majority of pesticides available on the market , favouring instead the marketing of products regarded as being safer , but much more expensive .
Consequently , production costs will grow , which will put farmers from new Member States at the biggest disadvantage .
If all the players involved approve this recommendation , this will ensure the conditions required to harmonise the principles relating to environmental protection and animal welfare with the efficient operation of the internal market .
The provisions concerning mutual recognition and the zoning system have been accepted by Romania , given that clauses have been included in the text , allowing Member States ( MS ) to take measures aimed at adapting the terms for authorising plant protection products ( PPP ) in order to take into account the specific conditions , along with clauses refusing recognition in specific justified cases .
This version is considered therefore to offer sufficient guarantees .
This entails the additional benefits of reducing the administration burden as the PPP evaluation will be carried out in only one state within each zone , which will take into account the specific conditions in all MS in the zone .
As a social-democrat MEP , I believe that we need to make sustained efforts to protect the environment , human health and animal welfare , without however compromising agricultural production .
Action Plan on Urban Mobility ( debate )
- The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Mr Costa , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , and Mr Galeote , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the action plan on urban mobility - B6-0002 / 2009 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission , which you , Mrs Vassiliou , are a part of , has announced the publication of its Action Plan on Urban Mobility several times .
The plan was due to be submitted to the Council and Parliament last autumn .
The Commission made this commitment at the conclusion , last March , of the consultation on the Green Paper on Urban Mobility , which was launched in 2007 , and again in the 2007 Freight Transport Logistics Action Plan , and in its Communication on a strategy for the internalisation of external costs and transport in 2008 .
Time has passed , but the action plan is yet to see the light of day .
As we near the end of the current legislative term , the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which I represent , is concerned that much of the work put in over the last few years may come to nothing .
Can you reassure me , Commissioner , that the action plan is ready ?
Can you tell me that it will be made public in the next few weeks , to enable Parliament to finalise its recommendations , as contained in the Rack resolution ' Towards a new culture for urban mobility ' , passed by this House in July 2008 ?
Mrs Vassiliou , urban mobility is without doubt an issue affecting the local , and on which local competence will always take precedence over national or Community competence , but that does not mean that it should be tackled without any state or Community intervention whatsoever .
Who if not the European Union can and should define the Community 's role in this ?
Who can and should interpret the limits imposed by the principle of subsidiarity in this field ?
The Commission 's - and therefore the EU 's - evasion of this subject does nothing to help solve the problem of urban transport and citizens ' mobility , nor the problems of air pollution in cities - we know that 40 % of CO2 emissions are caused by urban transport and that 70 % of other transport pollutants are urban .

Nor does it help the problems of road safety - we know that 50 % of fatal accidents take place in cities - nor those relating to the production of consumers , less able citizens , whose mobility is dependent on public transport .
Can we accept that there should be differences between Member States ?
Between cities , in standards of protection for the urban environment ?
In road safety standards in cities ?
In standards of citizens ' access to mobility ?
Or are they not fundamental rights that the Union should help to guarantee for all Europeans ?
Well then , we need to establish standards and uniform minimum objectives , but also best practices and financial incentives .
We need coordination and innovative projects , and to develop and share reliable and comparable statistics .
If the Union takes it on , will this not help in realising those subsidiary solutions that Member States and local communities have every right to be protective of ?
Mrs Vassiliou , it may be that you are about to give us a list of good reasons for the delay , and even the failure to present the Action Plan on Urban Mobility .
If you want to try and defend the failure to keep this commitment , before you do so , ask yourself - are these genuine reasons and not banal excuses ?
Do not contribute , Mrs Vassiliou , to the idea - which has become popular recently - that the Commission has become so afraid of disturbing the Member States that it has given up on solving Europeans ' problems .
It would be a suicidal move for an institution such as the Commission that has not been strengthened by the French Presidency 's successful term .
Delivery , delivery , delivery : that is what European citizens want , and for that reason alone they are ready , I believe , or they could be , to look on our institutions with a more friendly eye .
The small example of the urban mobility plan could be a real help in addressing this much larger problem .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all I would like to convey the regrets of Vice-President Tajani for not being with us .
He is on a very important mission to Japan .
Let me go straight to the point .
The Commission remains fully committed to developing an EU policy in the field of urban mobility because it is convinced that , although responsibilities for urban mobility lie primarily with local , regional and national authorities , in some specific areas there is an added value of action at European level .
As a matter of fact , although cities are all different , they face common challenges .
The problems in urban mobility are significant and growing and affect many citizens and businesses , which are confronted with traffic safety problems , with limited accessibility of public transport , with congestion and health problems caused by pollution .
To illustrate the importance of urban mobility , let me provide you with some figures : 60 % of the population lives in urban areas and 85 % of the EU GDP is created there .
However , cities also generate 40 % of CO2 emissions , and two out of three road accidents take place in urban areas .
Finally , congestion , which is one of the main problems that citizens have to face everyday , is responsible for the loss of about 1 % of the EU 's GDP every year .
Sustainable urban mobility is therefore a key element to achieve our goals with respect to climate change , economic growth and road safety .
This is why the Commission has been launching actions in this field since 1995 , in order to promote the exchange of best practices .
The highlight has been the extremely successful CIVITAS programme that started in 2000 .
The 2007 Green Paper ' Towards a new culture in urban mobility ' then identified broad areas for potential complementary action at EU level to promote greener and safer cities and smarter and accessible urban transport .
But what can be done concretely at EU level ?
We can help local authorities to implement related EU policies and to make best use of EU funding .
EU-wide dissemination and replication of innovative approaches can give authorities the possibility to achieve more and better results at lower cost .
We can help foster markets for new technologies , for example clean and energy-efficient vehicles , and facilitate harmonised standards for broad market introduction of new technologies .
Finally , the EU can guide authorities towards solutions that are interoperable and facilitate smoother functioning of the single market .
The Commission will therefore continue to act , because we think , as a large majority of stakeholders do , that there is much to be gained from working at EU level to support initiatives at the local , regional and national levels .
Now let me answer your question : why the adoption of the Action Plan on Urban Mobility has been delayed .
Unfortunately , the conditions were not appropriate for the adoption of a comprehensive action plan by the Commission before the end of 2008 .
But my colleague Vice-President Tajani would like to reassure you that he remains committed to working towards the adoption of the Action Plan and to develop an EU policy in the field of urban transport in full respect of the subsidiarity and proportionality principles .
To this purpose , it is not the intention of the Commission to propose a one-size-fits-all solution ; on the contrary , we would like to develop a toolbox , including short- and medium-term practical actions , in order to provide cities with the tools to address , in an integrated way , specific issues related to urban mobility .
Then , it will be up to local authorities to decide what is more suitable for them , according to their own objectives and needs .
In order to address the concerns that might still exist regarding the strategic role of the EU in urban mobility , Vice-President Tajani 's intention is to demonstrate with concrete actions how the EU can add value and quality to urban mobility in Europe .
On the basis of the responses to the Green Paper and many discussions with stakeholders , a number of actions have been identified and will be launched later this year .
To promote innovative solutions and new technologies , we have already opened a call for proposals , closing at the end of March , which will provide up to 50 % funding to the projects selected .
Once the Directive on the promotion of clean and energy efficient road transport vehicles comes into force , around March , we will initiate the development of an internet site to facilitate joint clean vehicle procurement .
On information and exchange of approaches , we intend to start up , around April , a website providing information on urban mobility legislation and funding in Europe , as well as on good practice .
We will also reflect with stakeholders on the future of our CIVITAS programme and how to build on the vast knowledge and experience generated in the CIVITAS-funded actions .
Finally , to help increasing knowledge on sustainable mobility policies , we will launch a study on aspects related to green zones and a study on the opportunities for making public transport systems more interoperable .
We intend also to establish an expert network for considering aspects of urban road pricing and internalisation of external costs .
I am convinced that this package of actions , which will be soon undertaken at EU level , provides an important basis for moving forward in the field of urban mobility .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , with all due respect to the Commission and to you as a person , you have not really answered Committee Chairman Costa 's question .
You had already given us a good intimation when you indicated - and this is something that was already evident in the Green Paper on Mobility in the City - that we need common European solutions to a problem that almost all European cities have in one form or another , some quite different and some quite similar .
We welcomed that at the time , a few months ago , and we have looked forward eagerly to the proposals from the Commission that we were promised .
They have not materialised , And if there was an intimation in your statement , then I have noted it now as follows : there will be no comprehensive action plan .
Why not ?
If we believe what we hear - and we hear a great deal in this House and in the institutions of this European Union - it means that there is one Member State or perhaps a few Member States who have caused anxiety , and unfortunately , also caused anxiety to this Commission , with the pretext that subsidiarity could be infringed .
The European Parliament has stated expressly in its proposals that it does not wish to interfere with subsidiarity .
You have emphasised once more that you do not wish to present a uniform plan to suit everyone , but presenting no plan at all is not a solution .
Let us take this step , keep this promise !
The re-election of the Commission will not be guaranteed by doing nothing and by one or more Member States not being insulted , but re-election will be guaranteed if something positive is submitted and presented .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , you have just supported us in the initiative that we , the European Parliament , plan to take on this issue .
You have just told us that , for obvious reasons , that is , because of the importance of urban transport in the transport field , and because of the objectives of the European climate-change plan , the European Union cannot fail to take an interest in urban transport .
Mr Barrault , before you , took the initiative of introducing a Green Paper , with the promise of an action plan .
You cannot today deny us this action plan and explain to us that you are implementing it on the quiet , without Parliament 's deliberations , without Parliament 's control , without any visibility .
It is for this reason that I managed to get my fellow Members - and I must thank them , especially Mr Rack , who did a huge amount of the groundwork - to agree to the European Parliament 's doing something completely out of the ordinary and producing the action plan that you do not want to produce , in an own-initiative report , before the elections .
This entirely heterodex initiative will carry considerable political weight , since it will involve questions being put to the new European Commissioner for Transport , who will be heard by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , and it will therefore carry a great deal of weight in terms of his approval by the European Parliament .
I find it regrettable in fact that , today , the European Commission should give in to any old objection from any old Member State .
And it is precisely because we are concerned about this development , which is an institutional drift , whereby the European Commission has decided no longer to play the Community card , but the strictly intergovernmental one , that we are today validated in our desire to negotiate an action plan among ourselves , to submit it to you and to ensure that the next transport commissioner makes a clear commitment regarding the follow-up action to be taken on it .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , with all due respect to your position and to you personally , Commissioner , I should like , if I may , to say two things in response to your speech .
You have tried to sidestep the issue and you have done a balancing act .
You have pointed out to us what the various chapters that were due to appear in this action plan were , and I believe that my fellow Members and I can only be pleased to have actually found the bulk of our proposals in this list .
You have therefore furnished us with proof that , within the Commission , you possess all the elements needed to publish this action plan in all its parts .
For my part I believe that there could be four explanations to account for your first sentence of part two , which says , if I have correctly understood the translation , that the conditions are not favourable .
Possibility number one : is there a shortage of technical information within the Directorate-General for Transport ?
The particulars provided by Mr Barrot , within the context of the Green Paper , seem to suggest that , on the contrary , the Commission is very well equipped with technical information .
Possibility number two : you say that the conditions are not favourable .
Are some Member States opposed to this plan ?
As far as I know , though , Commissioner , the Commission is independent of the Member States .
I do not for one second believe that you would have bowed to the pressure of certain Member States .
Possibility number three : are there differences of opinion within the Commission itself that would prevent you from submitting this action plan to us ?
My goodness , I hope not !
Lastly , are you refusing to hold the debate with the current European Parliament so as to postpone it until next year ?
Given the excellent reports that bolstered our relations with Vice-President Barrot during the drafting of the Green Paper , I dare not believe this .
Commissioner , we are a few weeks away from the elections .
This action plan is in my view an excellent example with which to demonstrate to our fellow citizens that , at the same time as it shows respect for subsidiarity , Europe is very in touch with their health problems , and so on , which you have listed .
I deeply regret this delay and , like my fellow Members , I hope that you will be able to remedy it as soon as possible .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the constant delay and your answer , Commissioner , are not acceptable .
Time is running out .
Urban traffic plays a key role in the context of climate change .
It is responsible for about 70 % of all greenhouse gases in cities .
The EU will only succeed in achieving its own climate protection goals if it changes its transport policy .
The greatest potential lies in the cities because 90 % of car journeys made in cities are less than six kilometres long - distances which could easily be covered by taking the train or bus or by cycling or walking .
I hope that the Commission has used the delay to consider how the EU can effectively help governments and cities .
There is actually no European added value when the report is as vague and non-binding as the Green Paper and the Rack Report .
We Greens request that EU Cofinancing be redesigned to be environmentally friendly .
To date , 60 % of EU money has been used for road-building projects , while only 20 % goes into public transport and rail .
We want at least 40 % for rail as decided by Parliament in my report on the first rail package .
Secondly , we only want to grant EU money if cities can present a sustainable mobility plan .
Thirdly , we want to increase road safety with a general speed limit of 30 km / h with the possibility for cities to set higher speeds for specific roads independently .
That is not only good for the climate , it will also reduce accidents because 40 000 people die on Europe 's roads every year .
- ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is clearly a great pity that there has been a delay in the publication of this document and the action plan .
Let us not forget that 70 % of people in Europe currently live in cities and it must be our aim to secure as soon as possible urban transport which offers greater levels of accessibility , safety and especially reliability while also taking far greater account of the environment .
I therefore expect that the published document will not only include new trends but will also evaluate new approaches and measures such as support for healthy forms of transport , for example cycling and walking .
Individual communities would then be able to select from this list the most achievable and appropriate options for themselves .
In my opinion this is the basic approach .
We should ensure support for it , which must of course come from the structural funds in such a way that the resources will serve the desired objective .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I very much agree with those who have spoken before me : in this day and age , the urban environment plays a fundamental part in all our lives and not just the lives of those who live in cities or large towns .
The data provided by the Commission in the Green Paper ' Towards a new culture for urban mobility ' clearly show that 60 % of Europeans live in an urban environment , and that these areas generate a large percentage of European GDP .
These statistics were also cited by Mrs Vassiliou .
These figures have not changed in recent months , and we must in fact take account of the growing problem of traffic congestion in large cities , as well as the environmental crises that remain a pressing hot topic , just as we cannot overlook Parliament 's recent efforts on the climate change package .
There have been steps taken on urban mobility under European Union regional policy , and there are numerous forms of EU funding : in the last parliamentary term , EUR 2 billion were spent on the Regional Development Fund , and a sum of approximately EUR 8 billion has been earmarked for 2007-2013 .

The Cohesion Fund may also support this work .
I therefore believe it is truly important for the Union to adopt a common policy , an overall action plan , respecting of course the principle of subsidiarity and the authority of Member States and local bodies .
The benefits that would stem from this are plain to see , indeed it is hard to understand why a plan of this scope has not been published before now .
This is the position expressed in the oral question tabled by the Chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism and supported by the Committee on Regional Development .
In view of the fact that we are almost at the end of this parliamentary term , I hope that there will be a re-think and that the Commission will actually publish the Action Plan on Urban Mobility , which will have such a positive impact .
- ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , clearly , issues relating to urban transport are very important in terms of both economic development and environmental protection .
There can be no doubt of that and it hardly needs to be debated .
Problems of a different nature have arisen , however , in the course of the European Parliament 's work on the text of the Green Paper .
These problems have already been mentioned and mainly relate to the division of power between local authorities , national authorities and authorities at European level .
Doubts have arisen as to whether the European Union should be involved in local matters , or whether it should leave those to national and local authorities .
In this connection , I should also like to draw the attention of the House to the fact that , in the course of this debate , the question also arose as to whether this Green Paper will lead to action that will somehow assist the cities , or whether it will lead to action that will bind the cities to take certain action .
We agreed that these actions should be supportive , in other words , that they should involve assistance .
The question that now arises in view of the delay is as follows . What was the European Commission aiming at by presenting the Green Paper ?
What was its long term plan ?
Did it really wish to engage in dynamic action , or was it merely interested in sounding out opinion on this matter ?
In the light of events , it seems to me that , following the initial very sceptical reaction , the Commission slowed down the process of further work considerably and is still considering how to proceed in relation to the action it began .
It is high time for unequivocal decisions .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to endorse what has already been said by my fellow MEPs .
I am very disappointed with your response .
You stated that the Commission will , of course , come up with a number of proposals concerning urban mobility .
Whilst this is self-evident , if you ask me , it is not what we have asked for .
What we want is a cohesive vision , an action plan detailing measures and proposals which the Commission will be launching in the next few years so that we can discuss these , not just among ourselves , but also with the public and with any stakeholders and affected parties .
Consequently , I should like to ask you to report to your colleagues after all , to insist that a few matters be reconsidered following this debate , and to come up with a proposal very quickly , before the elections and before this Parliament adjourns for the summer , at any rate .
As our fellow Members have said many times before , urban mobility is something that affects everyone in Europe .
In all our cities , we face problems of mobility .
At European level , the Union can play a very positive role to resolve this issue and related problems ; as an investor in new technologies , as a body that lays down and disseminates new technological standards , as the authority that is , indeed , best placed to spread new ideas and good practices , that can promote the fleshing out of mobility plans , that can launch new funding mechanisms , and suchlike .
In this light , I would very much urge the Commission to reconsider its response and to come up with a plan of action soon .
( RO ) The action plan on urban mobility is a must for the EU 's urban communities .
67 % of European citizens expect a European policy to be developed in this area .
What response can we give to Europe 's citizens ?
The costs resulting from urban traffic congestion are rising to approximately 1 % of European GDP .
In order to reduce the pollution level in urban environments and traffic congestion , we need to invest in public transport and in intelligent transport systems .
Last year we approved the report on promoting the use of green vehicles in public transport .
Prague is the capital city which has set an example , with its purchase last year of green buses for its urban public transport system , using state aid .
I call on the Commission to also give due consideration to urban mobility during the mid-term review of the framework for the utilisation of structural funds .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I really appreciate your contributions .
I shall certainly convey all your concerns to Vice-President Tajani , who , I know , remains committed .
The Action Plan is , in fact , included in the Commission 's work programme for 2009 , and I know that Vice-President Tajani is personally committed to progressing with the Action Plan .
Therefore , I have no doubt that what you have said will be seriously taken into account by him .
I know that the impact assessment has been completed and , as I said , the Action Plan is in the legislative programme and hopefully will proceed this year .
- The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
In the 2007 Green Paper , the Commission points to the legitimacy of the debate concerning the need for it to be involved in the issue of increasing mobility in cities within the Union , on the basis of the principle of subsidiarity .
Pursuant to the principle of subsidiarity the Union acts in the framework of its competences only when its action is essential and brings added value to the actions of Member States .
The aim of the principle of subsidiarity is ensuring that decisions are taken as close to the citizen as possible .
This is achieved by constantly checking that action to be taken at Community level is justified in relation to the possibilities that exist at national , regional or local level .
The role of the Member States regarding the legitimacy of also involving the European Union 's institutions at local level is further strengthened in the Treaty of Lisbon , currently at the ratification stage .
In the package under debate concerning possible action aimed at increasing the level of mobility in urban conurbations , innovative technologies tend to be dealt with separately from intelligent transport systems .
The synergies between these two areas should be exploited to draw them together in order to increase flow along streets and make travel more comfortable .
Other benefits would be better travelling conditions , shorter journey times , energy saving , fewer emissions , less expenditure on managing the vehicle fleet and on the maintenance and renewal of the surface .
Road safety would also be improved .
In the light the above , the foundation for the Commission 's action plan on urban mobility will be completion of ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon and implementation of the Czech Presidency 's programme .
The latter deals with improving the operation of the Union 's internal market in transport as a matter of priority .
Revision of the Broadcasting Communication - State aid for public broadcasting ( debate )
- The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Mr Visser , Mr Belet and Mrs Hieronymi , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the revision of the broadcasting communication - State aid for public broadcasting - B6-0495 / 2008 ) .
author . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is unfortunate that Mrs Kroes is prevented from being here this evening because of an accident .
I should like to take this opportunity to offer her my sincere wishes for a speedy recovery .
Politically , though , I fundamentally object to her interfering with national , public broadcasting .
Last Thursday , together with Mrs Hieronymi and Mr Belet , I organised a hearing for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats about the Commission 's public broadcasting communication .
I can tell you that the interest from the sector and the Member States was considerable .
Even the Directorate-General for Competition attended in great numbers .
This subject is obviously high on their agenda .
The Director-General for Competition was present all morning as a panel member .
Madam President , the Commission proposal reviewing the rules for public broadcasting is unacceptable as it currently stands .
Public broadcasters play a crucial role in the protection of cultural diversity , linguistic diversity and media pluralism .
I am vehemently opposed to the Commission 's plans .
First of all , we need to realise that public broadcasting corporations are a national preserve and that , consequently , it is the national authorities , and not the European Commission , that should stipulate their policy .
This is also clearly enshrined in the protocol on public broadcasting in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Member States organise and finance the public broadcasters as they see fit .
Commissioner Kroes 's plans seriously undermine the principle of subsidiary and the Member States ' freedom of movement and replace them with European interference .
I am very surprised that , as a Liberal Commissioner , she should opt for this route .
Secondly , I am apprehensive about the proposal to introduce a prior market test conducted by an independent supervisor .
This would give commercial channels considerable input .
Is that what we want ?
A market test will inevitably increase the level of paperwork .
It is very much the question whether the smaller broadcasting corporations will be able to afford extra manpower , and who will absorb the extra costs involved ?
Should the broadcasting corporations foot the bill ?
Or the taxpayer , perhaps ?
This initiative is not workable in small Member States .
Moreover , this test is very detailed ; the proposal is lacking in flexibility .
As a consequence , Member States will no longer be able to adopt policy and procedures that tie in with their national systems .
Moreover , it is very much the question whether a prior assessment of the market impact and a public evaluation of the new services will not give commercial competitors too much of a head start .
Thirdly , the proposal fills me with worry because the public broadcasting systems are not organised in exactly the same way in every Member State .
There is technological diversity , as well as differences in broadcasting systems , organisation and scope .
There are also differences in terms of language and culture .
The ' one size fits all ' rule that is proposed in the report certainly does not work in this case .
The proposal takes no account of this .
Having got my concerns off my chest , I should now like to provide a brief outline of what happened at the PPE-DE Group 's hearing last Thursday , where the Commission 's attitude was very positive .
The Commission admitted that the proposals were probably excessively detailed and that the wording needed editing .
The Director-General informed me that it is possible to delay the final communication until after 5 March , the day on which the Culture , Media and Sport Committee will be organising a second hearing on this subject .
After the hearing , the Director-General said that the Commission might have to draft a fresh version based on this new information , before it submits its final communication .
This was an excellent result .
You will understand , Madam President , that I am pleasantly surprised with these pledges .
This means , after all , that the Commission is opening its eyes and is prepared to listen to the voice of the sector , the Member States and Parliament .
Excellent .
I should like to ask the Commission a few more questions .
First of all , will the Commission stand by this prior detailed market test , conducted by an independent supervisor - a question you may be able to pass on to Commissioner Kroes - is the Commission prepared to abandon this idea of an independent supervisor and this prior market test , or does it insist that it stays ?
Secondly , how can technological impartiality be guaranteed ?
Does the proposal not imply that a difference is drawn between the current services of the public broadcasting corporations and the new media services ?
Thirdly , further to the comment by the Director-General for Competition , is the Commission prepared , based on the new information , to draw up a new proposal ?
Fourthly , what does the Commission intend to do about the Court of First Instance 's judgment in the Danish TV2 case ?
Will it include it in the new proposal ?
If not , how will it be implemented ?
My final question is , is the Commission prepared to involve Parliament in the follow-up procedure and to await further discussion with Parliament ?
I hope for excellent cooperation between the European Parliament , the European Commission and the Member States so that the final version of the communication can be thrashed out .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , as has already been mentioned , my colleague Ms Kroes had a small accident so that is why she cannot be with us .
On 4 November 2008 the Commission published , for consultation until 15 January , a draft new broadcast communication .
We are serious about the process of wide consultation .
Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education has scheduled a hearing for 5 March and , as has already been mentioned , the PPE-DE Group already held such a hearing on Thursday , last week , in the presence of the Director-General for Competition , Philip Lowe .
This dialogue between the Commission and Parliament is important .
We stand ready to listen and to reply to your questions .
We also know that Parliament agreed in September 2008 that state aid to public broadcasters should be delivered so that they fulfil their function in a dynamic environment , avoiding the use of public funding for reasons of political or economic expediency .
This concurs with our views ; both public and private broadcasting are important .
The dual system of broadcasting is an answer to Europe 's media landscape which must be safeguarded on all platforms .
The draft broadcasting communication therefore seeks to consolidate the Commission 's state aid case practised since their existing 2001 communication .
The draft ensures that our rules reflect the rapidly changing new media environment .
The objective of modernising the communication is to increase transparency and legal certainty .
The draft communication clarifies that public broadcasters shall provide audiovisual services on all media platforms while leaving private operators sufficient incentives to stay in the market .
This is ensured by the so-called Amsterdam test , which balances the value and the negative effects of publicly financed media services at the national level .
Why do we have these tests ?
Because having these tests at the national level helps to avoid Commission intervention .
The Commission increasingly receives complaints about borderline cases where a public media activity may have no clear value for citizens but where the market impact appears considerable .
The Commission , however , feels that repeated interventions in this sector would not be in the spirit of subsidiarity .
This is why we want Member Sates to share the Commission 's responsibility for controlling the market impact of state finance media services .
The Amsterdam test will ensure that new media services of public broadcasters satisfy the social , democratic and cultural needs of viewers and listeners while limiting the collateral damage for state aid for private operators to a minimum .
We cannot agree that the Amsterdam test would involve an unjustifiable administrative burden .
Of course , any test involves work but the minimum effort we require is reasonable and necessary .
Firstly , the test is only foreseen for important and truly new services ; and here our draft leaves a large margin of appreciation to Member States .
Each Member State can decide when a new audiovisual service actually merits being tested .
Secondly , the draft exempts pilot projects from the test .
Public broadcasters can therefore continue experimenting with new media without any preliminary tests .
Thirdly , the draft leaves Member States full freedom to choose their adequate procedures and institutions which apply the test .
It is finally worth mentioning that smaller Member States , such as Belgium and Ireland , already implement such tests .
The solutions found in these countries are proportionate to the resources available .
As the test is quite broad there is also no possibility of infringing on editorial freedom .
The test merely requires that a public media service satisfies the social , democratic and cultural needs of society and that its impact on the market is commensurate .
To safeguard editorial independence we also open the possibility in the draft that , under certain conditions , the test is done by a public broadcaster itself .
In summary , I would say the Amsterdam test should be seen as an opportunity rather than as a threat .
It will help to maintain media pluralism in the new media environment by safeguarding fairness and certainty for both commercial media , including online newspapers and our excellent public media .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , good evening , I should first of all like to ask you if you could pass on our good wishes to Mrs Kroes .
We hope that she makes a speedy recovery , as we gather that she missed the bend on a slippery surface .
We hope , naturally , that Mrs Kroes will be back with us as soon as possible .
Obviously , Commissioner , we agree that you as a Commission guarantee , now and in future , a level playing field for all players in the audio-visual field , namely both the public and private broadcasting corporations .
This is crucial for a balanced supply , and it also benefits quality .
What the Commission has now presented , though , is diametrically opposed to this for various reasons , as Mr Visser has already made quite clear .
I should like to start by making a brief comment , Commissioner , in relation to what you said a moment ago .
This market test that you propose is already being applied in Belgium , among other countries .
Well , to some extent , this is true , but not entirely .
This market test , or impact analysis , is indeed already being applied to some extent , by the broadcasters themselves , among others , but not according to the modalities as these have been set out in the Commission proposal , which look somewhat different .
I should like to share our reservations with you regarding the proposal .
My main objection is that it clashes with the Lisbon Strategy .
Indeed , it is the case today that in many Member States , it is precisely the public broadcasting corporations that bring about and encourage innovation in the media .
This should , obviously , stay this way .
We are , to my mind , moving in the wrong direction with the patronising administrative attitude that holds back innovation .
New platforms , particularly in the digital context , on broadband , on the Internet , and suchlike cost a great deal to develop .
Investments of this kind are ideally spread as widely as possible and developed in concert .
Private and public broadcasting corporations can then offer content on a shared platform , and it is in terms of content that competition should come in , so that the customer can derive maximum benefit .
Do not get us wrong , though .
We are 100 % behind balanced competitive relations between the public and private broadcasters .
There should be room for both to be able to provide quality content .
It is obvious , in this connection , that the public broadcasting corporations should account for the government funds they spend and with which they work , even though we are convinced that there are better ways of doing this .
In this connection , we would refer to the British example of the BBC , where alliances have been proposed between different partners in terms of development , production and distribution .
This is a good example , to my mind , and I would kindly invite the Commission to start thinking with us along those lines .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the revision of the basic guidelines on state aid for public broadcasting put forward by the French Presidency is an extremely topical debate both internally in numerous Member States and for the position of the mass media at European and international level .
At the same time , however , the revision of the telecommunications package , which basically restructures the way in which and the criteria by which the radio spectrum is allocated at European level , has demonstrated that the rules governing the financing of broadcasting services are now of fundamental importance to the future regulation or deregulation of services relating to the information society , innovation and services of public and economic interest .
This is the political question which we are basically required to resolve .
Clearly the debate on state aid focuses primarily on so-called public service broadcasters , as defined by each Member State , given the basically minimal resources which they have at their disposal and , above all , the important public service role allocated to them .
The important role of broadcasters is mentioned in the UNESCO Convention , the Amsterdam Protocol and in the 2001 Commission communication .
In other words , there is already a platform on which the role of the public mass media is clearly defined .
However , the dossier has been opened on the state aid debate and we must take account of certain new circumstances , as you stipulated , and of certain actions which are being taken either wittingly or unwittingly , due to the confusion which often exists between public and private agencies .
I should like to mention certain points : firstly , the question of the definition of the public service mandate should not be confused with the question of the financing mechanism selected in order to provide such services .
While public-sector television may engage in commercial activities - such as selling advertising time - in order to generate revenue , this has been condemned by certain governments , such as the French Government , and is being overturned on the basis of national legislation .
On the other hand , commercial broadcasters required to provide a public service also play an important role .
The coexistence of private and public service providers is a basic component of the European market .
I should like to close with one other point : the ex-ante procedures proposed by the Commission for examining state aid should worry us , not because subsidiarity is being suspended or superseded , but to see if they are compatible with the terms of state aid .
Finally , I would note that the question of national aid to radio stations and the mass media should be examined within the framework of international relations , because European organisations have to compete with international behemoths and strict legislation will damage European achievements and the acquis communautaire .
Mr President , I shall try to be brief and , of course , I must begin by also extending my warmest wishes to Commissioner Kroes in the hope that she recovers from her fall .
Here , at least , the doorway to the building has been gritted with lots of salt , but I see that there was not enough salt in other places .
The debate we are having is of the utmost importance and , in the end , therefore , its basic objective is to demand , to request , that the Commission involve Parliament .
That is the reason for our debate : not to end it here but , rather , to make sure , before the Commission 's communication is formalised , that we really are going to have a debate here and that we will all be involved .
Why ?
Because it is not only our television model that is at stake here ; a great deal more is at risk because television broadcasters are not - as we all know , and as we were well aware in our debate on the Audiovisual Media Services Directive - the same as they used to be ; what they do , in fact , is process content that they supply via a linear or non-linear platform , and everything interacts perfectly in both areas .
Therefore , it is no longer appropriate to talk about public service broadcasting as if this debate were being held in the 1970s or 1980s .
On the other hand , it is clear that this debate must take place , since not everything that is labelled a public service today is actually a public service , and it does not always make sense to use public money to do what certain television companies are doing with public money .
At the same time , however - and this is the core of our concern , I believe , and I understand it is also that of some of my fellow Members - public television broadcasters are absolutely vital in protecting our cultural and linguistic diversity and ultimately in binding our societies together because , in theory , they are looking for something more than direct profit .
This financial balance , therefore , must be protected .
We must look for new models of financing ; we should be creative and open up this debate , but we cannot do so in such a way that we risk something so vitally important to our societies - namely , our current public television broadcasters .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Barroso Commission had announced the abolition of European over-regulation as one of its major political goals .
We get the impression with the proposals you are making now that you are actually encouraging over-regulation .
The hearing held by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats last week made it clear that there are grave doubts regarding how much you are now interfering in the competences of the Member States .
What is now on the table has the stink of over-regulation , and that is not something that we can approve of .
It is correct that we must find a balance between the possibilities for developing public and private broadcasting services .
But this also means - particularly in the digital age - that public broadcasting , which stands for quality , cultural diversity , cultural and social cohesion , must have opportunities for development in the digital age .
We require this as part of the Lisbon Strategy .
If public broadcasting is denied this opportunity , it will be turned into a dinosaur .
Then it will not be able to develop well .
When we think of our economic and financial crisis , we have all come to the conclusion that markets must be regulated .
Social and ecological regulation is not a position against markets but in favour of fair markets - and that means regulated markets .
The same applies to the relationship within which the private and public sectors are able to develop in future if we want to be successful in the digital world .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , for 80 years , public broadcasting has had the task of informing the public in the broadest possible sense .
This service can survive by public funding that may be collected via a separate radio and television tax and that may be topped up with membership contributions to broadcasting organisations , as has been the case in the Netherlands for a long time .
Alongside this , in recent decades , public broadcasting has been encouraged to earn its own money .
This is achieved not only through advertising time but also by making much of the information material collected by the broadcasting house available in the form of audio and video material .
It is expected that , as a result , viewers and listeners will feel more closely associated , new target groups will be reached and government costs will be limited .
This task , which has grown over the years , poses no problems as long as commercial channels do not feel adversely affected .
From the perspective of commercial channels , the much older public broadcasters may be seen as competitors that are given a serious advantage as they collect funds through taxpayers ' money .
The question is now whether the public broadcasters ' right to exist should no longer be derived in the first instance from their usefulness to society as a whole , but from the possible distortion of competition in respect of commercial channels .
As public and private interests no longer clash , the European Commission is faced with conflicting demands .
The future of public broadcasters will be in the balance if their room to manoeuvre is limited in favour of commercial companies ' scope for profit .
Things will be even worse if this is done without this Parliament 's involvement , with the express objections of 19 of the 27 Member State governments being dismissed .
Over recent years , I have asked the Commission a number of times to abandon this fatal plan .
This appears to be the only possible solution to me , given the current widespread concern .
Moreover , this is a matter that falls within the competence of the Member States , not that of the European Union .
I endorse the questions and position adopted by Mr Visser and the other speakers .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , as my fellow Members who signed the oral question have emphasised and as distinguished speakers stated in greater detail at the public hearing in Brussels last week , we all need to look on public-sector television as a medium for supplying a service to our citizens which will , to a great extent , coincide with the obligation to operate it .
The public dialogue , the independent supervisory authority and the diversity of programmes , in keeping with the history and culture of each Member State , need to be protected in the wake of the development of new technologies and the host of companies that spring up on a daily basis .
Within the framework of healthy competition , the Commission needs to promote new ways of protecting the public interest and public broadcasting .
Mainly , the definition of the public mission of broadcasters needs to be made clear ; we need a better evaluation of state aid but also , as regards the rule of transparency , we must not impose pointless administrative and financial burdens on the Member States and public broadcasters in the ex-ante evaluation carried out by the Commission .
More effective control mechanisms also need to be adopted in the new mass media environment .
Furthermore , given that public broadcasts play a decisive role in cultural and linguistic diversity , all these media , as well as the public corporations and public television , are obliged to provide quality programmes and , at the same time , within the framework of competition with other similar bodies , they must be able to respond positively to the challenges of the times by broadcasting events of global interest , such as the Olympic Games , the World Cup and so on .
Unfortunately nowadays this is something that tends to be prevented simply by reason of the fact that , as private companies have more money , public television cannot afford them .
Consequently , citizens will not be able to watch these events alongside other programmes .
To finish , I should also like to point out that what is currently available on the market and the interests of commercial media in defining the scope of the competence and activity of public broadcasters is not , by the same token , conducive to the more general interest , with of course a few exceptions , and the Commission needs to take serious account of that fact .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , may I also wish Mrs Kroes a swift recovery .
I would like to make a few general comments on the review of the communication on broadcasting .
Firstly , I would like to say that I consider this review initiated by the Commission to be positive , insofar as it will enable the content of the 2001 communication to be adapted to the changes that have occurred both in the field of technology and in Community law .
Furthermore , it retains the main thrust of the 2001 communication , which recognised the essential role of public service broadcasting in guaranteeing quality of democracy and pluralism .
I am basically referring to the principles whereby the Member States should define and delimit the supply and content of the public service licences taken up by the corresponding public bodies , and should have the freedom to choose the funding model , thereby avoiding any distortions to free competition .
Furthermore , the licence should be assigned to a specific corporation or group by means of a formal resolution and there should be external , independent supervision of the licence ; on this point , I wish to stress the vital role of the regulating authorities for the audiovisual sector .
As far as the most significant additions to the proposal are concerned , I welcome the ex ante controls on public broadcasters ' provision of new services , but only if enough flexibility is retained for these controls to be adjusted to the institutional model of each State and adopted gradually .
Finally , I believe there must be a very careful assessment of the possibility that certain services that come under the umbrella of public service audiovisual provision may be subject to remuneration or valuable consideration on the part of the citizens who use them , taking into account both the free and universal nature of traditional public service audiovisual broadcasting and the risks of exclusion that may come about should this method of funding be accepted .
I hope that the Commission will take these comments into consideration .
Mr President , it is clear that the issue at stake here is the tension between the public interest and its role in society against the impact on fair competition and the functioning of the internal market .
The borders between public service broadcasting and private broadcasting , but also other media , are increasingly blurred and this is particularly the case when new media such as internet , iPods , SMS etc. are at stake .
As some people have said , public broadcasting is often the leading actor in innovation in services , but it is clear that this is an impact which is cross-border and across media sectors .
Therefore , it is important to have consistency between the broadcasting communication and the general framework of services of general economic interest .
This is an important issue which we have dealt with in Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
In particular , the PSE Group Members on this committee have stressed that it is important to create more legal security for services of general economic interest , and we would like to see a framework directive and sector legislation on this decided at a political level .
The consultation on the draft communication , which is now before us and has been presented by the Commission , can be commented on until 15 January , and it is important to give a clear signal again that this more horizontal general framework would be an important tool to place discussions like this discussion on public broadcasting in a broader context .
It is important to see who decides the rules and what balance exists in the rules between market interests and public interests .
I have the implicit feeling that the market test mentioned in the communication should give primacy to market and commercial considerations instead of these public considerations .
This was our intention with the new horizontal rules on services of general economic interest .
I am a bit surprised that the PPE-DE Group is now focusing so much on these specific issues , whereas they were quite hesitant in supporting our appeal for the more general framework .
Here is a clear example - also in this case of broadcasting - that , if you do not have a broader clear framework which places more emphasis on and gives more dominance to the public interest aspects , it is always the market interest that will dominate in this type of discussion .
I would like to take the opportunity to repeat our appeal for this framework of service of general economic interest , which , horizontally , should reinstate the balance between those interests in favour of the public interest .
( NL ) Mr President , public broadcasting stands for pluralism , diversity , cultural diversity in Europe , the heart of democracy - I did not make this up , the Commission can confirm this - and public broadcasters are of national importance .
There are now plans afoot to introduce a market test that is to be conducted beforehand , particularly for new media activities .
I do not think this is a good idea , because Brussels should not dictate beforehand how Member States should organise their public services .
How the public interest is served should , in my view , be assessed at national level and no compulsory market test is necessary for that purpose .
I should also like to say a few words about the red tape .
Whilst I am in favour of checking things through , we should ensure that we do not end up with more rules and more costs for the various Member States .
Moreover , as for supply , I think that we should not draw a distinction between old and new services because , in practice , the lines between the two are blurred .
It is not a case of either / or ; television programmes often go hand in hand with new services and vice versa .
So , just as in Europe , the two are intertwined .
It is not just about the market , but also about the public importance of our public broadcasters , which is universally acknowledged , not least by the Commission .
I should like to hear from the Commission whether this will be included in the adapted version of the communication and whether the responsibilities will be assigned appropriately , namely to the Member States , even though these will be accompanied by rules for services of general interest that should be drawn up in consultation with the European Parliament and the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , public broadcasting is more than an economic factor .
I was at the hearing held by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats last week in Brussels .
The importance of information and of the diversity of European culture and education was noted .
If 22 Member States are against revision or intensification because we have different framework conditions and different markets , then it is quite wrong to want an extensive administration , a time-consuming test procedure such as this obligatory ex-ante test , or European interference with an unwieldy bureaucratic concept .
There are already controlling bodies for public broadcasting : the broadcasting councils .
We monitor the adaptation to technological change .
We monitor the measures in order to ensure fair competition .
I am a member of such a body , as the representative of the Union of European Federalists at Hessian Broadcasting [ Hessischer Rundfunk ] .
Our independence is guaranteed by law .
We are in turn completely and rightly controlled by the public .
This is how an effective media policy works .
- ( CS ) Mr President , the state agrees with my fellow MEPs that state support for public interest broadcasting requires legislative clarification .
We have been calling for this in the European Parliament for a long time .
However , I would still like to draw your attention to further urgent matters that the Commission must resolve as quickly as possible .
Out of the many problems I will mention three .
Firstly , there is a need for the general introduction of shared television aerials to include digital broadcasting , particularly on blocks of flats owned by housing cooperatives , in accordance with the exceptions under Article 5 of the information guidelines , as this is a problem for millions of citizens in the new Member States , including the Czech Republic .
The second point is support for greater cooperation between the national councils for radio and television broadcasting and the European institutions in order to achieve better application of public service provisions .
The third point is to improve coordination between national monitoring authorities for television broadcasting in respect of fines for inappropriate broadcasts that threaten the moral development of children and young people .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I thank you all for your very fruitful discussion , which I will certainly convey to my colleague Mrs Kroes .
Let me comment on some of your remarks .
The Amsterdam Protocol points to the need to balance financing with state aid and effects on competition .
We want Member States to take the lead on this , because otherwise we will have to do it in Brussels on the basis of complaints .
Our aim is to give Member States more possibilities to develop public service broadcasting , as long as the Treaty provisions on competition are respected .
Public service broadcasting should continue to innovate , educate and , of course , entertain .
The Commission agrees with these goals .
It is up to Member States to decide on how to finance public service broadcasting .
This is clearly stated in the Amsterdam Protocol .
Public broadcasters will be able to experiment freely with new projects .
The draft communication makes clear that pilot projects are exempt from the tests .
We have always recognised the possibility of providing funding for a public service mission , which includes a wide range of varied and balanced programming by public service broadcasters .
This will also remain the case for the future .
The Commission also wants to guarantee a mixture of public and private .
The Commission aims at promoting public broadcasters to benefit from new technologies in order to serve the social , democratic and cultural needs of society .
The Amsterdam test allows Member States to provide funding for new media services by public broadcasters .
It protects the ability to keep up with changes in our fast-moving media environment .
At the same time , it is also in the public interest to maintain the incentives for private operators .
Innovation by both public and private broadcasters is important for realising the Lisbon objectives , and it goes without saying that public broadcasters will also remain free to launch any kind of new service on a commercial basis in the future without prior assessment .
I want to assure you that we take the consultation very seriously .
We will review the text to take into account legitimate concerns .
I will ask our services to take Parliament 's and Member States ' proposals into account as we review the draft .
The debate is closed .
Trade and economic relations with Western Balkans ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Belder , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on trade and economic relations with Western Balkans .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to present my report on trade and economic relations with the western Balkans .
It is not without a reason that I started this report by reiterating the European perspective of those countries .
The Union cannot continue to faithfully repeat past promises , such as that made to the western Balkan states at the Thessaloniki European Council of 2003 that they would join the European Union .
No , the western Balkans would be better served by tangible action and tailored accession procedures than by well-nigh dutiful rhetoric .
You may well ask why I hold the accession prospects of those countries so dear .
First of all , I am wholly convinced that the Union has a debt of honour to repay .
This reminds me of the debate on Srebrenica which will hopefully be held in this House on Wednesday evening this week .
Moreover , that region is of major strategic significance for Europe .
The specific proposals in my report are as follows .
I argue in favour of further consolidation of the Central European Free Trade Agreement ( CEFTA ) .
This is an important tool to enhance regional integration in that area , which is , in turn , important preparation if those countries want to integrate in the European market and join the Union in three stages .
The European Union should mobilise pre-accession funds through aid across a wide front so as to promote the reform process in those countries .
The Member States can also play an important role in this by providing specific training to local public servants .
This will grant those countries more official capacity to formulate their own ambitious projects that are eligible for EU funding .
Mr President , when I first started work on this report , the first thing I did was pay a visit to my country 's Economic Affairs Department in the Hague , where I was pleased to hear that the Dutch Government had taken on board a government-to-government approach .
This is something I described in my report as an example that is worth following , not because it is a Dutch approach , but because it is tailored to , and meets the calls from , the western Balkan states themselves to support the accession process actively and appropriately .
I should like to mention one specific item from my report , namely energy cooperation with the western Balkans , which is , I believe , a highly topical subject .
On account of its strategic location , that region could well play a significant role in the transit of crude oil and natural gas .
The Union should endeavour to adopt an external energy policy .
I am also member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
A number of years ago , we adopted a solid report with a view to adopting a European external policy in the area of energy .
Well , just look at the present situation , reinforcing , as it does , this appeal from the European Parliament to the Commission and Council .
Surely Brussels should not leave its own Member States out in the cold , literally or otherwise .
I should like to finish off by saying that , as an ex-journalist , I have travelled to the Balkans many times .
As a result , I feel much empathy and involvement with that region .
In connection with writing my report , I used my travel budget for study trips ; together with the Committee on International Trade , and its staff member Roberto Bendini , in particular , together with my own member of staff Dick Jan Diepenbroek , I have undertaken valuable trips to Serbia and Kosovo , and next week , I am hoping to travel to Albania .
In short , I may be concluding this report this evening , but the work is not done by a long shot , not for me and not for the European institutions .
If we really want to bring that region closer to Brussels and actually demonstrate this by our level of dedication and active support , we have every right to demand that the reform process , the accession , be met with commitment , and this should also be evident .
It was a real joy for me to work on this report , and I hope that it will be followed up in separate reports for the individual western Balkan countries .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all let me congratulate Mr Belder for this very good report .
Your report comes at a time when the Western Balkans are moving closer and closer to the EU and provides a comprehensive overview of the issues at stake in EU-Western Balkans economic and trade relations .
Allow me to focus on some points highlighted in your report .
The Western Balkans , as a region , is a key and valuable partner for the EU .
The last Commission communication on the Western Balkans in March 2008 reiterates the EU 's strong commitment to the European perspective of the region and confirms , among other things , the importance of the Central European Free Trade Agreement for the economic development of the region .
The Commission agrees with the rapporteur that the perspective of EU membership can act as a catalyst for sustainable economic development and for securing peace and stability within the region .
The Commission also agrees that the individual fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria is of the utmost importance when judging the readiness of countries in the region to join the EU .
The EU is the Western Balkans ' main trading partner .
Deeper economic ties between the EU and the region are therefore vital for boosting the region 's economic growth .
As rightly pointed out in your report , trade liberalisation and integration is a cornerstone in the stabilisation and association process , and the EU has pursued this objective with the Western Balkans at three levels .
Firstly , at the bilateral level , the EU has granted unilateral trade preferences to the Western Balkans since 2000 so as to facilitate the access of their exports to the EU markets .
The Commission has negotiated free trade agreements as part of the stabilisation and association agreements to create the conditions for political and economic reforms and to set the basis for the integration of the Western Balkans into the EU , for example by means of alignment to the acquis .
Secondly , at the regional level , the European Commission acted as a facilitator in the negotiations on the Central European Free Trade Agreement ( CEFTA ) and decided to provide financial support and technical assistance to the CEFTA Secretariat and to the parties to help implement the agreement .
At the same time , the European Commission values highly the regional ownership of the agreement and acknowledges that CEFTA is fundamental for deeper regional economic integration and for preparing the ground for the eventual full participation of the Western Balkans in the EU single market .
Moreover , CEFTA created all the necessary structures to discuss trade-related issues at the regional and bilateral level .
This is essential for facilitating and deepening regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations .
The European Commission will continue to monitor implementation of the CEFTA and will continue to report on this in its yearly report on the accession and pre-accession process .
Thirdly , at the multilateral level the Commission has supported the accession of the countries in the region to the World Trade Organisation as this is an absolutely fundamental step for effective participation in the globalised economy .
The EU has mobilised all available policy instruments to support the countries of the Western Balkans in their endeavours for reforms and regional cooperation .
The instrument for pre-accession assistance is important for addressing the region 's long term development needs .
The total funding for the current financial framework for 2007-2013 is EUR 11.5 billion .
Last but not least , the European Commission has started dialogues with all the countries concerned in the region to establish roadmaps for lifting the visa regime .
In the light of what has been said , let me assure you that the Commission is taking all the necessary steps to enhance trade relations and to bring the Western Balkans ' economy as close as possible to the EU .
In conclusion , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur again for this good report and I am pleased to say that the Commission shares its general approach .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Written Statement ( Rule 142 )
I would like to express my support and appreciation of the report presented by Mr Belder as it recommends specific economic measures aimed at the European perspective of the peoples of the Western Balkans .
I would like to draw your attention to three aspects :
1 .
We need to realistically acknowledge that Serbia is a key player in the success of the Stabilisation and Association Process , while the EU needs to continue to make efforts to win the confidence and long-term friendship of the Serbian people .
2 .
In the future , ethnic separatist trends and unilateral declarations of independence should no longer be allowed for territories such as Kosovo , South Ossetia , Abkhazia , Transnistria , Northern Cyprus etc .
The principle of states ' territorial integrity is sacred and must be respected in the future .
3 .
At the same time , we need to give strong backing to compliance with European standards concerning the rights of persons belonging to national minorities in the Western Balkan states , including the rights of the Romanian-speaking communities in Valea Timocului , Vojvodina , Istria and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
These rights must be respected , excluding any trends towards territorial autonomy on ethnic grounds and aspirations to collective ethnic rights , which have already demonstrated their potential for conflict and for triggering bloody wars .
The common agricultural policy and global food security ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs McGuinness , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the common agricultural policy and global food security .
rapporteur . - Mr President , when I initiated this report the issue of global food security was very high on the political agenda and , to some extent , it has slipped from the highlights .
But it is certainly an issue that is of concern because there are still upwards of one billion people globally who suffer hunger or malnutrition .
Thirty thousand children die of hunger and poverty-related illnesses a day .
These are horrific statistics and it makes the issue of how we produce sufficient food and give people access to that food a key issue .
I would like to thank the Commission for working with me in drafting this report and also the very many committees in the House , in particular the Committee on Development , which were obviously involved in its production .
In four minutes it is impossible to do justice to what is in the report , but let me just highlight some of the issues which I believe are of importance .
Firstly , the fact that I have put the common agricultural policy and global food security in the one heading suggests that the old practice of bashing the common agricultural policy and blaming it for all the ills of the developing world has moved on , and that we are now aware that the common agricultural policy has provided food security for European citizens , and that as a model it can provide lessons for what we need to do in the developing world in terms of food production .
It is very clear that we have allowed agriculture development to slip down the political and development agenda over the last decade or so .
There was a time when much of our development aid money went to stimulating agriculture and to projects on food production .
That is not the case today , although I think , since the food price hike , we are beginning to refocus on agriculture , both in the EU and globally .
That means allowing those countries which have the resources to grow food to do that , to help them and their small-scale farmers produce food locally to meet their needs .
It involves not just the provision of the basis ingredients of food production , such as seeds and fertilisers , but also the know-how , the advisory services , the assistance to farming families in the developing world to allow them to produce to meet their own needs .
It can be done .
We have examples of Malawi and other countries that have managed to come from situations of extreme famine to producing food .
It takes public policy initiatives to do it .
It also requires that the European Union , given its huge involvement in the developing world , urges countries to look at their agriculture and begin stimulating food production in their own countries .
The issue of supply and demand is a very delicate one because there is a growing world population - it will increase by 40 % by 2050 - so we are going to have to look at these issues .
The problem of competition - as we have witnessed - between food production , feed production and fuel , is obviously a key concern .
I suppose , driving all of this , we need to look at the issue of research and development .
I believe that we have not done enough in terms of research and development .
We , in Europe , had looked towards producing less food and therefore perhaps had not looked at the need to look at the efficiencies of agricultural production and the need to produce more into the future .
One of the key messages that I really want to get across in the short time I have is to say that farmers worldwide will produce food if they can make an income from doing it , so the pressure on policymakers is to get that right , to provide the policies that will give farmers stable incomes .
How do we do that ?
By providing stable prices and also looking at the costs of food production .
Unless farmers get that income stimulus , they will pull back .
I give a warning .
Well over a year ago we were talking about high commodity prices .
Today there are surpluses of grain , for example , in store and no market for them .
Those farmers will not produce as much in the next season , and that could exacerbate the longer-term problem of global food security .
There is a lot in this report .
I hope colleagues can support it and again I thank the many people who took a great interest in it .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the report prepared by Ms McGuinness and the intense debate which has taken place in the various EP committees on the elements surrounding this very topical subject , which range from trade to biofuels , price monitoring , investment policy , the financial crisis , climate change and water use in agriculture .
The Commission shares the broad analysis on the causes of the food crisis which hit many developing countries in the first part of 2008 .
The Commission will continue to analyse the link between food prices and energy prices .
The causality issue is a highly complex one as it involves the interplay of a number of demand and supply factors .
Energy prices constitute only one of these factors but one which has both a direct and indirect impact .
The topic of biofuels was discussed in detail during the various EP sessions .
There is a clear difference between EU and US policy on the extent to which cereal production is being diverted to biofuels .
EU biofuels policy does not reduce the availability of food , as the quantities of feedstocks used are very small on a global scale .
Even if the EU moves closer to its 10 % target , the impact on food prices will be limited , in particular for two reasons : first , more and more biofuels will come from non-food feedstocks or will be made from residues or waste .
Second , the efficiency of techniques for producing biofuels will further improve , and average yields can also be expected to continue to increase .
A sustainable EU biofuels policy is overall a pro-poor policy .
It will provide additional opportunities for the two thirds of the world 's poor who live in rural areas and thus depend on a thriving agricultural sector .
However , not all groups will benefit to the same extent .
The Commission is committed to closely monitoring the effects on food security and on food prices .
The EU has already taken steps in order to address global food security by adapting the CAP to the changed market and global situation .
The health check which was recently agreed will modernise , simplify and streamline the CAP and remove restrictions on farmers , thus helping them to respond better to signals from the market and to face new challenges .
The agreement on the health check abolishes arable set-aside , increases milk quotas gradually leading up to their abolition in 2015 , and converts market intervention into a genuine safety net .
New challenges , such as climate change , water management , renewable energy and biodiversity , which will have an impact on developing countries , have also been addressed in it .
The CAP will not remain static after 2013 , and the preliminary debate has already been engaged since the informal agricultural ministers meeting in Annecy in September .
The future CAP has to be seen in the context of a broader vision in which sustainable development , competitiveness and global food balances will form an integral part .
Various high-level events have placed global food security high on the international agenda .
There is a clear understanding and recognition internationally to place agriculture and rural development higher on the policy agenda at national , regional and possibly at continental level .
For example , we have discussed in detail the topic of agriculture and food security during our college-to-college meeting with the African Union in October , a debate which we intend to intensify in the course of this year .
Last but not least , the Commission needs to follow up on the G8 leaders ' statement on global food security .
In the run-up to the adoption by the Council of the food facility on 16 December , the European Commission has already had very fruitful discussions with the UN high-level task force .
The European Commission looks forward to the implementation of the comprehensive framework for action .
The Commission is convinced that the global partnership on agriculture and food security which is gradually taking shape will have a key role in implementing the various recommendations made in this report , including how to support smallholder farmer production and what type of trade policies should be adopted to contribute to food security , especially in the most vulnerable communities .
Evidently , export restrictions and bans should be avoided and the way forward is more rather than less trade liberalisation .
Enhanced trade flows are part of the solution towards food security .
The Commission hopes that the bold step taken by the European institutions to mobilise the one billion euros which will complement other financial instruments which have been earmarked to respond to the food crisis - of both a short- and medium- to long-term nature - is followed up by other donors .
The Madrid Conference on food security for all on 26 and 27 January is certainly a key event to move the debate to another level , one that seeks to identify the key priorities to address world food hunger .
The European Commission will continue to play a proactive role in contributing to global food security and the McGuinness report has certainly been a good analysis to look at some possible avenues which could be considered by the EC and the broader international community .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) The action taken by Parliament in the wake of the food riots has enabled EUR 1 billion to be released to combat the food crisis .
This emergency measure aside , I should like to stress the need for a long-term international strategy that is based on local and subsistence agriculture and that is appropriate to the needs of populations and to the potential of territories .
Indeed , the world population increase , global warming , the uncontrolled production of biofuels and aggressive speculation are so many factors that are increasing the tension on the agricultural markets .
These elements indicate that the crisis will not be short-lived and that public policies as a whole will have to be rethought in order to improve production methods and the regulation of international markets .
I believe that the CAP , with its excesses and imperfections ironed out , could become an example of effective , fair and responsible policy , rising to the food challenge and uniting at the same time the economy , society and the environment .
It should also help developing countries by sharing European techniques , knowledge and experience .
However , Europe should first and foremost work on reforming international trade rules so that they do not oppose the right of countries to support their agriculture in order to guarantee their food security .
in writing . - ( EL ) International and regional agreements to date have proved incapable of normalising market supply and trade and safeguarding transparent and stable prices for agricultural produce .
The regulation of agricultural markets should be based on a long-term strategy of effective measures and on organising and informing producers in terms of the state of and prospects for the market .
The basic principle of such a policy is to establish an income safety net against risks and crises arising either from adverse natural phenomena or from market distortions and an unusually long and widespread fall in prices .
Integrated and effective policies are needed , such as :
European and international systems for monitoring production and the market as an early warning system for identifying production trends ;
a global food and food reserve inventory ;
a European system for monitoring the market and recording changes in prices of agricultural product and inputs , which could be combined with a similar international system under the auspices of the FAO .
It would also be a good idea for the future agreement on the Doha Round to include emergencies during which food aid can be provided , because the provisions to date are not binding .
The conclusions drawn by Mrs McGuiness in her report about global food security are now also evident in Romania .
We are facing a rise in the prices of all basic food products , as a result of the devaluation of the national currency , the rise in the cost of raw materials and of the loans taken out by processing companies .
In addition , as a result of global warming , we have seen increasingly frequent incidences of crops being destroyed by natural disasters .
In fact , farmers from the new Member States are the most disadvantaged in these situations as the level of grants they are awarded is lower than in the other Member States .
This is why , based on the amendments proposed , I have called on the Commission to examine the possibility of creating certain intervention mechanisms at Community level , independently of any specific aid granted for crop insurance , to prevent and combat the effects of global warming .
The Community standards imposed on food producers are stringent , which is why food prices in the EU are high .
I strongly believe however that agriculture can provide the launch pad for the recovery of the European economies affected by the global crisis and the development of renewable energy sources can have a positive impact on the agri-food sector .
If we take the necessary precautionary measures , we can achieve growth in biofuel production without endangering the environment or the food stocks required globally .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report on the CAP and global food security provided us with a fantastic opportunity to reflect on how we can ensure that European agriculture plays a full part in achieving the planet 's food balance .
Indeed , although food needs to continue to increase in the world , the proportion of development aid devoted to agriculture has , for its part , been on a constant decline since the 1980s .
That is why I tabled a number of amendments within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that are aimed at making this report more ambitious and , in particular , at proposing that the European Commission adopt a comprehensive strategy on food security issues , thus making the Union 's Community policies as a whole more consistent .
While I am delighted that this text emphasises the CAP 's crucial role in achieving the objective of food security , I regret that the rapporteur is in favour of aligning agricultural policy more with the market and that she accuses environmental protection initiatives of being responsible for a reduction in agricultural production within Europe .
This statement is in my view completely misguided , and , on the contrary , I feel it is necessary to take hold of the climate-change problem in order to develop new models that are designed to produce more and better .
in writing . - ( FR ) Today the EU must urgently improve its food safety and rise to major challenges .
Firstly , agricultural production will have to double in 30 years since the world 's population will reach 9 billion people by 2050 .
The fact is , 860 million people continue to starve .
Such development will have to be sustainable and will have to rely first and foremost on local agriculture .
The huge fluctuation in the global prices of foodstuffs , together with the proper management of global stocks , represent a further challenge .
In order to guarantee European farmers a fair income , I support the idea of insurance policies providing a higher level of cover for farmers against price fluctuations , as well as the initiative of setting up a global food inventory regime .
Lastly , in view of the increased trade in animals and plants , the EU has a duty to implement an effective strategy to prevent all health crises in Europe .
This strategy should be based on prevention , traceability and responsiveness .
In this respect , the recent decision of the Council of Ministers to strengthen and harmonise the import control arrangements will mean that our fellow citizens can be given a better guarantee of the quality of foodstuffs .
Now more than ever agriculture is playing a central role in the areas of growth and development .
We must therefore protect it at all costs !
The global food crisis , caused by the constant rise in the price of maize , wheat and energy , the growth in the world 's population and climate change have sparked a series of riots and unrest which , if they are not resolved in the near future , could destabilise countries and regions around the globe .
What is alarming is the gap between the rate of population growth , which could reach more than nine billion inhabitants by 2050 , and the reduction in global food stocks .
This kind of situation will most probably lead to conflicts over oil being superseded by conflicts over drinking water and food or by a fight for survival .
At the present moment , the European Union is the main donor of humanitarian aid , but the food stocks are starting to become depleted and developing countries , especially in Africa , need more support to help them fight poverty and chronic hunger .
Reducing agriculture 's dependency on fossil energy sources , using organic products , maintaining fertile soils and adapting the common agricultural policy to the food crisis situation are some of the key elements which need to be taken into consideration in order to break this deadlock .
in writing . - ( HU ) The most important question facing the European agricultural sector in 2009 is how the global economic crisis will affect the conditions for the production and consumption of agricultural products .
The question will be a central topic of the Second Hungarian Agrarian Academy which I am organising jointly with State Secretary Zoltán Gőgös of the Hungarian Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development on 17 April 2009 in the town of Pápa .
Since 2006 , the price of corn has risen threefold , and the price of wheat by 180 % on the international market , while overall food prices have increased by 83 % .
By 2050 the population of the world will have grown to 9 billion , and in order to provide for their needs we will need to double the level of agricultural production ; the days of cheap food have thus come to an end .
Therefore it is extremely important to preserve , and where possible increase the agricultural capacity of the European Union .
It is unacceptable that as a result of the sectoral reforms of the CAP , agricultural production should have decreased in the European Union .
Good examples of this are the sugar reform , which has led to the disappearance of the Hungarian sugar industry , and the subsidies given for the grubbing up of grape vines in the context of the wine reform policy .
The separation of direct agricultural funding from production is likewise heading in this direction .
We need to find the appropriate balance between food production and biofuel manufacture , and the latter must not threaten global food security .
The United States ' bioethanol programme contributed significantly to sending food prices soaring in 2008 ; based on those experiences , the European Union must re-examine its earlier commitments with regard to biofuel ratios .
Finally , I urge speedy action at EU level against the creation of monopolies among food retailers , in order to protect producers .
The rise in energy prices , adverse meteorological events and the increase in demand for energy due to world population growth have produced high food prices .
I urge the Commission to examine the link between high food prices and growing energy prices , especially for the fuels being used .
The agricultural sector needs to improve its energy efficiency .
Increasing the proportion of crops for biofuel and using renewable energy could have a positive impact on the agri-food sector , which has been affected by high prices for fertilisers and pesticides , as well as by the increased costs of processing and transport .
I urge the Commission to closely monitor the effects of increased biofuel production in the European Union and in third countries in terms of changes in land use , food product prices and access to food .
Incentives to encourage sustainable cultivation of energy crops should not jeopardise food production .
I believe that agricultural research is required in order to boost farm productivity .
I also invite Member States to avail fully of the opportunities offered in this respect by the Seventh Framework Programme for research and technological development and to adopt measures that will improve agricultural output in a sustainable , energy-efficient way .
Developing civil dialogue under the Treaty of Lisbon ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Grabowska , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the perspectives for developing civil dialogue under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are changing the subject to discuss contact between the European Union 's institutions and its citizens .
These contacts are inadequate .
There is a deep divide between the Union and its citizens , yet Jean Monnet pointed out that the Union was being created for the citizens rather than for countries and governments .
The Union is enlarging and acquiring more citizens , but its institutions have difficulty in establishing contact with the citizens .
This became evident through the painful experience of the French and Dutch ' No ' to the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is true , nonetheless , that the Union 's institutions are endeavouring to improve their contacts with the citizens .
They are opening up to them , and are clearly recognising the role of civil society .
There is an ever increasing range of Union communication policies in this area .
The new term civil dialogue has even been coined to describe these policies .
More is required , however .
The European Parliament is therefore endeavouring to rise to this challenge , and attempting to create a suitable mechanism for the purpose and promote contacts of this nature between the European Union 's institutions and its citizens .
This would resolve the issue of lack of democracy and demonstrate that the citizens also play an important role in the decision-making process within the European Union .
Article 10 of the Treaty of Lisbon states that ' Every citizen shall have the right to participate in the democratic life of the Union .
Decisions shall be taken as openly and as closely as possible to the citizen . '
There is also an additional provision making it possible for one million citizens of the European Union to take a legislative initiative .
Following entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , one million citizens will be able to approach the European Commission and invite it to submit a legislative proposal on a subject of importance to the citizens .
That is why I refer to civil dialogue in this report .
The latter is a dialogue that is not defined in law .
It is essential , however , and I would like it to be guided by the following principles , or rather to guide itself by them .
Firstly , I have introduced the principle of civil society representation into this report .
I would like civil society to be suitably represented at the level of the European Union , that is to say , I would like it to be represented by partners that reflect and represent the interests at issue correctly .
I would like civil dialogue to be a reciprocal , two-sided process .
This means it should not just involve the European Union approaching citizens , and the latter responding .
The Union should also inform citizens when their views have been taken into account and explain what the implications of those views have been .
That is why we also need feedback from the Union to the citizens .
I would like civil dialogue to be based on the principles of clarity and transparency .
We should be governed by clear rules when inviting representatives of society to engage in dialogue with us .
We should systematically publish the list of organisations involved in consultation .
It would be wise for the Union to appoint a contact person responsible for this area , namely dialogue .
It is not easy to establish rules governing this area .
The European Commission already drafted principles for strengthening a culture of consultation and dialogue back in 2002 , and I therefore hope it will be prepared to draft the appropriate principles .
These would become common principles for all the institutions .
I should like to add too that the Member States should also be required to promote civil dialogue .
I have been unable to mention every part of this report .
I would , however , like the content to be put to the test at the first available opportunity , namely during the 2009 European election campaign .
I would like us to take advantage of that occasion and take a first step towards contact with European citizens , making them aware of the best the Union has to offer and learning from them what we should be fighting for in this House .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all the Commission would like to thank the rapporteur , Ms Grabowska , as well as the Committee on Constitutional Affairs for their excellent report .
We agree that civil society plays an important role in European integration .
It is one of the key tools for communication between European institutions , EU society and EU citizens .
It helps citizens to exercise their right to participate in the democratic life of the Union .
The Commission has a long and healthy tradition of interaction with civil society organisations .
This cooperation between the Commission and civil society has grown , covering a wide variety of issues from policy dialogue to project management , both within the EU and in our partner countries .
The Treaty of Lisbon would put our existing practices on a more formal footing and provide a fresh impetus to further enhance them .
It would also open the door to another option for civil society to operationalise its views through the Citizens ' Initiative .
Involving interested parties in an active dialogue requires the provision of appropriate instruments for civil society to express its opinions and be heard .
The EU institutions also need equally appropriate instruments to ensure that what we hear from civil society and citizens is properly picked up and put into the system .
The Commission welcomes the fact that the current report supports many of the ideas the Commission is already putting into effect .
Through its mandate , the current Commission has taken a series of initiatives to involve civil society organisations and individual citizens in a public debate on EU issues .
One of the more innovative examples of these efforts has been the citizens ' consultations , experimenting with deliberative polling and face-to-face consultations .
To understand people 's needs and expectations , over the past 35 years the Eurobarometer has been developed into a very valuable tool for monitoring public opinion in Europe .
Neither the Commission nor Parliament can , however , single-handedly organise a Europe-wide public debate .
This will only be possible if EU institutions and Member States work together .
That is the purpose of the political declaration on ' Communicating Europe in Partnership ' signed by Parliament , the Council and the Commission on 22 October 2008 .
In this context , the Commission and Parliament are already coordinating efforts with the Member States via the management partnerships , which include regional and local campaigns on specific issues , linking up with action by local authorities and NGOs .
Eleven new management partnerships in 2009 will make this approach even more effective .
The Commission shares the view that fruitful dialogue depends on the active participation of all sides : the EU institutions , the Member States and civil society .
The Commission hopes that the Lisbon Treaty will come into force and stands ready to take the necessary action to put its provisions into practice and to continue developing civil dialogue .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
If the European Union is to be truly democratic and close to its citizens , close cooperation is required at local , regional and national level between the Union 's institutions and its Member States on the one hand and civil society on the other .
Civil society represents many non-governmental and not-for-profit organisations established by the citizens of their own free will .
It plays a vital part in the process of European integration as it makes the positions and wishes of the Union 's citizens known to the European institutions .
It is therefore very important to provide the citizens with effective and reliable information and to make civil dialogue more popular .
This is particularly so regarding the promotion and dissemination of the European Union 's actions and intentions , the development of a European network of cooperation and strengthening European identity amongst civil society .
Greater political awareness , a more effective civil dialogue and broader public debate are needed if the Union is to achieve its political aims and intentions .
The Treaty of Lisbon strengthens citizens ' rights in relation to the Union by making it easier for them and for associations representing civil society to participate in debates on the so-called citizens ' Europe .
The institutions of the European Union should cooperate more closely in order to develop European civil dialogue and encourage Union citizens to engage more with Europe .
It is essential to encourage wider participation by the citizens in European debates and discussions .
The citizens should also be actively involved in the coming elections to the European Parliament .
After all , as Jean Monnet stated , we are not creating a Union for countries and governments , we are creating it for the citizens .
Membership in a civil society organisation provides European citizens with the opportunity to take active part in policy-making .
In view of attaining EU goals , the active involvement of citizens in this process and the creation of concrete , tangible opportunities for them to take initiatives , provide feedback and express criticism and contrary opinions present a true challenge .
However , since there is no single , precise legal definition of a civil society organisation , this can present difficulties .
In order that EU citizens might recognise the advantages the European Union offers them , we need to continue to expand democracy , increase transparency and improve the effectiveness of the EU 's operation .
The democratic deficit in most cases results from the fact that citizens do not always have access to essential information .
Some of the documents relating to the Community decision-making process are still not accessible , and thus we need to continue the process aimed at further increasing the accessibility of Community working documents .
The mechanism of consultation forms an integral part of the activities of European institutions .
We need to lay down general principles and a minimum set of rules regarding consultation and to establish a framework for consultation that is consistent yet flexible enough to adapt to the particular expectations of the parties concerned .
in writing . - ( DE ) This report sends a clear signal for bringing the EU closer to its citizens and proposes tangible steps towards making this goal a reality .
We call upon all EU institutions to make dialogue with civil society an important across-the-board task in their political work .
People only support the EU if they are informed about political projects and activities and are able to participate in decision-making , for example through consultations .
With the rejection of the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland we have seen what negative consequences deliberately disseminated misinformation can have for European integration .
This must be prevented in future by a pro-active information and dialogue policy .
This also applies particularly to the Council and to the governments of the Member States , which should make a more active effort to provide better information about the EU .
Access to documents from all the EU institutions must be made easier and improved so that every citizen can obtain an impression of their work .
Our aim is to build a strong European civil society as the basic prerequisite for the development of a European public area .
Therefore , we demand the creation finally of the necessary framework conditions , which means , primarily , a charter for European associations , as well as the necessary basic infrastructure for active citizens at European level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mrs Grabowska on the perspectives for developing civil dialogue under the Treaty of Lisbon is an example of a waste of time and resources .
A fundamental question therefore arises .
What is this debate actually all about ?
After all , the Treaty of Lisbon is dead .
Ireland rejected it in a national referendum .
This means that the aforementioned document does not have legal force .
Building anything on it is like building on sand , without foundations .
To build upon a treaty that does not really exist because it was rejected is a violation of democracy and of equal rights for free nations .
This all brings to mind the definition of democracy .
As I understand it , democracy is a free choice , not something that is imposed and which disregards the will of the people .
It is the people who are sovereign in a democracy , not a particular interest group .
The supreme expression of the will of the people is a referendum , not a decision taken by a ruling clique , contrary to the will of the people .
Is that so difficult to understand ?
I would like to congratulate Mrs Grabowska on her wonderful report which I am sure will contribute to improve and develop civil dialogue .
There is a great deal that can be said about the development of dialogue between the European Union 's citizens and its institutions .
As chairwoman of a citizens association in Bulgaria , I firmly believe that this is one of the most important elements for the future development of Europe which needs to be urgently reformed and improved .
I believe that this report will enable the European Parliament to give the necessary guidelines and recommendations to the other institutions , but also to the civil organisations because , without their cooperation and participation , we will be unable to achieve the objective that we have set ourselves .
The report proposes an equal dialogue , taking into account the differences between and independence of the many associations .
It will promote civil participation in the political process with a view to tackling the serious challenges it is facing , both at a national and European level .
This is why it is vitally important that we find a differentiated approach in order to produce results at a local level because of the different level of development , both in different countries and in different sectors .
I am counting on the other institutions and the Member States taking into account our recommendations as soon as possible , even if the Lisbon Treaty does not come into force soon .
Public finances in the EMU - 2007-2008 ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Gottardi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on public finances in EMU 2007-2008 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , exactly one year ago we took the decision to combine the reports on public finances for 2007 and 2008 .
There were at least two reasons for this : to try to speed up the process and to take account of the signs of change taking place .
We did not know the full extent of the changes at the time , but it was already obvious that by analysing two years together we would gain a more comprehensive and accurate assessment .
And we were right !
The report we will be voting on tomorrow has been constantly updated .
The tight link between public finances and the financial and economic crisis is very clear .
Simply consider the resources allocated to bail out banks and big businesses , the support for manufacturing , and bear in mind the calls chiefly from small and medium-sized enterprises , and the protection for citizens from the fallout of the recession .
All of these measures have been brought to the attention of the European institutions and individual Member States , however they should not undermine or weaken our outlook and our commitment on behalf of future generations .
The report involves at least two levels : that which is general , stable and valid in all situations , and that which is an emergency response to the current crisis .
The principle remains intact , even strengthened , that high-quality , sustainable public finances are indispensable not only for individual countries but also for the solidity of the economy and the European social model .
As regards revenue , steps must be taken to broaden the tax base , without however weakening the principle of progressive taxation , and to reduce the tax pressure on work , above all for mid to low-level salaries and pensions .
As for expenditure , action must involve an assessment of the context , requirements , the composition of the population , with due consideration for gender policies and demographic change .
Rather than introducing indiscriminate reductions , the aim should be to reorganise expenditure , partly by reallocating budget items and modernising public administrations .
A useful way of doing this is through gender budgeting , a method favoured and promoted by the European Parliament for some time , though still far from being the norm .
It increases transparency and comparability , is more readily recognised by citizens and thus builds trust and a sense of ownership .
Today 's unprecedented instability calls for determined action .
If public sector intervention has become central and essential once more , we must not make the same mistakes again - that would be even more unpardonable .
Instead , we must steer the crisis towards a new model of development that is genuinely sustainable , both environmentally and socially .
When we talk about European coordination , we should be thinking of having our own counter-cyclical governance , moving together and in the same direction , stepping up the fight against evasion and tax havens and linking national plans together .
When we intervene to support businesses , we must assess the impact on competition , the level playing field and the functioning of the internal market , guaranteeing supervision , accountability , restrictions and consequent behaviour .
The review of the Stability and Growth Pact permits controlled flexibility , to be used with care and long-term perspective .
The macroeconomic policies and joint investments should be re-launched in strategic , pre-determined sectors using instruments such as the Eurobonds , while keeping a close eye on the sub-national level and regional stability plans .
There was a broad consensus on the report within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , as most political groups shared this vision .
I really hope that this is a prelude to a good result at tomorrow 's vote .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the Gottardi report and the substance of the report fits well with that of the two earlier Commission reports on public finances in the EMU released in June 2007 and 2008 .
The Commission also agrees with the three latest amendments tabled by the rapporteur on 7 January .
The European Parliament 's report confirms that the revised Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) , so far , has been working as it should .
In particular , many Member States have made considerable efforts to meet their obligations with regard to the Pact .
Since the reform of the SGP , both the corrective and preventive arms have been applied in full accordance with the provisions of the reform pact and any leniency in enforcement has not occurred .
However , the report also emphasises the very negative economic outlook for the EU and the euro area for 2009 .
Growth has slowed down considerably , to the point of turning into an outright recession this year .
The overall economic prospects for 2010 are also discouraging , so the Commission agrees with the European Parliament that supporting demand by making use of discretionary fiscal policy measures is now essential .
Nevertheless , fiscal policy should be maintained on a sustainable course , anchoring expectations of an ordered resolution of the crisis .
In this respect the Commission shares Parliament 's concerns regarding the long-term sustainability of public finances and continues to put emphasis on its assessment .
A new report on the long-term stability of public finances in the European Union will be issued by the Commission in autumn 2009 .
The Commission also takes the European Parliament 's view that public expenditure has to be reoriented in order to improve the quality of public spending in line with the Lisbon Strategy .
Such a policy orientation is indeed part of the integrated policy guidelines adopted by the European Council .
Work is ongoing at the Commission for a more systematic assessment of quality of public finance developments including aspects of performance-based budgeting .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Written Statement ( Rule 142 )
In the spring of 2006 twelve Member States were going through an excessive deficit procedure .
As a result of implementing the recommendations and decisions issued by the Council in the case of countries with excessive deficit , two and a half years down the line the number of Member States going through an excessive deficit procedure is approaching zero .
This achievement has been possible thanks to the presence of favourable economic conditions in 2006 and 2007 .
During the 2008-2009 period we are facing an economic crisis which has already sparked in many Member States economic recession , a rise in unemployment and large numbers of company bankruptcies , especially among SMEs .
The European economic recovery plan provides for major public investments for modernising transport and energy infrastructures .
Member States are developing programmes aimed at supporting SMEs to allow them to stay in business .
In these conditions , Member States in the euro zone , as well as all Member States , will find it difficult to meet the convergence criteria .
I believe that measures need to be adopted at European level to enable Member States to face up to the current challenges such as an ageing population , migration , climate change etc .
Agriculture , education , health and transport , which are key areas for the EU 's economic development and European citizens ' quality of life , must benefit from specific public policies .
The transposition , implementation and enforcement of Directives 2005 / 29 / EC and 2006 / 114 / EC ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Weiler , on behalf of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the transposition , implementation and enforcement of Directive 2005 / 29 / EC , concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market , and Directive 2006 / 114 / EC concerning misleading and comparative advertising .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , before I come to my report , I would like to say once more that we have not conducted ourselves correctly with our decision to debate our own-initiative reports .
When I see how the debates proceed - without dialogue , without controversy , without conflicts - I do not feel this to be a proper parliamentary debate and I hope we will put that right quickly after the European elections .
Nevertheless , I would like to express my thanks to fellow Members who are not present .
We have worked very well together on the production of the report .
I would also like to thank the Commission and the committee secretariat .
We have made many new joint discoveries during the debate in committee .
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection has consciously put the debate on implementation relatively early on the agenda because the deadline for implementation by Member States was the middle to the end of 2007 , which to date is not much time for a directive involving an enormous and significant element of harmonisation .
Nevertheless , some Member States have not undertaken transposal .
Certainly , this has to do with the complicated procedure , but it is interesting that three Member States who have not managed it are some of the founding Member States .
Therefore , we cannot assume that they are lacking in knowledge of European law .
Three Member States have not yet transposed the directive , four have done so deficiently and inadequately and three Member States have received communications from the Commission that could potentially lead to proceedings at the European Court of Justice .
There are a large number of cases of deficient transposal .
We established during our hearing that two countries have transposed the directive with a great deal of commitment and creativity , namely the United Kingdom and Austria .
It is possible , then .
The benefits of the internal market should be in the interest of the Member States .
The aim of this directive should be to clarify consumer rights and to simplify cross-border trade , to introduce reliable and fair regulations and , of course , to strengthen legal certainty .
A very important point for us , as parliamentarians , was the protection of citizens and consumers from fraudulent practices .
This applies not only to consumers but also to small enterprises and tradespeople .
Our aim , Commissioner , should perhaps be to put these two directives together in the medium term because very many small businesses are confronted by the same irritations in the internal market as consumers .
We know of many examples , such as annoying advertising and misleading and aggressive business practices .
We all know the address book fraud that is a widespread problem throughout Europe .
We know about cheating on the lottery and much more besides .
I would also like to thank the Commission for rigorously introducing the new sweep and search system in airlines and ring-tone advertising .
We hope that it will continue to work on this .
We expect that it will implement stronger networking with national offices and ensure that black lists are not undermined and sanctions are actually a deterrent - a quite significant point for us as parliamentarians .
I would like to say , in closing , that successful transposal requires cooperation between the Member States and between national and European parliamentarians and , entirely in line with the Treaty of Lisbon , which has been mentioned here , I would also like to argue in favour of national parliamentarians exercising more control over their national governments .
These two Acts would be a good start .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Weiler , for her report , the contents of which of course will be carefully considered by the Commission , but also to thank her for the comments she made regarding this procedure .
The Commission fully agrees that it is now very important that Member States adequately transpose the new concepts introduced by the directive on unfair commercial practices and that national authorities also contribute to uniform implementation of the directive right across the EU .
As far as transpositions are concerned , two Member States are still late : Luxembourg and Spain ; the Commission referred these cases to the Court of Justice in June last year .
The Commission also coordinated cooperation on transposition in order to avoid incorrect transpositions .
Nevertheless , some problems remain in a limited number of countries mainly because of their reluctance to comply with full harmonisation .
For those cases the Commission will not hesitate to launch infringement proceedings .
The report mentions the need to protect not only consumers but also SMEs against unfair commercial practices .
On this point the Commission reminds the European Parliament that a full harmonisation directive on unfair business-to-consumer practices was already a very ambitious proposal which would have failed if its scope had been extended to business-to-business unfair competition practices .
It has been concluded from the consultation leading up to the proposal and from the deliberations in Council that there was little support for extending the scope of the directive to cover business-to-business unfair commercial practices .
As regards aggressive practices which were regulated for the first time at EU level through the directive on unfair commercial practices , it was considered that such practices occur almost exclusively in business-to-consumer relationships .
Misleading business-to-business practices are already covered by the directive concerning misleading and comparative advertising .
Such practices should continue to be regulated solely by this directive .
As regards enforcement of consumer protection legislation , the Commission will continue to coordinate enforcement actions through the consumer protection cooperation network .
In this context the Commission notes that Parliament 's support for the ' sweeps ' as an enforcement tool .
The Commission intends to further develop this mechanism and has planned a further sweep for later this year .
Further to the request from Parliament , the Commission is also pleased to add that the forthcoming second version of the consumer scoreboard will contain data gathered during the sweeps carried out so far .
As the report mentions the need for information campaigns to raise consumer awareness of their rights , the Commission would like to inform the members of its recent ' Is it fair ? ' website which includes for example educational material on the blacklist of banned practices .
To conclude , the Commission would like to assure this House that it will continue to work closely with Member States to ensure adequate and effective enforcement of the directives on unfair commercial practices and misleading comparative advertisement .
The database containing national transposition measures and case-law will be set up this year and will serve as a useful tool in this respect .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
( Following upon Mrs Weiler 's comments , the President read out the provisions of Rule 45 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Written Statement ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( SK ) European consumers are often confronted with unfair commercial practices and deceptive and misleading advertising .
The category of vulnerable consumers , which includes children and senior citizens in particular , is most exposed to the risk of fraud .
I welcome the Commission 's effort to assist Member States in transposing a directive which will help to increase confidence of both consumers and traders in cross-border transactions .
It will ensure greater legal certainty for consumers and , at the same time , protect small and medium-sized enterprises against aggressive unfair commercial practices .
This directive will be crucial for the future development of consumer rights in the EU and for fully developing the potential of the internal market .
Since some things still remain unclear in the transposition of this directive , I welcome the report of Mrs Weiler drawing attention to the problems with transposing the directive into national legislations .
In order for us to be successful , judicial authorities will have to reinforce cross-border cooperation regarding misleading database services .
I attach great importance to information campaigns for heightening consumers ' awareness of their rights because these are a key factor in providing them with greater protection .
Only a well-informed consumer is able to detect misleading advertising and avoid the disappointment it may cause .
I believe that the ' blacklists ' will enable us to uncover unfair commercial practices and completely prohibit misleading advertising .
CFP and the ecosystem approach to fisheries management ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Guerreiro , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the CFP and the ecosystem approach to fisheries management .
This Commission communication raises a diverse range of questions as part of the debate on a possible reform of the common fisheries policy by 2012 .
My report , which has been adopted by Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries , puts forward a number of factors that we consider important in the context of this debate .
Fishing is a fundamental activity for guaranteeing human beings ' food and survival , and this is the primordial objective of any fisheries policy .
In this context , it is worth underlining the importance of fishing in the waters of each Member State 's EEZ for its sovereignty and independence , particularly in terms of food .
The common fisheries policy ( CFP ) should promote the modernisation and sustainable development of the fishing industry , safeguarding its socio-economic viability and the sustainability of fish stocks and guaranteeing the supply of fish to the public as well as food sovereignty and security , the preservation of jobs and improved living conditions for fishermen .
Taking account of its own objectives , a CFP must therefore not be subordinate to other Community policies that have since been defined .
In other words , a fisheries policy is not and cannot be a policy for the oceans or for the marine environment .
Since fishing is an activity that exploits a self-renewable resource , the first and principal task of fisheries management is to control total fishing effort in such a way as to guarantee the maximum sustainable catch .
A policy for fisheries must start from the assumption of an interdependence between the welfare of fishing communities and the sustainability of ecosystems , of which they are an integral part , in particular by recognising the specific features and importance of small-scale inshore fishing and artisanal fishing .
The application of an ecosystem approach to marine management necessarily requires multidisciplinary and intersectoral action between the various measures that have an impact on marine ecosystems , going far beyond and upstream of those adopted in the area of fisheries .
The proposal for an ecosystem-based analysis of the assessment of fishery resources must be based on validated scientific data , rather than on hunches based on preconceived ideas .
It must also be recognised that there are significant differences between the various marine areas and the resources that occur in each of them , between the various fleets and gear used and between their respective impacts on ecosystems , which requires fisheries management measures that are diversified , specific and adapted to each case , with fishermen being compensated for their socio-economic consequences where necessary .
In order to guarantee the sustainability of resources , fishing activity and the respective local communities , we believe it is vital that the Member States should exercise their sovereignty over their 12 miles of territorial waters and for the area corresponding to the EEZs of the outermost regions to be considered an exclusive access zone .
In this context , there is some concern at proposals regarding access to resources that aim to promote a system of transferable individual quotas , which would have consequences in terms of the concentration of fishing activity and the individual appropriation of fishing rights .
It should also be pointed out that a policy that encourages the indiscriminate scrapping of vessels , that takes no account of the specific features of fleets , resources , needs as regards consumption in each Member State and the socio-economic impact , is inappropriate and unjustified .
Lastly , I should like to emphasise that the sharp decline in income in the industry stems not only from restrictions on fishing activity , but in particular from the stagnation / fall in first-sale prices , accompanied by the increase in production costs ( diesel and petrol ) .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the report presented and the support given to our perspectives regarding the ecosystem approach .
One of the main messages the Commission gives in its communication is that , while fisheries depend on healthy marine ecosystems , fisheries management cannot take on the role of overall ocean management on its own .
Healthy marine ecosystems can only be safeguarded through a policy which involves all sectors which impact on these ecosystems .
This is why the Commission sees the maritime policy , and especially its environmental pillar , the Marine Strategy Directive , as key to the implementation of an ecosystem approach .
This approach will give assurances to the fishing industry that all human impacts on marine ecosystems , not only fisheries , are addressed in a proportionate and coherent way .
This is also the overall thrust of the report and we appreciate the agreement on this point .
I will emphasise that this does not mean that one policy is subordinate to another - that we , by taking this approach are establishing a hierarchy between , for instance , the Marine Strategy Directive and the common fisheries policy .
The Marine Strategy Directive serves the common fisheries policy by being the necessary integrative instrument to safeguard the resource base for fisheries in the future , and the common fisheries policy will contribute to the Marine Strategy Directive by putting in place management measures necessary to support the objectives for healthy marine ecosystems .
As stated in the report , meeting food needs , safeguarding fishing industries and fishing communities , and preserving the sustainability of marine ecosystems are not irreconcilable .
On the contrary , in the long term there is a synergy between these objectives .
The report touches on many questions regarding the specific instruments to be utilised in the future .
These are important and pertinent questions which we will address in the debate regarding the reform of the common fisheries policy .
I will therefore not comment specifically on these questions here .
I will , however , point out that there are a couple of points where we may be in disagreement .
It is indicated that fishermen affected by management plans and measures to protect ecosystems should be subsidised or compensated .
We do not think that direct subsidies is a way forward , but that the solution is to help the industry to be more economically resilient and to help coastal communities diversify into other economic activities .
It is also indicated that restocking from aquaculture may be an instrument to replenish wild fish stocks .
Although this may be an option in a few very specific cases , we do not think that this is the way forward in general .
Fish stocks should be rebuilt by proper management of the human impacts on the marine ecosystems , including the impacts of both fisheries and other sectors .
We will return to a more detailed debate on the instruments for fisheries management in the context of the debate and development of the common fisheries policy reform , starting with our publication of a green paper in April .
In the mean time , I thank Parliament for its support for our approach as expressed through this report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Written Statement ( Rule 142 )
Current fish stocks in European Union waters are continuing to dwindle , both due to excessive fishing and the use of unsuitable equipment and to the impact which other sectors , in particular tourism , are having on marine biology life .
Scientific research into identifying the factors that influence marine ecosystems , including the impact of climate change , will provide the opportunity to determine the development of fishery resources and ensure that precautionary measures are taken to prevent the rapid , continuous depletion of fish stocks .
As fishing is an essential activity for guaranteeing food and man 's survival , managing the fishery resources ' sustainability becomes vitally important at a time when marine biodiversity is deteriorating .
For this reason , social , economic and environmental aspects need to be taken into account in all the initiatives promoting the sustainable development of the European Union 's coastal areas .
Equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion , and working conditions ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Riera Madurell , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on transposition and application of Directive 2002 / 73 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council , of 23 September 2002 , amending Council Directive 76 / 207 / EEC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion , and working conditions .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , the directive referred to in the report is an amended version of a 1978 directive on the same subject , prepared in the light of the Treaty of Amsterdam , the case-law developed by the Court of Justice of the European Communities and the new social realities .
It is a version that incorporates key elements of the improvement in women 's rights , which are those assessed in this report .
The legal text presents the definition of direct and indirect discrimination , assault and sexual assault ; it requires Member States to encourage employers to adopt measures that prevent all forms of gender discrimination ; and it safeguards workers ' rights following maternity or paternity leave .
By implementing this Directive , the Member States not only commit themselves to establishing equality bodies that promote , assess , implement and support equal treatment , but also undertake to instigate social dialogue , with the aim of promoting equal treatment in the workplace through collective agreements , in a planned manner .
They also commit to strengthening the role of NGOs in promoting equality , to establishing effective measures to penalise those who do not abide by the provisions of the directive , and to implementing protective measures for those who provide support to victims .
If the Commission had been able to draw up the report which , according to the directive itself , is mandatory every four years , our evaluation work would have been relatively simple .
For that to have been so , all the Member States should have transposed the directive within the given time period , done so properly and submitted all the information to the Commission .
That , however , was not the situation we found ourselves in when we began .
When the deadline for transposing the Directive had passed , nine Member States had not provided information on the measures they had adopted in order to transpose it .
The Commission had then initiated infringement proceedings and , in May of last year , proceedings were still underway against two Member States .
Furthermore , due to the directive 's complexity and the new elements it contained , the Commission had detected problems with its transposition in 22 Member States , although it was expecting to resolve many of those through dialogue .
In order to make a report that was thorough , useful and as complete as possible , we needed to have more data available and therefore also decided to request information from Member States .
With the information provided by the Commission , that received from Member States - through their equality bodies and national parliaments - and the contributions from my colleagues in the various groups , we were able to write this report , which now provides a clear idea of how the transposition process is progressing in each of the Member States .
After this experience , I would like to stress that collaboration between the national parliaments and the European Parliament was fundamental in enabling us to do our job properly .
Without the information provided by the parliaments and equality bodies , we would not have been able to write this report , at least not as thoroughly as we have done ; nor would it have been possible without the mutual collaboration that we have been able to establish with the Commission , or without the invaluable help provided by the services of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , my office and the services of my parliamentary group .
I would like to extend my thanks to all of these women .
I also wish to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their contributions and their willingness .
From the very beginning , our aim was for our work to be not merely thorough and useful , but the result of the broadest possible consensus , since we needed to gain an accurate picture of how the transposition was progressing .
This directive is highly important , since it equips the European Union with very effective tools that enable Member States to strengthen their legislation on equal treatment in the workplace - something that is fundamental if we are to achieve the goals we have set ourselves as Europeans .
We should not forget that even today in the European Union there is a 28.4 % difference in employment rates between men and women , that we are a long way off the Lisbon target of achieving 60 % female employment by 2010 and that , in addition , women earn on average 15 % less than men .
If this report also serves to further awaken people 's consciences on this matter in Member States , then we can be doubly satisfied .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's report on this important Directive , and we thank Mrs Madurell for her hard work on this .
Directive 2002 / 73 / EC is an important tool for fighting gender discrimination in access to employment , vocational training , promotion and working conditions .
It has significantly improved Community law in this field , with clearer definitions of types of discrimination and a number of innovative legal solutions .
They include provisions for the protection of pregnant women and women on maternity leave , the involvement of social partners and NGOs in ensuring gender equality in the workplace , and the establishment of equality bodies .
This report is of special importance given the many inequalities still affecting men and women in the area of employment .
It draws the attention of the Member States , the Commission , the social partners and civil society to the Directive 's key provisions and stresses the need for full implementation .
It can therefore contribute to greater compliance with the Directive and to greater awareness of the Community legislation on equal treatment of men and women .
As the guardian of the Treaties , the Commission continues to monitor closely implementation of the Directive in the Member States .
It is keeping up the dialogue with the Member States in connection with infringement procedures , with a view to ensuring the Directive is properly implemented .
In fulfilment of its reporting obligation under the Directive , the Commission will adopt a report in the first half of this year on the Directive 's application in all Member States and will communicate this to Parliament and the Council .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The Irish Equality Authority is considered to be a model of good practice .
Yet , the Irish Government has recently cut its budget by some 43 % and fast-tracked the decentralisation of the Authority , at a time when the Government 's overall programme of decentralisation of public bodies is being halted .
Indeed , Mr Niall Crowley , Chief Executive Officer of Ireland 's Equality Authority , has resigned as CEO stating ' the Equality Authority has been rendered unviable by the decision [ ... ] to cut its funding by 43 % and to continue the decentralisation of its staff ' and that ' [ T ] he work of the Equality Authority has been fatally compromised ' .
Moreover , a further six members of the Equality Authority 's board have now also resigned .
This report urges Member States to develop capacities and ensure adequate resources for the bodies promoting equal treatment and equal gender opportunities provided for in Directive 2002 / 73 / EC .
It also restates the Directive 's requirement of ensuring the independence of those bodies .
The Irish Government is clearly in breach of the directive because it evidently has no intention to either adequately resource or ensure the independence of an authority whose funding it has almost halved forcing the resignation of half its board .
in writing . - In light of the persisting gap between men and women in terms of employment rates , wages and access to management positions , I call on Member States to speed up the implementation of Directive 2002 / 73 / EC , while ensuring that its provisions are fully and effectively transposed in the national legislation .
With a financial crisis unfolding , I am concerned that a slow or low quality implementation of this directive is likely to exacerbate the gender inequalities , endanger the fulfilment of the Lisbon strategy goals and prevent the EU from developing the full potential of its economic capacity .
Regrettable is also the choice of certain Member States to limit the scope of the prohibited types of discrimination , thus only partially complying with the Directive 2002 / 73 / EC .
It is disappointing that despite numerous studies on the subject , some national lawmakers are still neglecting the destructive effects of discrimination and sexual harassment on employee morale and productivity .
To better implement anti-discrimination and harassment practices it is necessary to engage stakeholders at grass-roots level , through information campaigns , use of NGOs , and also by more formal instruments such as including special provisions in collective agreements and national legislation relative to gender equality .
in writing . - ( SK ) The adoption of a piece of European legislation initiates the process of transposing and applying the directive in each Member State .
The European Parliament carefully monitors the transposition of every directive , one example of which is the report from my fellow Member Teresa Riera Madurell examining the application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality works intensively to draw attention to the fact that gender-based discrimination still persists in many areas of social and political life .
Slow and low-quality implementation of Directive 2002 / 73 / EC puts at risk the achievement of the Lisbon Strategy and the development of the full potential of the EU 's social and economic capacity .
I call on the Commission and Member States to introduce clear , detailed and measurable equal treatment indicators and standards for evaluating gender relations .
I believe that the gender institute which is coming into operation will greatly contribute through its activities to the field of gender equality .
I firmly believe that a successful transposition of this directive can be achieved by sharing best practices and adopting positive measures in areas where discrimination has been identified .
I was pleased to read on the European Parliament 's website that the topic of equal treatment for women and men is in a distinguished third place among the most read news items in 2008 .
The huge interest in this topic shows us however that there is still a great deal to do , especially in the area of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion .
In this respect , Teresa Riera Madurell 's report is a success thanks to clarifying the role of employers and civil society in promoting gender equality .
I think that the Commission has an extremely important role to play in the battle to establish equal treatment for women and men in the workplace .
It needs to verify primarily the way in which EU Member States have taken positive action in relation to the disadvantages women have encountered during their professional career .
I am also referring in particular to the integration and observance of the principle of gender equality in the Member States ' administrative and political decisions .
At the same time as submitting the reports to the Commission every four years , each Member State needs to offer a coherent presentation of the actual sanctions to be imposed for infringements of this directive , which would very much help to establish the exchange of experience and good practice .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10.45 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting opened at 09.00 . )
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities ( UCITS ) ( recast ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Wolf Klinz , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the coordination of laws , regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities ( UCITS ) ( recast ) - C6-0287 / 2008 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in July 2008 the European Commission presented its proposal for a revision of the existing Directive on Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities ( UCITS ) , thus providing the basis for what we are debating today .
We needed to stick to an extremely ambitious timetable if we wanted to ensure that we could actually succeed in revising the UCITS Directive , which has been in place since 1985 in its initial form , by the end of this parliamentary term .
The clear aim of these reforms was to improve the competitiveness of the European fund industry , to enable it to reduce its costs , to develop and make use of economies of scale , to ensure that all fund providers do indeed have access to all markets in the European Union , and to achieve all of this without reducing protection for investors : on the contrary , we wanted to improve protection for investors .
In other words , we had a very ambitious programme , and I have to say that I really do appreciate the fact that , in cooperation with all the institutions involved , we have managed to conclude this project within such a short period .
Investment funds provide small investors with the option of investing small sums of capital in a diversified , professionally managed portfolio .
In the past , European UCITS have already proven to be a great success story .
Collective investments in transferable securities are not only sold in Europe , but are also , to a not inconsiderable extent , exported to regions outside the European Union - particularly to South America and Asia - where they are very highly regarded .
That is why it was so important , when revising this directive , to ensure that we did not damage the status of these UCITS .
The UCITS Directive has been amended twice in the past , and on this occasion too , the Commission has tackled the revision with great care .
It carried out a consultation process , presented a green paper and a white paper , and undertook in-depth discussions with all those involved in the market .
The Commission proposed a total of six measures in this revision , which should help to achieve the aims I referred to earlier .
These include , firstly , introducing a management company passport ; secondly , facilitating cross-border mergers of funds , in order to reduce the number of funds provided in the European Union and thus resolve the imbalance that can currently be seen between Europe and , in particular , the United States ; thirdly , providing the possibility of master-feeder structures , in other words the option of investing one fund in another master fund and having that master fund manage the investments ; fourthly , developing a short - only two pages long - information document , known as the key investor information , containing the most important information for small investors ; fifthly , simplifying the notification procedure in order to ensure that , when a fund requests authorisation in a country where it is not yet authorised , this does not de facto result in a new re-authorisation ; and , finally , strengthening supervisory cooperation .



The fund industry has not escaped unscathed from the financial crisis .
A lot of money has flowed out , and in these circumstances it is absolutely vital that we make decisions as soon as possible , in order to strengthen the credibility of the funds and to ensure that small investors do not lose confidence in these investment instruments .
I would just like to conclude with two final comments .
The first is that the Commission has established a group , chaired by Jacques de Larosière , to examine the issue of supervision in Europe .
I hope that the conclusions drawn by this group and the proposals it develops will ultimately be taken on board by the Commission and will find favour here .
Secondly , particularly in the case of cross-border mergers of funds , we are still seeing differences in the tax treatment of cross-border mergers and national mergers .
Here , too , we call on the Commission to make sure that we have the same conditions for both , not different treatment .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am pleased to express the Commission 's support for Parliament 's amendments to the UCITS IV proposal .
This will facilitate the adoption of UCITS IV modifications in a single reading .
Such an outcome will be a very welcome development for EU fund markets which have recently been confronted with many tough challenges .
The proposal adopted by the Commission last July is the outcome of a thorough process of consultation .
It started before the financial crisis .
It sets some clear objectives for improving the functioning of the UCITS Directive .
Bearing this in mind , the Commission wanted to simplify and stimulate cross-border sales of UCITS , provide fund managers with effective tools for increasing the size of their funds and benefit from economies of scale .
However , it is not only about being competitive .
The Commission also wanted to put in place effective rules on investor disclosure ensuring that anybody wishing to invest its savings into a UCITS should receive essential , clear and understandable information before taking his or her decision .
I am pleased to note that the goals set by the Commission proposal have been met .
Parliament and Council have adjusted the Commission 's proposal on mergers , master-feeder-structures , fund notification and key investor information , but the high-level ambitions set by the Commission in its original proposal was fully respected .
The Commission is very pleased with the outcome of the codecision process as regards the chapters contained in its July proposal .
On the subject of the management company passport - which became an important part of the proposal - initially at the time of the adoption of the proposal , the Commission had serious concerns about the potential negative impact that an insufficiently prepared management company passport would have for the security and retail investors placing their money in UCITS funds .
Looking back , I am convinced that our decision to consult the Committee of European Securities Regulators on these issues was the right one .
It helped Parliament and the Council to design sound provisions which would protect the interests of unit-holders .
This was my one and only consideration dealing with the management company passport .
We have come a long way since July 2008 .
The CESR advice has provided the basis for a comprehensive set of provisions that clarify respect for responsibilities , ensure full information flow and underpin the necessary cooperation and support to EU Member State authorities .
This is true at all stages : initial authorisation , ongoing supervision and enforcement .
The Commission can now sign up to the compromise text .
Our work in this is , however , not finished .
The success of the management company passport depends on our ability to deal with some remaining complex issues , like risk management via Level 2 measures .
This work will also provide the occasion to tackle weaknesses in risk management that have become apparent in a small number of cases in recent times .
Very strict deadlines have been imposed on the Commission in delivering these measures .
We have expressed our concerns on the feasibility of these deadlines .
We will need time and resources to carefully prepare these measures , to consult stakeholders and adopt them .
The Commission will endeavour to start this process as quickly as possible .
We will also need the full and active cooperation of all actors , including this Parliament , to be able to deliver on time .
I would like to warmly thank again the rapporteur Mr Wolf Klinz and express my appreciation and admiration for the efficient handling of this file by Parliament .
All three institutions can be satisfied with the consensus that has been achieved in the space of only a few months .
You have shown that Europe can move speedily to bring about useful regulatory improvements .
You must build on this achievement now and complete the ambitious programme of implementing legislation .
Finally , let me conclude by making two statements which the Commission agrees to make in relation to the adoption of this report .
Firstly , regarding the issue of taxation of cross-border mergers .
The Commission will undertake to examine the potentially adverse impact that national taxation systems may have on cross-border mergers and use its funds once the proposed provisions are adopted .
The Commission will in particular examine the potential cases of adverse tax consequences for investors .
On the issue of supervision , I have been vocal about the need to strengthen supervisory cooperation .
In Solvency II and in the amendments to the capital requirements directive , the Commission has , on my recommendation , put forward proposals to strengthen supervisory cooperation .
I therefore have no difficulty in agreeing on the need to push forward in this crucial domain .
Therefore , in order to ensure consistency and coherence in all relevant financial sector regulation , the Commission agrees , on the basis of the conclusions of the de Larosière report , to examine the need to strengthen the provisions of this directive related to supervisory cooperation arrangements .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me first of all to salute the remarkable work accomplished by our rapporteur , Wolf Klinz , who has managed to find broad agreement within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and negotiate a completely satisfactory compromise with the Presidency .
The Committee on Legal Affairs , when asked for its opinion , made known its views and these were taken into account .
The original UCITS Directive was the key to development for European investment funds .
In June 2007 , the assets managed in UCITS represented EUR 6 000 billion and UCITS accounted for around 75 % of the investment fund market in the European Union .
The internal guarantees provided by UCITS explain why they are recognised by investors well beyond Europe 's borders .
However , the regulations must change to promote the development of these funds .
The changes made in 2001 opened new investment areas for UCITS but they left behind several bottlenecks .
The Green Paper led to a public debate .
In 2005 it was followed by a White Paper .
Today , we can welcome the major advances in efficiency offered by the proposal that we have before us .
The most significant progress is the recognition of a European passport for management companies .
The proposed provisions will allow the implementation of this passport for management companies , whilst guaranteeing adequate protection for investors .
It is a complete passport and we welcome it .
The supervision measures it includes will certainly be effective in removing any doubts which might have been expressed .
The proposal also makes major technical improvements , for example , notifications , cross-border mergers and the grouping of funds via master-feeder-structures .
The harmonisation which will be thus achieved will also guarantee equitable competition conditions across the European Union , provided , as our rapporteur has stated , that actions are taken at a fiscal level to avoid distortions .
Mr President , Commissioner , more than ever , I have very mixed feelings about the proposal for a directive on which Parliament is preparing to vote .
It is true that the rapporteur , Mr Klinz , has been working for many years on this and has negotiated with talent , especially during the trialogue .
It is also true that the directive will make some significant advances in the operation of the internal market and in the collective management of financial assets , and these have been welcomed by Europe 's investment fund industry .
It is still the case that the debates and discussions in the Council and Parliament have never been totally free , as the result was known in advance : for some players it was essential , at any cost , to introduce the European passport for management companies .
On the principle , there is no more to say ; the passport is its own defence .
However , it is necessary to ensure that the introduction of the passport for management companies is accompanied by the necessary guarantees , especially as regards the supervision of funds , as it leads to dissociation of functions beyond borders .
I note with regret that the system as implemented is not only complicated but also subject to different interpretations .
There is a risk that it will soon run into practical difficulties that will damage the European export fund industry , especially for export to third countries .
I have indeed noted that my position is in the minority , although I do not feel ill at ease .
In normal times , I would have been tempted to say that only in practice will it be possible for definitive conclusions to be drawn on the issue and therefore to decide who is right .
Is it those who trust in the abilities of market operators to adapt or those who insist on a more prudent approach ?
I do not exclude the possibility of success , but it is not guaranteed either .
Given the latest news , especially the Madoff scandal and its implications for the collective financial assets management industry , we are unlikely to be reassured .
My scepticism gives way to concern .
The investment fund industry will not be spared by the financial crisis ; we know that now .
It may be that fundamental questions need to be asked .
In this deep crisis , making choices that dilute the responsibilities of stakeholders or assume perfect cooperation between the regulatory authorities may really lead to incongruity .
I am saying what I think : this directive is also from another era , from before the crisis .
It is marked by a certain nonchalance .
The financial system , in fact , is experiencing a lasting and fundamental crisis of confidence , and entire chunks of its architecture must be reconsidered .
Let us not forget that the first duty of money market funds is to protect the investor by diversifying the risks and by establishing strict rules .
By voting for this text as it stands , without really knowing where we are heading , we make it look as if nothing has happened .
This withdrawal from reality will lead to no good , so I will abstain , even though I have signed the compromise amendments negotiated with the Council .
Given the circumstances , the improvements made seem to me to be of little import compared with the questions of principle that I have just raised .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are about to vote on the new directive on undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities .
This directive has been extremely important in the past and will continue to be so in the future .
Things have changed so quickly since the first directive , which dates back nearly a quarter of a century , that we now need to coordinate the laws , regulations and administrative provisions , as the title states , and request a radical update to take into account new needs , which I think should be seen in terms of greater fluidity and mobility , as well as greater supervision and control .
The work in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs went ahead in a spirit of excellent cooperation due to the positive attitude of the rapporteur , whom I cannot thank enough , and the Council , perhaps because we realised that we were touching on an area that is closely connected to the financial crisis and that we urgently needed to come up with some timely and appropriate answers .
I think it is important at this stage to sum up a few points on which we reached a good understanding and , I hope , good results .
This is the case with management companies , particularly as regards identifying the applicable law - the law of the Member State where the fund is or where the management company was set up - in order to take us toward a clearer , safer and more efficient supervision system .
It is also the case with the agreement on the Level 2 measures that the Commission has been asked to adopt by July 2010 without fail .
It also applies to the understanding that makes the management company responsible for procedures , mechanisms and contact names to enable consumers and investors to obtain specific information , not least if they have complaints to make , if the management company is not based in their Member State .
We should view in a positive light the possibility of further strengthening cooperation in terms of supervision , with bilateral and multilateral agreements between the competent authorities of Member States on UCITS and management companies , and also the agreement on merger and master-feeder-structures that make it possible to operate throughout the full extent of the internal market .
We still have some differences of opinion , however , on the timing of the notification procedure , because we would have liked and would still like this to be longer and more appropriate , as laid down by the Council .
Lastly , I would like to mention the progress made on the prospectus , the key investor information for consumer protection , noting that in this case as well we would have liked a hard copy of the prospectus to be circulated automatically due to its small size , and not solely on request .
To conclude , I feel there should be broad agreement on the need to complete this dossier at first reading .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by thanking my colleague from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , Mr Klinz , for his excellent work .
In such a turbulent time as this autumn has been , the rapporteur has succeeded in finding a reasonable compromise , as we have already heard .
Even without the financial crisis , these issues are difficult to deal with .
I know this only too well , as I was responsible for steering through UCITS in 2001 .
The aim of UCITS funds is to create not only a better and larger funds market , but also an open and consumer-friendly market .
This has largely happened .
Many obstacles were removed in 2001 .
I would like to remind everyone that it was not particularly easy then , either .
It was also prior to the Lamfalussy process .
A few obstacles remain , however , and it is these obstacles that are being dealt with now .
There will be an improvement in marketing .
There will be greater protection for investors .
The merger of funds and master-feeder-structures will be possible , and cooperation between supervisory authorities will be strengthened , something that was also mentioned by the Commissioner .
The rules concerning the management company passport have been a sensitive issue .
We have already heard comments on this .
We are aware of the different opinions .
However , I think that the present proposal is a good one .
Competition and openness are always good in a well-organised market .
Another important issue was the key investor information , which replaces the simplified prospectus .
A balance must be achieved between relevant information and effectiveness .
Too much information is not good but neither is too little .
The question of language is , of course , a sensitive one , but I believe we must have the courage to deal with this issue if we want to make more headway with cross-border trade .
A reasonable balance is also required in this area .
As became evident in the autumn , Europe needs a financial market that functions effectively .
UCITS have cleared the way and become a success and an esteemed trade mark outside Europe , too .
Let us safeguard this development , which is also something this proposal does .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Klinz , the rapporteur , on his excellent report .
He has worked extremely hard to get an agreed compromise , and I congratulate him on that .
The revised UCITS directive will , when it enters into effect , serve to reduce much burdensome red tape and unnecessary costs .
During compromise negotiations , certain specific concerns of some Member States were recognised , allowing for the production of a strong and widely supported proposal .
I believe it not only protects consumers but is also good for investors .
As some speakers have already said , an open market is a positive thing and can be a very good thing for all of us if it is well regulated .
UCITS revision is yet another recognition that the financial markets of today are so integrated that we need common rules and standards for the effective regulation and operation of the global financial services industry .
That is recognised not only in Europe but also globally , as we go through unprecedented financial times .
It is very important that we work together at a global level to try and resolve the problems .
Let me just say that today is a great occasion : we celebrate the 10th anniversary of the euro currency , which itself serves as an illustration of the importance of economic cooperation .
It is fortunate that my own country , Ireland , is a member of the euro zone as the current currency has been a source of stability for Ireland and other countries at a time of unprecedented turbulence and during the current global recession .
If Ireland were not in the euro zone , we would probably be in the unfortunate position of Iceland - but that is not the case .
I would like to remind some of the Irish Members in this House - Sinn Féin in particular - that if they had had their way , we would not be in the euro .
They described it at the time as a backward step .
Ireland would not be in the monetary union and Ireland 's economic position would be as bad as Iceland 's .
I would like to remind those who opposed the European project in Ireland that many countries around the world are now using Ireland 's rejection of the Lisbon Treaty and exploiting the confusion over its possible or perceived repercussions to win over new contracts at the expense of Ireland .
Economically , Ireland must stay at the centre of decision-making in Europe , where we have traditionally been and where our enterprise needs and wants Ireland to be .
Mr President , with all the controversy currently surrounding regulation of the financial services industry and the headlong urge to rush towards over-regulation , this is a welcome example of common-sense , appropriate and measured regulation of the industry .
Mr Klinz and the Commission have done a good job and I happily support this report and the proposed revision .
UCITS are a vital part of the European - and , yes , of the Scottish - investment management industry .
They are a vitally important savings vehicle for savers and investors , not just in Europe , but all over the world .
Imitation is surely a sufficient compliment and , even in the US , the UCITS is the model to be aspired to .
Mr Klinz has incorporated much of what I consider to be vitally important , such as diversification into new investment products and techniques with reasonable security at a common-sense level .
Most importantly , we have to achieve greater economies of scale in Europe .
Many of our UCITS are too small and there are too many of them , so we must facilitate mergers .
Personally , I would have liked to have seen that go even further to allow UCITS with different investment objectives to be able to merge more easily , provided that the investor was adequately protected and informed of such changes .
Thirdly , the management passport is a vitally important new provision which will allow for greater economies of scale , greater efficiency and the reduction of red tape .
This must only be in the interests of the investor .
The revision will therefore be good for the industry but , even more importantly , it will be good for the investor and the saver , not just in Europe but all over the world .
I am very glad to support Mr Klinz 's report and the UCITS revision .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr Klinz , thank you for your work , your commitment and your negotiating skills .
UCITS are in some way a trade mark for the European financial markets ; they are a good export product .
However , there are imbalances in the European Union , as it is an area in which there are producer countries and consumer countries , so there are different strategies .
One of the aims in revising this directive is to organise , in these conditions , an internal market in UCITS which really works .
Now , there are four questions at this stage : the first , which has already been raised in this debate , is evidently that of the management passport and I heard the Commissioner tell us about his fear of seeing this passport badly prepared .
However , Mr McCreevy , there needs to be a will to prepare it : I have sometimes had the impression that it was not something the Commissioner was set on achieving .
I am therefore pleased about the negotiations that have begun on the initiative of the European Parliament and the Council to ensure that , when the UCITS Directive is revised , we will adopt a real management passport which will allow the European Union 's internal market to function in normal conditions .
The second observation relates to the issue of retention .
If , when the Capital Requirements Directive is revised , we require the banks to hold 5 % of the securitisations that they place on the market , it will be necessary immediately to harmonise , and under similar conditions , the retention obligations in the UCITS field , because the same risks must lead to the same rules .
My third observation relates to the issue of supervision .
I do not think anyone here will doubt our determination to seek improved supervision conditions .
We are all awaiting , on the initiative of President Barroso , the results of the working group led by Jacques de Larosière .
I believe that the stakes are such that we cannot wait much longer for the results of this working group to be implemented .
That will have an impact on the conditions for organising supervision between the stakeholders , in other words the producers and the consumers of UCITS .
We thus need the supervision issues in this area to be defined .
Finally , my last observation is about tax regime issues .
The rapporteur has mentioned them and the Commissioner has made a commitment .
There is , behind the issue of tax regimes , hidden protectionism which we must denounce , which we wish to overcome .
To do so , the Commission must take initiatives so that the tax regime allows truly free movement of UCITS products , with no protectionism .
( LT ) I would also like to underline our rapporteur 's excellent work and ability to find a suitable compromise .
However , like some of the speakers , I also have a few doubts .
Those doubts concern the provision that EU Member States will have to prepare all the documents related to investment business , as stated in the document , ' in a language customary in the sphere of international finance ' , and this means in English .
I spoke in favour of creating an opportunity for business to reduce costs which would not be regulated in detail , but fund managers with one language , in this case English speakers , should not receive priority and a competitive advantage .
We should also avoid creating legal uncertainty .
How can a consumer defend his rights if the document creates prerequisites for ambiguous interpretation of financial business responsibility ?
I am in favour of clearly defining financial business responsibility and the competitive conditions which investment business follows .
( PL ) Improving the effectiveness of the mechanisms by which UCITS function should , in my opinion , be a priority of Parliament 's work .
In order to increase the benefits and competition in the European fund industry , costs to investors should be restricted , guaranteeing them at the same time the same high level of protection .
I agree with the rapporteur that the existing prospectus should be replaced by a free document containing key information for investors .
It is also extremely important to continue work on the directive in the area of taxation of fund mergers in order to remove tax barriers .
Furthermore , and like the rapporteur , I take the position that practical use of the management company passport , which is intended to give management companies the right to offer group portfolio management services in the whole of the EU , would contribute to the creation of a true common market for the fund industry .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , once again I express my appreciation and admiration for the efficient handling of this file by Parliament .
It is a result of a remarkably quick consensus .
As has already been mentioned , this is not yet the end of the story - much still needs to be done at Level 2 .
Member States will also have the task of transposing this new set of rules - Level 1 and Level 2 - altogether before the summer of 2011 .
Arrangements for cooperation between national supervisors will have to be put in place .
These are key to the good functioning of the management company passport .
I can assure you that the Commission will play its role in order to facilitate this progress and to put these badly needed changes to work in the EU fund industry .
Mr President , first of all , I agree with the Commissioner that this is indeed not the end of the story .
We now need to get started on implementation , and one reason why we have set relatively tight deadlines for Parliament and for the Council is that we want to ensure that we do not have to wait too long for implementation .
We need to keep up the pace , because we can see that the markets are changing at a tremendous pace , and if we are constantly lagging behind we will not be able to achieve our targets fully , or perhaps not at all .
Today 's debate has shown that we have broad cross-party support for the compromise we have negotiated here .
I acknowledge that Mrs Lulling sees things a bit differently in this respect , but I am reasonably confident that the future will show that her concern that Luxembourg 's position as one of Europe 's central investment fund centres could be damaged will prove to be unfounded , and that , on the contrary , this new UCITS directive could also provide opportunities for this financial centre .
Mrs Berès is absolutely right : what this is really about is finally creating a real internal market in the investment funds sector .
This sector is an example of the fact that , though we talk about the internal market , in many cases we do not yet have one .
That is crucial .
No one disputes that it will lead to a completely new and very ambitious level of cooperation , including between the supervisory bodies , but we need to achieve that in any case .
In other fields , too , the supervisory bodies need to work more closely and more constructively together , and trust each other more , than they have in the past .
If the UCITS directive can give a gentle nudge to encourage that , then in my opinion that is all to the good .
The Level 2 measures to which the Commissioner referred are legion , and need to be dealt with within a short time ; that much is true , but we all have an interest in ensuring that this does happen .
That , however , is not the end of things : the industry itself also needs to do its own homework .
The Commission , and we here in Parliament too , have deliberately chosen not to raise the issue of fund processing at all , because we are working on the assumption that the industry will keep its promise to deal with this matter on its own , without legislative pressure .
It has been working on this for quite some time now , and we still have nothing concrete to show for it .
I hope that it will soon be able to put something on the table , otherwise we will have no choice but to take further action in the foreseeable future .
In conclusion , I would like to thank not only the Commission but also , and in particular , the Council for their cooperation and for their active support .
I am also grateful to all the representatives of the other groups , particularly Mrs Berès , Mrs Gottardi , Mr Gauzès , and also Mrs Lulling , who , as we have seen again today , defended her interests valiantly but was still perfectly willing to compromise where possible .
Thank you very much .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
( The sitting was suspended at 09.40 and resumed at 10.00 . )

Formal sitting and debate - 10th anniversary of the euro
The next item is the formal sitting and debate on the 10th anniversary of the euro .
( Film )


Mr Juncker , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , Mr Trichet , Mr Almunia , Mrs Berès , ladies and gentlemen .
The first of January 2009 was the 10th birthday of our currency , the euro .
Here in the European Parliament today , we are celebrating one of the most important and historic decisions that the European Union has taken so far .
In a European Union that was growing ever closer economically , the creation of the euro was a logical development in strengthening the common market and simplifying trade within the internal market ; even so , when the currencies of 11 sovereign states were replaced by a single currency 10 years ago , there was a great deal of scepticism as to whether the planned single currency would be a success .
Its introduction required courage and decisiveness .
Ten years on , we can see not only that the euro is just as trusted as the currencies previously used in the euro area , but also that it has , without doubt , brought about considerable advantages for people and businesses in the European Union .
The euro area has become a rock of macroeconomic stability .
In view of the size of the economy of the euro area and the fact that the majority of its trade is internal , the euro area has proven to be much better equipped to withstand economic shocks than the Member States previously were with their national currencies .
Particularly in the recent months of the global financial crisis , the euro has proven to be an important stabilising factor : the single currency has protected us from the worst effects of the most serious financial crisis since the 1930s .
Without the European Central Bank and the European System of Central Banks acting as a stabilising factor , the situation in the European Union last autumn would have been considerably worse .
Just look at Ireland , a country that was particularly badly affected by the financial crisis : its membership of the monetary union protected it from a crisis of even greater proportions .
Monetary union represents a hopefully irreversible step towards deeper economic and political integration ; it means being part of a ' Union with a common purpose ' .
Like a family , all the members of the euro area talk to each other and adopt the best approach to benefit each and every one .
However , the creation of the euro was not just a decision with economic and financial effects ; it also sent a very clear signal that the European Union is in a position to implement far-reaching decisions in order to build a common , prosperous future .
Today , the single currency is seen , by many citizens in the euro area , as one of the most positive results of European integration .
In order to ensure that this continues to be the case , we must hold tight to the stability of our common currency : it is the only way of making sure that the euro continues , in future , to be a stabilising factor and a point of stability in a turbulent world .
Today , well over half of the Member States of the European Union have introduced the euro .
A few days ago , we welcomed Slovakia as the 16th member of the euro , and I am confident that , by the time we are celebrating the next big birthday of the euro , it will have even more members .
The aim must be for all the Member States of the European Union ultimately to join our single currency , on the basis of the stability criteria .
I am convinced that this step-by-step expansion will help to strengthen the entire euro area , as well as being a symbol of a common , peaceful European future , particularly for young people in the European Union .
The former President of France , Valery Giscard d 'Estaing , is here with us today , and he is very welcome .
Together with the former German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt , the former Luxembourg Prime Minister Pierre Werner and others , he is one of the architects of our single currency .
A very warm welcome , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing .
( Applause )
I agree with Helmut Kohl , who , along with François Mitterrand and Jacques Delors and others - we just saw Jacques Santer in the film - contributed to the ultimate introduction of the euro , when he said in 1998 that ' ... a currency is of course a means of payment .
But a currency is also far more than a means of payment .
It has something to do with cultural identity and it is a measure of political stability ...
Imagine what a marvellous achievement it is that in the European Union ... , with all our intelligence , creativity and colourful variety , and in spite of all the difficulties ... , millions of our people should have a single currency . '
On behalf of the European Parliament , I would very much like to thank all the architects of the euro , and all the people who prepared the way for it , in particular the European Central Bank , its current President Jean-Claude Trichet and his sadly departed predecessor Willem Duisenberg for their historic achievements .
The importance of the European Central Bank simply cannot be overestimated .
( Applause )
Our thanks also go , in particular , to Alexandre Lamfalussy , the President of the European Monetary Institute , whom we met yesterday evening , and who is also taking part in a colloquium now .
The European Parliament and its committee responsible for such matters , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , chaired at the time by Karl von Wogau and then by Christa Randzio-Plath , have also had a part to play as a driving force in this historic project over the years leading from the currency snake to the creation of the single currency .
The same applies to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in its current incarnation , chaired by Pervenche Berès , to whom we are grateful for the idea of this celebration .
Since the euro was launched 10 years ago , the European Central Bank and the Eurogroup have cultivated an increasingly close relationship with the European Parliament .
I would like to thank the presidents of the two institutions , Mr Juncker in his capacity as President of the Eurogroup and the President of the European Central Bank Mr Trichet , most warmly for their excellent cooperation with the European Parliament .
On the occasion of its 10th birthday , we wish our single currency , the euro , many more successful years with a bright common future for our continent of Europe .


Mr President , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , Mr Juncker , ladies and gentlemen , it is an immense honour and a great pleasure to participate in this ceremony to celebrate the euro , one of Europe 's main achievements .
Jean Monnet , the founding father of Europe , once said : ' When an idea matches the needs of the time , it ceases to belong to the people who invented it and it is stronger than those who are in control of it ' , and he added , ' there are no premature ideas , there are opportune moments that you have to know how to wait for ' .

Over the decades , the single European currency was an idea shared only by a few .
Many more thought that it would never happen or that it was doomed to failure .
Today the single currency is a reality for 329 million of our fellow European citizens .
One day , the creation of the euro will be seen as a decisive stage in the long march to ever closer union for the peoples of Europe .
I cannot help but think about our founding fathers - Robert Schuman , Walter Hallstein , Alcide de Gasperi , Pierre Werner , Sicco Mansholt and Paul-Henri Spaak - who , as we saw a few moments ago , were visionaries to whom we owe the European Union .
I also remember the statesmen , the heads of state and government who were determined , convinced and courageous Europeans and who are today represented by Mr Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing .
Without them , there would be no euro .
Since the introduction of the euro , our fellow citizens have known a level of price stability that few in the euro area had achieved before .
This price stability is an advantage for all European citizens .
It protects income and savings , helps to reduce the cost of financing , and encourages investment , job-creation and medium- and long-term prosperity .
The single currency is a factor for dynamism in the European economy .
It has increased price transparency , strengthened trade and promoted economic and financial integration .
( DE ) The last few months have demonstrated another advantage of the euro .
The financial crisis has shown that , in times of turbulence , it is better to be in a large , safe ship than in a small boat .
Would we in Europe have been able to act as quickly , as decisively and as consistently without the single currency to bind us together ?
Would we have been in a position to protect our individual national currencies from the impact of the financial crisis ?
We can be proud of how Europe 's parliaments , governments and central banks have responded .
Together , we have shown that , even in very difficult circumstances , Europe can make decisions .
( Applause )
We owe the historic success of the euro , not only to the determination and perseverance of visionary leaders - and I mention them - we owe it also to the effective interplay between European institutions .
The European Parliament played a crucial role at the pioneering stage .
Parliament was the first institution in Europe to make proposals for a single currency , back in 1962 .
In the past 10 years , since the establishment of the ECB , our institutions have maintained a very close and fruitful dialogue .
This dialogue has involved over 50 hearings of the members of the Executive Board of the ECB before this Parliament and the committees mentioned by the President .
The dialogue between Parliament and the ECB is very important in terms of accountability , allowing the ECB to explain its decisions and actions to the general public through their elected representatives .
During its first years of existence , the euro had to face three major trials : the establishment of a sound and credible central bank , the creation of a stable new currency and inspiring confidence .
These challenges were successfully overcome and the euro is firmly established today .
This is a time for celebration and , as I said , I am very moved .
But this is no time for complacency .
Current challenges are pressing and new challenges will arise .
The continued success of EMU depends on how these challenges are addressed .
I would like to mention three of them .
Firstly , the financial crisis .
The crisis has revealed fundamental weaknesses in the global financial system .
We are playing a very active part in the global efforts to address these weaknesses and redesign the regulatory and institutional framework .
Secondly , monetary union .
The solidity of the single currency rests on two pillars : a monetary policy geared towards price stability and a set of sound economic policies - which are very much in defence of the Eurogroup , Mr Prime Minister .
The particular challenges on the economic front include the firm and credible implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact , constant efforts to render our economies more productive and dynamic , and the avoidance of major competitive divergences within the euro area .
Thirdly , enlargement .
When we started out 10 years ago , we were 11 countries .
We are now 16 countries .
This says a lot about our historic endeavour .
Handling enlargement in the best fashion possible is a very inspiring and demanding challenge for all of us , particularly for the Executive Board and the Governing Council of the ECB .
The euro is an historic achievement .
What matters most today is our responsibility for the future .
New challenges are arising .
If these challenges are faced with utmost lucidity and audacity , they can generate the powerful ideas which Jean Monnet referred to and which have advanced us so far on the path of stability and prosperity in Europe .



Mr President , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , Mr Trichet , Mr Almunia , ladies and gentlemen , over the last 50 years Europe has often proved its capacity for setting out grand ambitions and for developing the spirit and the determination needed to implement in practice the ambitions it cherishes .
The European Union itself is the best example of this , along with the internal market and enlargement , in other words , with the renewal of ties between Europe 's geography and history , and along with the Economic and Monetary Union , whose 10th anniversary we celebrate today .
The path which led to the creation of the Economic and Monetary Union and the introduction of our single currency was a long one , and the genesis of the Economic and Monetary Union after the initial impulse of the Werner report in 1970 demonstrates this .
It was a long genesis which went via the monetary snake , the European Monetary System , the creation of the ecu in 1979 , the 1989 Delors plan , the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 , and also the Danish ' no ' and the French ' yes ' , which at the time was said to be small , without forgetting the 1993 crisis in the European Monetary System .
The journey has not been without its difficulties and shocks .
At the time , there were many who criticised the single currency both in the political and academic worlds , without mentioning the notable number of central bankers who felt that the Economic and Monetary Union could not or should not be achieved and that if , despite everything , it were to come into being , the single currency , in brief , would be weak and without a future .
It is important for me to take advantage of the 10th anniversary of this key event in European integration to pay homage , in my turn , to those men who created the euro , such as Pierre Werner , Helmut Kohl , François Mitterrand , Jacques Delors , Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing and others .
I would like , once again , to applaud their vision , their determination and their unfailing commitment to Europe .
Those I have mentioned , and many others who accompanied them , could not have imagined the rapid success of their political project .
Since 1 January of this year , 16 Member States have been participating in the Economic and Monetary Union and the euro is the currency of almost 330 million European citizens .
The euro , then , has become the most tangible sign of European integration .
As a tangible sign recognised around the world , the euro is a measure of stability .
It is protecting its citizens from the most serious consequences of the economic crisis .
After 10 years , it has to be recognised that the euro is an unquestionable success .
Now , anniversaries only have value if they are bridges to the future , as we have to recognise that , despite our collective indulgence as we congratulate ourselves , the true tests for the cohesiveness and coherence of the euro area await us .
This year , 2009 , will be an extremely difficult year for the euro area economies and for European citizens and there will be many challenges facing us , both internally and externally .
Internally , euro area governments will have to act together to contain the effects of the economic crisis and invest in the structural bases of the economy to build a bridge to the post-crisis world .
Exceptional situations demand exceptional measures .
We must not lose sight of the fact that the euro , this protective screen we have built around our economies , did not just fall into our laps .
The euro area economies are better protected against negative economic developments because being part of the euro area is a mark of quality certifying that its members have a real capacity for implementing prudent macroeconomic policies and policies based on sustained growth and prosperity for its citizens .
The protection afforded by the euro is therefore directly linked to our credibility , which rests on the ability to implement such policies .
This credibility is the foundation of the benefits of Economic and Monetary Union and we must maintain it to continue fully to profit from the benefits of the single currency .
Externally , we have to learn the political lessons from the international financial and economic crisis .
There is a direct causal link between the current crisis , with its origins in the United States , and the persistence of major world imbalances .
The lack of sufficient transparency , responsibility and integrity in the financial sector therefore acted as a catalyst for the crisis .
The re-establishment of stability in the financial and the real economy on a world scale implies a profound reform of the financial system and the elimination of the major imbalances in the mix of global consumption and global saving .
This balancing demands the active cooperation of the major economies in America , Asia and Europe .
Despite noticeable progress , the euro 's international image remains , too often , overly fragmented and national interests too often win out over the common interest , preventing the euro area from fully assuming the political responsibility that corresponds to its economic importance and from achieving all of the economic benefits deriving from Economic and Monetary Union .
Economic and Monetary Union is , of course , an economic project , but it is , first of all , a political project .
As a result , we must take advantage of the euro 's second decade to perfect the Economic and Monetary Union by strengthening its political bodies , both internally and externally .
Mr President , Prime Minister , Chairmen of the committees , ladies and gentlemen , I am sure that I am echoing the views of the vast majority of this Chamber in saying that , 10 years after its launch , I , as a European , am proud of the success of the euro .
I would like to congratulate Parliament on its initiative to commemorate the 10th anniversary of our single currency here , in this Plenary Chamber of the European Parliament in Strasbourg .
The euro and Economic and Monetary Union have undeniably been a success .
Over these 10 years , the euro has brought many benefits to all its members and continues to do so today amid a deep economic and financial crisis .
Within the short period of a decade , the euro has earned a well-deserved reputation for strength and stability .
The euro is the second of the world 's currencies and , thanks to its role in the international economy , is already comparable in some respects to the dollar as an instrument of commerce and means of payment in international finance .
Above all , though , the euro is part of the daily life of nearly 330 million people in 16 countries of the European Union .
We all carry in our wallets this symbol of a shared European identity : because the euro , as well as being a currency , is a central element of our European project , reminding us in a tangible way of the benefits of the integration process that began over half a century ago .
The euro has given us low inflation and low interest rates , thanks to a macroeconomic framework directed at stability .
The euro has provided a clear boost to trade and investment among its Member States .
The euro has also facilitated the creation of 16 million jobs over the last 10 years in the euro area , three times the corresponding figure from the previous decade .
The euro has encouraged financial integration and the development of the single market ; it has protected the members of the euro area from external disruption ; and it has been and continues to be a pole of stability , not just for the European economy , but also for the global economy .
The crisis is , without a doubt , a touchstone for the euro .
However , those who think that the Economic and Monetary Union is not ready to face the consequences of this crisis are quite mistaken .
On the contrary , if the single currency did not exist , the adverse effects of the crisis would be much greater .
Many Member States would now be facing great volatility in their exchange rates and , possibly , might even be suffering speculative attacks on their currencies .
The spread of their public debt securities would be much greater than currently , and their margins for combating the crisis through fiscal stimuli would be narrower .
The Stability and Growth Pact , reformed in 2005 , has encouraged governments to sort out their public accounts , leading in 2007 to the lowest budget deficit for 25 years , which is now enabling them to face the crisis in a better situation .
Throughout this crisis , the actions of the European Central Bank have done nothing but reinforce the solid reputation that it had already earned in the early years of Economic and Monetary Union .
By decisively adopting the necessary measures and taking the lead in cooperating with the other central banks in industrialised countries , the European Central Bank has served as our guide throughout this period and has substantially contributed to preventing huge financial collapse .
The economic situation is not as we would have hoped as we celebrate this anniversary , but events are highlighting more than ever the advantages of Economic and Monetary Union .
For those countries which have not yet joined , the euro area is an increasingly attractive option , as demonstrated last week in Bratislava when we welcomed Slovakia as the newest - the 16th - member of the euro family .
The European Commission and Parliament must continue working with Member States , the Eurogroup , the European Central Bank and the international community in order to place our economies on the path to the sustainable resumption of growth .
In this regard , the Commission 's recommendations in the report that we submitted a few months ago on the first 10 years of Economic and Monetary Union , which was recently debated in this Chamber , are as valid or even more valid today than they were last spring .
Increased budgetary vigilance , its extension to other macroeconomic aspects , the link between macroeconomic policies and structural reform , the external image of the euro and improved governance of the Economic and Monetary Union are , and must continue to be , the core themes on which to base the euro 's second decade , with at least as many successes as this first one .
Mr President , I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the vision and ambition of the founding fathers of the euro , whose imagination and resolute action bequeathed to us a currency of which all Europeans can be proud .
We must safeguard the foundations of this success .
The crisis has opened up a new chapter for the global economy , in which the Economic and Monetary Union must continue to play a relevant role in serving the common interests and ambitions of all Europeans .


Mr President , Mr Juncker , Mr Trichet , ladies and gentlemen , everyone who has been involved in creating the European currency is grateful to you , Mr President , and to you , ladies and gentlemen , for this very fine initiative which you have taken in commemorating the 10th anniversary of the birth of the euro .
I am one of those people who think that it is better to avoid the ever-increasing number of commemoration ceremonies , but this one is justified because it marks the greatest contribution to European integration since the election of the European Parliament by universal suffrage in 1979 .
We have certainly come a long way and perhaps this pleasant , friendly gathering does not paint the whole picture .
I would like to pay tribute to all those who mapped out this course and those who have followed it .
We can find its distant origins in the report from the Luxembourg prime minister , Pierre Werner , your predecessor , in 1970 .
It was , however , the monetary crisis in the years that followed and the currency flotation which triggered action in this area .
As long as the currency exchange rates were fixed , the monetary system did not upset our attempt to create a common market .
However , as soon as they were floating , this problem raised its head .
After the unsuccessful attempts to create a monetary snake , the strong momentum from France and Germany between 1975 and 1980 led to the meeting in Bremen , in northern Germany , and the decision to create the European Monetary System and introduce the ecu , the euro 's precursor .
This move had the backing and support of our partners in the Benelux countries and Italy .
After a period of little activity between 1980 and 1988 , the process was given new impetus with the creation by the Council of the committee chaired by Jacques Delors , resulting in the signature of the Maastricht Treaty .
Let us salute the pioneers who have been involved in this along the way , as you yourself have recently , Mr President , as well as my friend , Chancellor Helmut Schmidt and his Secretary of State , Manfred Lahnstein ; Bernard Clappier , the governor of the Banque de France at the time and co-author of Robert Schuman 's Declaration in 1950 ; Alexandre Lamfalussy , who provided us with his great , almost unique expertise during the work of the committee on European monetary union which we set up with Helmut Schmidt to relaunch the project ; Jacques Delors , President of the European Commission , who took over ; and , last but not least , the negotiators and signatories of the Maastricht Treaty who drafted an excellent text , which has not actually been touched since then , headed by Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President François Mitterrand , whose determination must be mentioned in particular , along with their other colleagues .
Today we must say a big ' thank you ' to all of them .
On this occasion of the 10th anniversary , being celebrated at a time of crisis , what can we say in support of the euro ?
What fine words can we use in our anniversary toasts ?
First of all , the euro 's success has exceeded expectations , not only of all its opponents , of course , but even of all its supporters .
I will not go into detail as you have only given me five minutes .
During the conversations which I had with the most eminent monetary experts between 1995 and 2000 , they were all sceptical about the possibility of introducing the euro and making it a success .
In 10 years the euro has become the number two currency in the world and , as has been mentioned just now , one of the most respected currencies .
Its sound management has provided a protective shield against the crisis and a platform for non-inflationary growth .
Without the existence of the euro , mainland Europe would be currently turned upside down by a monetary tornado , which would deepen the economic crisis .
We are expecting the monetary policy to try to contain , within the limits of the currency 's power , the depressing impact of the crisis and to pave the way for the return to non-inflationary growth , which we are not tackling yet , by which time the sizeable public deficits and level of debt triggered by the crisis ought to have been cleared .
In this respect , we are putting our trust in the managers and staff at the European Central Bank , who have demonstrated their considerable expertise since the start of the crisis .
We also respect their determination and independence .
I would like to finish with two remarks .
We must be careful not to try to give the euro a global dimension , which would flatter our vanity , but would multiply the risks we face .
The euro is Europe 's currency and must express its distinct culture , promoting a rational and stable model among the world 's other currencies .
Finally , I do not think that the general public will need to wait too long for banking regulation to be restored in the euro area .
It seems to me that we could call on the European Central Bank to carry out this process of restoring order and supervise its implementation , according to Article 106 ( 5 ) of the Maastricht Treaty .
Indeed , we need a strong impetus , expertise and a decision timetable which the European Central Bank could draw up and which the Council of Ministers for the euro area , presided by your good self , Mr Juncker , could then adopt and implement .
I will conclude , Mr President , by saying that the symbol of integration represented by the euro 's success must give us the courage to take the next step in creating this increasingly united Europe as recommended under the various treaties and which we are endeavouring to achieve .
Let us counter the inevitability of failure with the energy of success .
That success today goes by the lovely name of the euro .
( Applause )
Mr President , the euro is the successful outcome of a vision and political will , and not the product of the market .
It demonstrates the best that Europe can achieve when everyone joins forces .
I also want , of course , on this occasion to salute and thank on our behalf , on our children 's behalf and on everyone else 's behalf , the founding fathers and the architects of this success : Pierre Werner , who is with us , Chancellor Helmut Schmidt , President Giscard d 'Estaing , the President of the European Commission Jacques Delors , Chancellor Helmut Kohl , President François Mitterrand , Baron Alexandre Lamfalussy , Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa , Philippe Maystadt and everyone else whom I have not mentioned .
I would also , however , like to pay tribute to the actions of your predecessors , Mr President , the actions of my predecessors , Karl von Wogau , who is still with us , and of Christa Randzio-Plath , who is also with us today .
The actions of this Parliament played a crucial role in that , at the time of the transition to the euro , we were not only concerned about the transfer of accounts in the banks but also about our citizens , so that they could adapt to , get used to and adopt this new currency which was going to be theirs .
I also believe that this action by our institution must be recalled and given credit .
I am also pleased that this ceremony can take place here , in the European Parliament , the home of democracy for all Europe 's citizens .
After all , the euro is first and foremost the concern of us all , and then of the banks .
It is certainly the concern of Europeans , as they are happy to tell us .
Some governments are loath to provide Europe with symbols .
However , Europeans themselves have adopted the euro as a symbol of belonging to the European Union .
Of course , we are not all using the euro .
There were 11 of us to start with , and now there are 16 .
We are expecting others to join us .
However , I do get the feeling that this crisis is tempting some countries to reconsider whether they should belong to the euro area or not .
I think that this is the best proof of our success .
Europe makes progress , as is so often the case , by demonstrating its efficiency and on this occasion to mark its 10th anniversary , we can clearly see that the assessment of the euro is largely a positive one .
Some countries which were hesitant could now knock on the door of the euro area .
We can only encourage them to do this under the terms of the Treaty , which have never been revised and which are useful terms allowing Europe to progress in economic and monetary matters on the basis of the two pillars of consolidation and enlargement .
However , an anniversary is also a time for looking to the future .
The euro , which has been enriched by these last 10 years , must now open up new areas for development , not that we have not dealt with these at all , but simply because they are still work in progress ahead of us .
On the subject of economic cooperation , Jean-Claude Juncker described the crisis that we are going through .
It is not a normal situation .
In this current crisis we all know that , if we had made progress in the Economic Union as quickly as we have in the Monetary Union , we would be even better off today .
Let us learn then the lessons from this .
It is not normal for us to focus on the budget deficit balances and not on the quality of public spending .
Governments must learn to talk together about their economic policies .
It is not normal for Member States to borrow at such different rates of interest when they have the same currency and the same rate of interest set by the European Central Bank .
The same applies when it comes to supervising the financial markets .
President Giscard d 'Estaing mentioned Article 105 ( 6 ) , which is our common platform , allowing us to make progress .
I think that one of the lessons from this crisis is that it actually shows that the European Central Bank will need to have a supervisory role .
We do not want to disconnect the supervision of the financial markets from macroprudential supervision .
However , to achieve this , we will also need , as political leaders , to think about achieving a balance .
If the European Central Bank sees its responsibilities strengthened , it will have to be indicated how the institutional balance on the whole needs to be established in the future .
I would like to make one final remark on the international role of the euro .
I agree that we must not demand the exorbitant privilege of being the reserve currency .
However , it is not normal either for us to have taken 10 years to create the euro and then , 10 years after the transition to the euro , we are still passive in the international arena and the strong voice of the euro is not being heard more clearly in the process of restoring some balance to the global monetary system .
Finally , I believe that the euro is much more than just a currency .
This is why it is a major issue for this Parliament .
It is a tool at the service of our citizens who are going through the deepest crisis in years .
We must then use this wonderful creation , this symbol of Europe to help our citizens come through this crisis in the best conditions possible .
Mr President , 10 years of the euro is indeed a reason to celebrate .
Anyone who had said 10 years ago that the euro would have developed as splendidly as it has done would have been laughed at .
Many people have contributed to this success , and I remember many sceptical voices - it was referred to as a premature baby and an unviable project - and today we know that it was a vision to which many people contributed .
The previous speaker reminded us of all those who contributed to this , of the milestones , of the European monetary system , which was an agreement with the European Central Bank to create central rates , of the Delors report , which provided for the introduction of the monetary union in three stages , of the Treaty of Maastricht - only two years after the fall of the Wall - and of the transitional periods .
Many people have helped to make the euro the successful project it is today .
As the committee chairman , Mrs Berès , has already said , during this period , in particular from 1994 when the implementation of the Treaty of Maastricht began , and up to 2002 , Parliament actively cooperated in the introduction of the notes and coins , and in many reports , discussions , opinions and also proposals , and I would like specifically to thank the two committee chairmen from that time , Mr von Wogau and Mrs Randzio-Plath , who also represented Parliament to the outside world and who gave this project , although originally created by the governments , the parliamentary support it needed .
We are working today , too , under the chairmanship of Mrs Berès , for the same representation .
On 18 November Parliament adopted , with a large majority , a report in which we describe the successes , challenges , risks and problems , and I would like to mention just a few things in addition to what Mrs Berès has said .
The euro has been a great success , and it is a unique project : a central monetary policy under the management of the European Central Bank and local budgetary and finance policies .
It is important that , in future , the connection between these two levels of responsibility in the Stability and Growth Pact are retained also during times of crisis .
Without this Stability and Growth Pact , without stronger coordination of the budgetary and finance policy , the euro would also in future face risks that are avoidable .
In this regard , I appeal in particular to the Member States of the euro area , but also to the whole of the European Union , to take this discipline , this coordinated cooperation , more seriously than has been the case in the past in connection with certain issues .
The euro has pushed down inflation considerably and so created confidence and stability , and it has become the second most commonly held reserve currency in a space of time that no one thought it capable of .
The euro has increased the pressure for structural reform in the Member States and therefore , even in the age of globalisation , has become a ' fitness programme ' for undertakings and for nations .
The institutions of the euro area - several were mentioned by the previous speaker - the Ecofin Council , the Euro Group and many other institutions have created the necessary conditions together with the Commission and the European Central Bank , because they were already operating , because they were in place , because they worked independently in order to react quickly , reliably and correctly in the economic crisis .
We have experienced the euro as a lever for creating a European financial market .
The political conclusion from these common successes is that states with a common currency and a common internal market have achieved a unique level of integration that will secure peace and prosperity .
However , we cannot necessarily take the euro for granted in future .
There are numerous specific requests and demands to take the risks seriously : the drifting apart of the national economies , which is associated with considerable risks in connection with the growth of wages and with budget deficits , should not be concealed on this anniversary .
An entirely different aspect is the varying development of the interest rates for government bonds .
We are currently seeing the interest rate margin , which has no doubt decreased , increasing again , bringing the possibility of new problems in this regard for individual Member States within the euro area .
I would remind the House that , particularly in connection with the expansion of the euro area , no special rebates may be given and that all states that are members of the euro area can , and must , comply with these conditions of the Treaty of Maastricht .
The euro has been well-received by the public .
It has gained the world 's trust .
It has passed the first test and has provided a unique contribution to the permanent integration of our nations in Europe .
That is something we can all be proud of .
Thank you .
( Applause )




Mr President , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , Mr Juncker , Mr Trichet , Mr Almunia , ladies and gentlemen , many good points have already been made .
In 10 years , the euro has become a strong symbol for Europe .
Yet the idea that Europe could create a single currency , whose foundations were laid especially in the Bremen agreement on the monetary system in 1978 and the creation of the ecu , would have been met at the time with scepticism from the markets and the main monetary authorities outside Europe .
We should warmly thank and congratulate all those who made the decision and whose names have been mentioned here .
The creation of the euro is the best proof that Europe is capable , given the political will , to take long-term decisions for a common , prosperous future .
This anniversary , then , gives us a particularly apt message of hope for today 's times .
It must be said , however , that among our fellow citizens and until recently there were mixed perceptions of the euro .
For those who travel , the advantage of a single currency was obvious .
For those who do not , the euro was associated with price rises .
Studies have , in fact , shown that in most countries inflation was felt even though the official figures showed that , due especially to the action of the European Central Bank , monetary stability had been ensured .
The reality is that some definitely took advantage of the euro to round up some prices and perhaps consumers were not vigilant enough .
When the euro has risen against the dollar , we have also heard comments from some manufacturers who for the most part produce in the euro area but sell outside this area .
The European Central Bank has not been without its critics , who have not called into question its independence but rather its policy on interest rates , which seemed to be too high .
Today , the crisis has changed many of these perceptions .
We all understand that the euro is a determining factor in restricting the European repercussions of a crisis imported from the United States .
The European Central Bank has certainly been the most responsive central bank .
Its particularly pertinent decisions have been welcomed unanimously .
What would the situation have been if the various Member States had each had to defend their own individual currency ?
Devaluations would have been inevitable and we would not have avoided a currency crisis .
The welcome results of the euro must encourage us to continue and to broaden the coordination of economic policies and to respect the principles of the Stability and Growth Pact .
It is true , at present , that exceptions may and perhaps should be accepted , but they can only be temporary and the objective of balanced public finances must be retained .
High-quality public finances and economic policies are , in fact , in the long run , more than ever necessary .
They are the guarantee of effectiveness , competiveness and growth .
They are the condition for the solidity of our currency , the euro .
Mr President , during these times of uncertainty , it is important to be able to count on something with a reliable value : the euro .
As I was able to play a bit-part as a member of the Ecofin Council during the period of preparation for the future single currency , I could see the doubts on both sides of the argument and the pussyfooting of the Member States , which ultimately made the Eurogroup into a stronger forum for cooperation ahead of its time .
Furthermore , two of Europe 's finest achievements came about through the determination of a few states to forge ahead in making integration something real for all our fellow citizens .
I am referring to the Schengen Agreement entailing the free movement of Europeans , which was implemented on the initiative of five states : France , with President Mitterrand , Germany , with Chancellor Kohl , along with the Benelux countries .
Switzerland has now become part of the Schengen area , but the British and Irish are still shying away from this people 's Europe .
President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl were also the political architects of the euro , even though there were many who supported this monetary success , starting with Jacques Delors .
The first lesson I would like to draw from this is that anyone who wants a better Europe must not be afraid of intergovernmental action , especially if there is a coalition of states which really want to move Europe forward .
The Prüm Treaty , which is intended to combat serious crime , is an example of this positive enhanced cooperation for Europe .
At a time when the Constitutional Treaty is dead and buried , following the ' no ' vote from a strange coalition of political forces not only in France but in the Netherlands too , and when the indigestible piece of legislation known as the ' mini ' Treaty of Lisbon is being blocked in Ireland and possibly in the Czech Republic as well , we should prove that Europe is still functioning by relying on the huge area of enhanced cooperation .
In any case , the attraction of the euro remains intact .
Following Slovenia , Slovakia has just joined us .
Others are fretting about not being able to benefit more from the protective shield provided by the euro .
Even in the UK voices are being raised , questioning the country 's splendid isolation in the face of the pound 's collapse , which has seen its status fall from that of the world 's reserve currency to a run-of-the-mill currency in less than a century .
Thanks to the consistent actions of Wim Duisenberg , Jean-Claude Trichet and the likes , the euro has become the world 's second reserve currency in 10 years .
Of course , the dollar remains king for global transactions , still providing a safe investment , but the colossal debts accumulated by the United States in getting the rest of the world to finance their lifestyle will increasingly sow the seeds of doubt as to the ability of the number one economic power to honour its commitments .
In fact , the financial world is tending towards a euro / dollar duopoly .
Any monetary duopoly regularly goes through parity adjustments which often occur suddenly .
In these times of widespread recession , the world needs stability and new certainties .
The euro will have a key role to play in this new stability .
The European Central Bank ( ECB ) has done what it needed to do in the face of a global financial crisis ' made in the USA ' .
As Jacques Delors said , the euro is the shield to protect the whole of Europe , but the euro has not stimulated the European economy enough so far .
The ECB is only in charge of monetary policy .
At the end of the day , the Commission is only a first-class consultant making suggestions which are generally useful , but the real economic players remain the states themselves which , unfortunately , are operating in a disorganised manner .
Although the effective harmonisation of the cumulative economic power of 27 states could work miracles , the Eurogroup , in spite of the commendable efforts of Jean-Claude Juncker , still only remains an informal discussion group .
In the spring of 1999 , I was able to witness the attempt made within the Eurogroup by a few finance ministers , including Oskar Lafontaine , Dominique Strauss-Kahn , Carlo Ciampi and a few others , to establish economic and monetary cooperation between the European Union and the European Central Bank .
Wim Duisenberg made the cutting retort : ' there never will be any ex-ante coordination with the European Central Bank as you are always going to have to react ex-post to our decisions . '
The reason for this is obvious : the ECB is and will remain independent in conducting its monetary policy , but independence does not mean a ban on constructive dialogue between institutions tasked with defending the interests and common destiny of 500 million Europeans .
There is nothing to prevent states from organising themselves better with regard to achieving proper coordination of their economic policies , whether it is inside the EU or especially when representing Europe externally , as Jean-Claude Juncker so sensibly concluded just now .




Mr President , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , Mr Juncker , Mr Trichet , Mr Almunia , ladies and gentlemen , I find it very regrettable that relatively few Members are here today for this formal sitting , because it really is a historic event .
We have already heard from the various previous speakers how much scepticism there was when the euro was first introduced .
It was felt that the logistical challenges involved in introducing billions of banknotes and coins alone would be unmanageable , and the idea that we could combine a common monetary policy with separate fiscal policies in the Member States was seen not just as a major challenge but as simply impossible .
Today , the facts tell a rather different story .
European monetary union is a reality ; the euro has been in existence for 10 years today .
This is something of a minor political miracle , and once again the words of Walter Hallstein , the first President of the Commission , have proven to be true : ' Anyone who does not believe in miracles in European matters is not a realist . '
The doubts of the citizens , many of whom , in many Member States , initially believed that the euro would result in huge price hikes , have now disappeared .
The euro has now been accepted , and even enthusiastically welcomed by many citizens .
It has become something of a visible European identifier : besides the anthem and the flag , it is one of the few symbols we have today .
It could , I think , be said that , in the European Central Bank 's first few years , Europe and the European economy were sailing in relatively calm waters , so that the bank found it pretty easy to pursue a policy of stability .
Even so , it is worth pointing out that the mean inflation rate over the first 10 years of the euro has been approximately 2 % , in other words more or less on the target that the European Central Bank set itself .
The German mark , on the other hand , which was always held up as a poster child for stability , had a mean inflation rate of 3 % over its 50 years of existence .
It can therefore be said that the European Central Bank has performed very well .
However , it is now , in this time of crisis , that the European Central Bank is showing its true strength , its true quality .
It has a hugely important role to play here .
It has proven itself to be independent , efficient and self-confident , and it acts decisively and quickly .
It has become an example for some central banks , both in those European countries that are not yet part of the euro area and outside Europe .
It has made it quite clear to the Federal Reserve in the United States that it can pursue a successful policy , not despite its independence but precisely because it is politically independent and not subject to instructions from various governments .
We now know that at the moment , after the banking sectors in the individual Member States have been brought under a protective umbrella , the Member States are in the process of developing various economic stimulus plans to absorb the negative impact of the financial crisis on the real economy .
This will present the European Central Bank with further challenges , because there is a risk that the differences in approach will result in distortions of competition , and that the convergence we have , in part , now achieved between the members of the euro area will be lost and we will see increasingly divergent developments .
This needs to be counteracted , which is why it is so crucial and so important that the Stability and Growth Pact must not be undermined or discarded .
Quite the reverse : we must ensure that it remains valid .
That is why it is also so important for the necessary structural reforms , which the Commission and the European Central Bank have repeatedly called for in the past , actually to be pursued in the individual Member States .
The European Central Bank will gain a new task in the coming years .
The crisis has taught us that we need some kind of European supervision of the financial market , and this is an area where the European Central Bank can play a major role .
It has signalled that it is , in principle , willing to introduce some kind of central European supervisory system analogous to the European System of Central Banks .
The euro 's international role needs to be further strengthened .
The euro area needs to speak with one voice , and also be represented as a unit in international organisations such as the International Monetary Fund and the OECD ( Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ) .
It is still true that a single currency without a single fiscal economic policy is , and will continue to be , a risky undertaking .
This is no mere bagatelle .
The EU is still facing some major challenges : we are facing high , and unfortunately rising , levels of unemployment , demographic changes , migratory pressures , increasing poverty in some sectors of society , and stiffer competition in the context of globalisation .
The euro area will only be able to meet these challenges if the economic policies of the Member States can be more closely interlinked .
The appointment of a president of the euro area was the first step in this direction , but it is only the first step : more is now needed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after 10 years , the growing space carved out by the euro in international trade and its use as a reserve currency show that it has become a world benchmark .
It has guaranteed monetary stability and has helped integrate the economies of the Member States that have adopted it , despite some errors of judgment that created problems for citizens both because of the actual exchange rates between national currencies and the euro and because of the few checks subsequently carried out on the prices of goods and services .
The euro was created without being imposed from outside and without any wars of conquest or political hegemonies .
It was the result of the free coming together of 11 governments who believed in the creation of an economic and monetary union , as laid down in the Treaties , as an essential step in attempting to achieve the political union that still unfortunately remains out of our grasp .
Some problems that have occurred are due to inefficiencies in a system that was unprepared for the task of guiding the other great associated phenomenon ; I am talking about the increasing pace of internationalisation and the great changes in the way trade is conducted at international level .
The euro has made it possible to face up to a series of difficulties , the most severe of which is the current financial crisis , and it has protected us against the great stresses that have ravaged the markets .
Were it not for the euro , we would have repeated the experience of 1992 , only worse .
We mark this 10th anniversary by warmly welcoming the entrance of Slovakia , the 16th country to join the euro area .
The measures introduced by the European Central Bank ( ECB ) and the Commission to combat the current crisis have acted as a buffer and a form of containment but we still maintain , as we have often done in this Chamber , that we find it inconceivable to have a monetary policy disconnected from economic policy .
Admittedly , the actual situation is somewhat anomalous : 16 Member States with the single currency , 27 national economic policies coordinated by the Commission as well as it can , and 11 Member States with national currencies .
Coordinating a monetary policy with an economic policy that does not actually exist is certainly no mean feat , but if the institutions responsible for economic policies in our countries do not communicate with the central banks and the ECB , which has to pull all those policies together , and vice versa , the European Union will find new difficulties in jointly facing up to the current crisis and also the continual challenges that the outside world and globalisation bring home to us .
We hope that recent experiences convince people of the need to face up to change in Europe , restoring the real economy to the centre and ensuring better cohesion and connection between the ECB and the European institutions responsible for laying down political and planning strategy .
The very recent energy crisis has also shown us that a common economic policy on the main strategic topics is of vital interest to the public and cannot be delayed .
If the political will is present , the introduction of such a policy will be facilitated by the growing power of the euro .



Mr President , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , Mr Juncker , Mr Trichet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to remind you how , in 1992 , when it was still completely dubious as to whether the French would vote in favour of the Maastricht Treaty , Jacques Delors spoke to the general assembly of the French Green Party , which managed to deliver the missing 1 % or 2 % .
He said to us : ' Vote for the euro , then we will have a political Europe , because if we do not create a political Europe to control Europe , the people will not accept it ; they will never accept it . '
He did not persuade us .
The Maastricht Treaty was approved , but no political Europe was created .
This is the very problem which we are facing today .
Why were we against the euro at that time ?
There were basically two reasons for it .
Firstly , it seemed to us that the Maastricht criteria were going to drag Europe into at least five years of pro-cyclical recessionary policy and , secondly , the way in which the monetary policy was incorporated into the general economic policy by the Maastricht Treaty was not satisfactory .
For the sake of the European Central Bank 's independence , we would separate monetary policy from the rest of the policies .
I must say quite honestly that , even if I am still not convinced by the Maastricht Treaty today , like all the other Greens , I am rather attracted by the changes which the legislation and application of Economic and Monetary Union have undergone .
Three major changes have taken place .
Firstly , price stability has been established at a level of slightly less than , but close to , 2 % .
This target may seem a bit absurd .
At the moment , when the world is being threatened by deflation and the situation is being aggravated by the tendency of some countries to hastily cut their VAT rate as part of a Keynesian policy , it is obvious that setting this target of 2 % is no longer just for show .
If we fail to keep to this 2 % target we run the risk of having very high real interest rates being forced on us .
The second major reform is obviously the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact carried out in 2005 , which allows us today to have a policy that is contracyclical and aimed at countering the crisis .
The third major transformation is the change to how things work in practice .



This permanent dialogue , as highlighted once again in this Chamber , between Mr Trichet , Mr Almunia , Mr Juncker and Mr Barroso , is , strictly speaking , contrary to the Maastricht Treaty itself .
I regard this form of cooperation between Mr Trichet and Mr Almunia , for example , to be the equivalent of that between Mr Bernanke and Mr Paulson , which is a positive and desirable development .
What remains to be done then ?
All I would say is that we need to apply properly the good aspects of the Maastricht Treaty .
We have a real problem in defining the exchange rate , which has been mentioned on several occasions by my predecessors .
The task of setting the exchange rate is assigned to the Council .
We must find the means to ensure that the Council sets an exchange rate for Europe which does not derive randomly from the interest rate chosen by the European Central Bank , but properly reflects an industrial policy .
We must find the proper instruments to do this .
Secondly , the European Central Bank 's objective is not only to maintain a rate close to 2 % but also to apply Europe 's policy , by that I mean the Lisbon and Gothenburg Strategies .
We need to have a policy for refinancing and rediscounting private debts by the European Central Bank according to the Gothenburg and Lisbon Strategies .
Lastly , as has already been mentioned , there needs to be supervision at a European level and the European Central Bank is in the best position to perform this function .
It is regrettable that we are not taking advantage of this opportunity for an in-depth examination of the consequences of implementing neoliberal and monetarist policies - using the euro as an excuse - which have contributed to the current serious social situation and to increasing inequality , unemployment , precarious and poorly paid work , and poverty .
It is unacceptable that we are holding onto ideological dogmas , such as price stability and the irrational criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact , which are being used as a pretext in order to pursue privatisation and remove responsibility for social functions from the state .
This approach also involves the idea of the minimal state and the greater efficiency of the private sector , with the aim of imposing acceptance of so-called wage restraint , which actually results in low , nominal wage rises and even a reduction in real wages , as the Portuguese case regrettably clearly demonstrates .
We cannot agree with the false independence of the European Central Bank , which is dragging its heels on the decisions to reduce interest rates and which is keeping the euro overvalued solely to protect those countries with more developed economies and the more powerful economic and financial groups , thus worsening the hardships of the more fragile economies and those people with fewer financial resources .
This European Central Bank policy has resulted in the contraction of the European economy , clearly demonstrating the need for further reductions in the reference interest rates .
As the purchasing power of workers , the retired and pensioners has fallen over the last 10 years , the profits of economic and financial groups have reached their highest level in 30 years , resulting in the joy and satisfaction that we have heard in this Chamber .
Even now , in the crisis situation that they have caused , what they are doing is nationalising the damage in order to then privatise the profits , whilst workers , micro- and small entrepreneurs , the retired and the unemployed suffer the consequences of the crisis , with the right , in the best-case scenario , only to a few scraps .
Look at what is happening in the financial sector , where certain banks have already increased their spreads more than once since the start of the financial crisis and where the margin charged has doubled in the space of a year , thereby penalising new credit even more .
We therefore insist on the urgent need for a proper break with these neoliberal and monetarist policies , putting an end to the Stability Pact , tax havens and the false independence of the European Central Bank .
We therefore insist on the need to significantly increase the EU budget based on a fair distribution of income and wealth , so that there is a real policy of economic and social cohesion and so that we reject measures that are just more of the same , in other words ' save yourself if you can ' measures , allowing the richest to become ever richer and the poor to become ever poorer , as clearly demonstrated by the increasing inequalities and disparities among the euro area economies .
We therefore insist on the need to support production and micro- , small and medium-sized enterprises ; to promote quality public services ; to facilitate credit and improve the purchasing power of families , and not just the most disadvantaged , but also the middle classes ; to create more jobs , and to reduce the poverty and misery of millions of people in our countries .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , do enjoy the 10th birthday of the euro because I very much doubt you will be celebrating the 20th .
What we have seen this morning has been reminiscent of the old Soviet times .
Do you remember when the five-year plans were announced to be successes often before they were even launched , with much talk of record harvests and wonderful production figures for tractors ?
Much like those days , we have been treated this morning to a succession of unelected , ageing bureaucrats telling us what a great success the whole thing has been .
It is all delusional stuff .
The idea that the ECB has done a good job is extraordinary .
It was last July when the European Central Bank put interest rates up , just at the very moment that the markets were going into meltdown and rates were being slashed across the rest of the world .
Of course none of this surprises me because what this euro is all about is a political class imposing its will upon the peoples of Europe .
Remember that only two countries - Denmark and Sweden - had a referendum on the euro and both of them said ' no ' , that little word that you try and avoid if you possibly can .
The euro zone has never been tested but it is about to be .
Spain is in economic trouble .
Italy , as German economists at the time said , should never have joined the euro , but the situation in Greece is , I think , where we should focus our attention .
Thousands of young people out on the streets demonstrating , demanding their government does something , demanding that their government cuts rates , demanding that their government devalues .
But the Greek Government is stuck inside the euro straitjacket .
There is nothing it can do .
There is nothing that a future general election can do in Greece to change anything .
When people have taken away from them the ability to determine their own futures through the ballot box , then I am afraid that violence becomes the only logical alternative .
What you have done with this euro is you have trapped people in an economic prison .
You have trapped people in a Völkerkerker from which it will take great courage to get out .
It will take leadership , or possibly the inevitable economic meltdown .
You can boo , you can jeer , but remember this : Britain outside of the euro has been able to devalue , has been able to slash interest rates .
We have been able to do the things that we need to do .
Jeer on if you like , but have you noticed that on the bond markets this morning Greek bonds are trading 233 basis points higher than German bonds ?
Now I know that most of you in this room will not even know what that means and those that do will do their best to ignore it .
You can go on burying your heads in the sand if you want .
You can ignore the markets if you want to , but in time the markets will not ignore you .
Mr President , in the last 200 years there have been at least half a dozen attempts to create single currencies or fixed exchange rate mechanisms .
All have failed , all have damaged the participants , and so it is with the euro .
The imbalances long predicted by sceptics are starting to bite .
Italy 's competitiveness is shot to pieces .
Spain 's experience is like the bull in the corrida : proud and strong to start with , but bleeding to death in the sand by the end .
Greece 's recent unrest is clearly linked to unemployment , resulting from an overvalued euro .
Bond spreads between Greece and Germany have reached unprecedented levels - over 200 basis points .
The markets are speculating on a euro break-up .
We in Britain can thank heaven that we kept our own currency and are not part of the euro zone 's slow-motion train wreck .
Happy birthday to the euro !
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The tenth anniversary of the vote on the proposal , presented to Parliament , on behalf of the Council of Ministers , by Gordon Brown ( then president of the Council ) , to lock exchange rates at that day 's level and to create the euro , is an opportunity to celebrate ten years of success , stability and strength of what is now one of the two leading currencies in the world .
The current economic crisis would have been compounded by turmoil on currency markets had we still had the peseta , lira , drachma and so on as separate currencies fluctuating wildly against each other .
The euro has been a rock of stability for its members , as illustrated by the contrasting fortunes of Iceland and Ireland .
The anniversary is also an opportunity to debate whether Britain 's long-term economic future lies with euro membership .
Of course , Britain can manage in the short run outside the euro , but over time , we stand to lose out : our businesses are handicapped in the European market by conversion costs and hedging costs that their competitors in that market do not face ; and inward investors into the European market will prefer to be in the major currency area rather than the smaller one .
The formal sitting of the European Parliament marking the 10th anniversary of Economic and Monetary Union ( EMU ) at a time of serious crisis in the capitalist system follows repeated resolutions and reports by the European Parliament on the same subject and is yet another attempt to gild the pill of the anti-grassroots , anti-labour policy of the EU which , following the demise of socialism , proceeded to the Maastricht Treaty and its all-out attack on labour rights and freedoms .
EMU , the establishment of the European Central Bank and the launch of the euro are necessary links in the chain of capitalist restructurings being promoted by capital in order to defend itself against workers ' claims and safeguard its profitability by stepping up the exploitation of the working class and grassroots classes .
The arguments about price stability , reducing inflation and protecting economies from risk and crisis have proven to be stale arguments .
EMU protects the profits of the monopolies and facilitates privatisation and merger .
This past decade , workers have seen their incomes shrink , industrial relations worsen , their insurance rights evaporate and health and education services deteriorate and made into privatised commodities .
Workers reject the European one-way street and its supporters , and also the Lisbon Strategy and the Lisbon Treaty , and are fighting against EMU and the EU itself for grassroots power and a grassroots economy .
In the debate about the euro I want to draw attention to three negative aspects of its performance .
Firstly , from the moment when the euro was introduced , in other words from 2002 to 2007 inclusive , the three Member States which were outside the euro area ( England , Sweden and Denmark ) developed faster than the countries which were in the euro area .
Gross national income in those countries grew almost twice as fast as the average for the euro area , and the level of unemployment was lower .
Secondly , the battle with the effects of the current financial and economic crisis is clearly more effective in those countries than in the euro area .
The central banks of England , Sweden and Denmark very quickly and clearly reduced interest rates while ensuring liquidity to commercial banks .
It also seems that the fiscal policy pursued by these countries will be more effective than the fiscal policy in the euro area .
Thirdly , new Member States which are preparing to enter the euro area have to comply with many monetary and fiscal criteria two years before entry .
Some of these criteria are mutually contradictory , such as the need to be present in the ERM II system - and therefore the need to maintain the national currency 's exchange rate against the euro within a fluctuation band of ± 15 % - and at the same time to maintain a low level of inflation .
Counteracting devaluation pressure on the national currency means the need for intervention by central banks , which means putting greater amounts of the national currency into circulation , which obviously increases inflationary pressure .
As the Commission wants to encourage new Member States , it should consider eliminating this obvious inconsistency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , European Economic and Monetary Union began on 1 January 1999 , and 11 EU Member States adopted the single currency at the same time .
The euro was 10 years old on 1 January 2009 .
At the same time , Slovakia became the 16th country to use the euro .
Just as Mr Juncker stated to Parliament in his speech , the euro is very definitely an ' anchor of stability ' .
This is something the countries that have been left out of the euro area have been made painfully aware of .
Although the 10th anniversary of the euro is overshadowed by worries of a possible deepening of the recession , I trust in the euro area 's ability to emerge from the crisis .
This will nevertheless require considerable effort on the part of the Union .
According to the latest estimates , the effect of the agreed stimulus package will be considerably less than the 1.5 % of gross domestic product planned for the area .
According to current estimates , it will be around 0.6 % .
An additional stimulus is needed .
The euro has been an unquestionable success , but would not have been but for the continuous efforts made .
Now we need to strengthen Europe 's role in the supervision of the financial markets .
We have to keep to the basic principles and criteria of Economic and Monetary Union .
On 1 January 2009 the euro became the official currency of Slovakia .
From that date , the double cross on three hills from the Slovak flag has also appeared on one-euro and two-euro coins and has been put into circulation across the euro area .
That day was a historic moment for Slovakia and we Slovaks are very proud to be the first country from the former Socialist bloc to introduce the euro in this symbolic year of the 10th anniversary of the euro area .
I am appreciative of the fact that the current Slovak Government has subscribed to the commitment of Mikuláš Dzurinda , whose cabinet , in autumn 2004 , adopted a plan to replace the koruna with the European currency and fixed the beginning of 2009 as the target date .
It also seems appropriate here on the floor of the EP to thank the Slovak people because it was they , as the main actors in the challenging but necessary ' Dzurinda ' reforms , who persevered and helped Slovakia to become a successful European country .
From 1 January 2009 the euro will link the people of Slovakia to the Union every day .
Goodbye koruna , welcome euro .
The introduction of the European single currency 10 years ago marked the completion of a process whose implications go far beyond the economic sector .
The finalisation of the Economic and Monetary Union process demonstrated Member States ' commitment to safeguard the EU 's economic and political unity .
The euro 's success therefore means success in the process of building an entity designed to promote European values at international level and confirm the European Union as the main player in business and financial relations within the global economy .
I believe that the benefits offered by adopting the euro , involving macroeconomic stability , a significant reduction in price fluctuations , the promotion of job creation and support for productivity growth , all underpinned by strengthening resistance to external shocks , justify all the efforts made by the new Member States , especially Romania , to meet the convergence criteria as soon as possible and join the euro area .
Since the euro was launched on 1 January 1999 , the single currency has , in many respects , proven to be an important factor in the stability of the EU economy .
The single currency is , first of all , a driving force for European exchanges : the disappearance of exchange rates in the euro countries is an important and visible benefit for citizens , and promotes mobility within the EU .
In addition to the obvious benefits , the euro has also emerged as an anchor in the financial crisis .
Only a major currency used by many Member States and national economies is able to cushion the dramatic effects of economic collapse .
Monetary union means that macroeconomic levers can be applied at international level and active responses can be made to the financial crisis .
Finally , though , the euro is also a symbol of European integration and the long road that the European people have already travelled together .
Monetary union is the next logical step after economic union , and should also pave the way for deeper European integration .
Nearly one year ago , when marking the 10th anniversary of the creation of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) and Economic and Monetary Union ( EMU ) , we highlighted the fact that : ' In the ten years it has been in existence , the results achieved by EMU are a resounding success . '
I think that this assessment is quite appropriate as I am a strong believer in the importance of the solidarity which Member States need to show in their joint actions to combat the effects of the financial crisis and reduce the adverse impact of the global economic crisis .
Europe is in its most precarious economic situation since the end of the Second World War .
In this climate , marking the 10th anniversary of the introduction of the euro must refocus our attention on the major European integration projects .
The introduction of the European single currency and the creation of EMU were joint decisions made through harmonisation and solidarity based on European values .
This is the kind of attitude which we also need this year in order to devise and successfully implement measures to combat the financial crisis .
Europe 's competitiveness has to be maintained within the euro area and must be boosted in Member States which are preparing to join the euro area .
Furthermore , EMU members ' diverse interests must take secondary priority to the EU 's common economic interests .
The next item is voting time .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
1 .
Cooperation in the regulation of civil aviation safety (
2 .
Common system of trade for ovalbumin and lactalbumin ( Codified version ) (
3 .
System of taxation applicable to mergers , divisions , partial divisions , transfers of assets and exchanges of shares concerning companies of different Member States and to the transfer of a registered office ( Codified version ) (
4 .
Language arrangements applicable to appeals against decisions of the European Union Civil Service Tribunal (
5 .
Trade and economic relations with Western Balkans (
6 .
The Common Agricultural Policy and Global Food Security (
7 .
Developing civil dialogue under the Treaty of Lisbon (
Madam President , we do seem to be having rather a lot of roll-call votes at the moment , which is a little irksome for people like me whose machines are not working .
Could I therefore record ' yes ' votes for everything and ask for a technician ?
8 .
The transposition , implementation and enforcement of Directives 2005 / 29 / EC and 2006 / 114 / EC (
9 .
CFP and the ecosystem approach to fisheries management (
10 .
Framework for Community action to achieve a sustainable use of pesticides (
11 .
Placing of plant protection products on the market (
12 .
Undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities ( UCITS ) ( recast ) (
13 .
Public finances in the EMU - 2007-2008 (
( DE ) Madam President , I have the following request .
When we have formal sittings here , there is always a camera in the middle of the seating area .
It is not always exactly easy for the camera operators to work there ; it is also , however , a problem for Members if there is a camera where we want to work .
Could we not amend the allocation of seats if we want to have the cameras here ?
If not , someone really needs to come up with a better technical solution .
We will consult the competent authorities .
Madam President , I have been trying to wave to an usher throughout the voting procedure in order to give explanations of vote , but because you conducted votes so brilliantly and we got through them so quickly , an usher has not quite made it too me yet .
I am holding a piece of paper asking to give two oral explanations of vote on the McGuinness and Breyer reports .
I would appreciate it if you would allow me to do that .
Madam President , likewise , if I could have the same forbearance .
My request is on its way to you as well .
Voting time
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it gives me great pleasure to speak in this great parliamentary Chamber , crowded by Members from all 27 of our Member States .
I rarely get such an opportunity to make myself heard by so many .
It falls to me on this occasion to explain my vote in favour of the report by Mr Belder on trade and economic relations with Western Balkans .
I am absolutely in favour of the European Union making it as easy as possible for these Balkan states to join the European Union .
I believe that it is important for economic aid to be higher than that allocated to date , and that we should make it possible to increase links between the Balkan states and Europe , develop tourism and allow all Balkan citizens , young and old , to live a better life than they have until now .
Madam President , first , I just wish to record the fact that I pressed the wrong button on the McGuinness report .
In fact , I completely support the McGuinness report on food security - but I will check that with the services later .
I particularly agree with the point that we need to adapt the CAP to meet food security concerns and the fact that farmers need a stable policy environment in order to plan for the future .
We cannot have certainty , but we certainly need to have some stability .
In addition , I support the fact that the market alone cannot provide income security for producers and also the call for a detailed impact assessment , in particular , let us say , on the implications for food security .
If we look at particular EU proposals , for example on plant protection , again we need a proper detailed impact assessment on that , and we need to take food security into consideration when we conduct that assessment .
Madam President , I would like to thank colleagues for their endorsement of this report and Marian Harkin for her words of support .
It presents a clear statement of the view of this House on agriculture policy , not just at the European level , but also at a global level .
In particular - and this is important - it calls for a refocus on agriculture policy in the developing world , providing assistance to those who can produce food to do so locally .
I believe the EUR 1 billion that the European Union will provide for this purpose is a step in the right direction .
Obviously , I supported my own report .
I believe it is a blueprint for the future in terms of how this House views agriculture .
While the food security debate has gone off the political agenda , the problem of 30 000 children dying of hunger and starvation every day remains with us .
Madam President , I am grateful to you for giving me the opportunity to explain why I abstained on the McGuinness report .
It focuses on a very important aspect of the European Union and that is the absolute essentiality of ensuring food supplies to those who are starving or those who do not have a proper food supply .
Nobody could be against that , and I am certainly not against that .
But the problem with the report , in my view , is that it looks and refers to the common agricultural policy and does not address the fact that there is an urgent need for the reform , and further reform , of that policy .
It is not serving the people of Europe well ; it is not serving the farmers of Britain well .
Until that burden is taken away from the European taxpayers , then we are going to be in difficulties .
Yes , the objectives of the report are right , but I am afraid that it fails very badly in addressing the core problem .
( PL ) I fully endorse most of the proposals and statements contained in the McGuinness report , which was adopted a moment ago .
Sudden fluctuations in food prices are going to occur in the global market with increasing frequency , which will have negative consequences .
Price rises are felt most by low-income families , who spend a significant proportion of their budget on food .
It is just such people who deserve help : the most needy people , both in developing countries and in the European Union .
I agree that the common agricultural policy should be adapted to the new conditions in order to better address the problems of food security , and this is why the removal of instruments which manage markets and a reduction in the level of EU expenditure on agriculture in the future financial perspective should be opposed .
It is a good idea to establish an international body which will observe the prices of agricultural products and factors of their production under the auspices of the Food and Agriculture Organization , in order to monitor these data on a world scale and to be able to react rapidly to fluctuations .
I think the establishment of a world system of storing food supplies should also be considered .
Madam President , I am grateful for this opportunity to explain why I also abstained on this report .
I think most people in this Chamber , from whatever part of the political spectrum they come from , would agree that food security is very important .
The problem is that we do not agree on what food security is .
To many of us , food security is making sure that there is enough food for the people of the world - wherever they come from .
For others , it is an excuse for protectionism .
Food security to them means only food produced in the EU for Europeans .
' Local production ' is a phrase that I often hear used .
I hear people using the excuse of food security to keep out imports from the rest of the world , thereby condemning the high-quality exports that we see from many of the poorer countries of the world and condemning many more farmers in poorer countries to poverty .
To say that a common agricultural policy should be the cornerstone of food security is an amazing statement which needs to be shot down .
Madam President , I concur with the comments made by my excellent colleague Mr Syed Kamall on this matter .
I abstained because it was my party 's whip to abstain on this report , but everybody knows that food security is a very important subject to us all , which is why I am bemused by the way that this place deals with such a matter .
In this particular report - which I believe we all voted for - we mention the problem we were just about to create for ourselves by voting for the plant protection products directive .
We have just undermined European food security .
About three minutes after we voted for this report we were basically ensuring that our farmers would not be able to grow enough food for our continent in the future .
I find this bizarre .
It is a shame that nobody else seems to read some of these reports that go through this place .
Madam President , one of the biggest concerns and one of the keys in relation to global food security is to ensure sufficient , sustainable production and , indeed , food security in the so-called developed world , such as here in the EU , so that we can export our surplus production and are not competing ourselves on world markets for food , thereby increasing the prices for those in regions who do not have the climate , the soil , the know-how and the investment to produce their own food .
We have to be very careful with our policies to ensure that we are responding not only environmentally but also globally to the necessity for sustainable food production .
( SK ) I voted for the report on the common agricultural policy and global food security because it deals with issues that I have consistently been raising in the European Parliament as matters of priority .
The first issues involves the reduction in producer costs , which will lead to greater global competitiveness .
The second issue is the reduction in the volatility of food markets , especially by increasing stocks .
The third issue concerns halting the decline in the social importance of agriculture by increasing public awareness of its unique and irreplaceable role .
The fourth issue concerns ending the random operation of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) by implementing a systemic organisation of the policy with a focus on long-term objectives .
The fifth and final issue involves putting a stop to the agricultural decline in the new Member States caused by the CAP 's discriminatory principles , while significantly boosting utilisation of wasted agricultural potential in these countries , the new Member States .
Madam President , this goes to the core of this whole European Union .
Here we are approving more money to try and persuade the public to vote for the wretched Lisbon Treaty .
The public , on being given a chance in the Republic of Ireland , made it absolutely clear that they do not want it and if the people of Britain were to be given a chance - and they should have been because they were promised it in the last general election by the Labour Government - they would also vote overwhelmingly to reject this Treaty .
The message should be heard loud and clear in the European Union , it really should : people do not want it .
People do not want more control in Brussels and Strasbourg .
People want their own governments and their own legislatures to be making the decisions that affect them .
Until that message is received we will keep pumping more taxpayers ' money into forcing people to the polling box in the pretence that you actually persuade them to change their minds .
They will not do so .
Madam President , first of all I would like to say that this is an excellent report .
We are always speaking about connecting the EU to its citizens and the fact that the EU project cannot proceed without the involvement of EU citizens .
There are two types of democracy : representative , which we have in this House , and participative , which is what this report is all about .
However , it is important to understand that civil dialogue is two-sided .
It is reciprocal .
Therefore , the concerns and ideas put forward by citizens must be taken into consideration by the EU institutions .
I think we have an excellent example of that in the one million signatures for disability and the document that we are debating in this Parliament at the moment .
I disagree with the last speaker because I believe , if we do pass the Lisbon Treaty , that it gives us the opportunity to connect citizens to the EU in a much more meaningful way .
Our role in this House is to ensure , if we pass the Lisbon Treaty , that it works effectively .
Madam President , much can be inferred from the title of this report : ' Perspectives for developing civil dialogue under the Treaty of Lisbon ' .
Never mind that , as it seems periodically necessary to remind this House , the Treaty of Lisbon is not in force .
It has been three times rejected in its several forms by 55 % of French voters , by 62 % of Dutch voters and by 54 % of Irish voters .
Focus rather on the Orwellian Ministry of Love bit of the title ' Perspectives for developing civil dialogue ' .
Now , ordinary voters unversed in the peculiar idiom of the European Union might not understand those words , as we in this House do , to mean creating a new propaganda budget to try and convince people to change their minds .
I have to say that not every euro in the vaults of the European Central Bank will serve to convince people of an intrinsically bad idea .
Dialogue by definition involves two parties .
The EU has to be able to receive as well as transmit .
That means putting the Treaty to a referendum .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
Madam President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to explain the way I voted on this report .
When I read the title of the report , ' Civil dialogue under the Treaty of Lisbon ' , it reminded me of a phrase by Mahatma Gandhi .
When he was asked about Western civilisation , he said , that ' that would be a good idea ' .
Therefore , when I read this title , ' Civil dialogue under the Treaty of Lisbon ' , I thought , ' that would be a good idea , would it not ? '
If only we had civil dialogue .
If only we had two-way dialogue .
One of the previous speakers said that dialogue is very much a two-way process , but if we look at some of the civil society organisations being funded in order to promote the Treaty of Lisbon , we only see organisations that are fully signed up to promoting this fundamentally undemocratic Treaty .
How many organisations that are against the Treaty will be funded or will be allowed to be promoted ?
There is no two-way dialogue , and that is why the citizens of the EU , when they are given the chance and asked about the Treaty of Lisbon , will choose to reject it .
Madam President , thank you all for your patience in the Chamber .
I wanted to speak on this but I have just got too much to say today , I am so excited by all the votes that have been going through the Chamber today .
Yes , the common fisheries policy ; yes , let us talk about sustainable development - but the two are inherently contradictory .
If you want to look at a sustainable fisheries policy , you have to look at property rights and market-based solutions .
Look at those countries where fishermen are given rights that are tradable and passed on from generation to generation .
That is the best way to make sure that we have sustainable fish stocks , not some artificial communistic method where you have central planning in fishing .
That is why we are seeing great depletion of fish stocks , and we will all suffer in the end .
We will now suspend the sitting .
We will return to the explanations of vote after the formal sitting .
Formal sitting - Latvia
Mr President of the Republic of Latvia , the right honourable Valdis Zatlers , it is a very great pleasure for us all to be able to welcome you today on your first visit to the European Parliament .
I should like to start by thanking you , as the President of a country which is still a relatively new Member State of the European Union , for accepting the European Parliament 's invitation to address us today , the day on which we are celebrating the 10th anniversary of our common currency , the euro .
Today is a premiere in every sense of the word , as this was the first time that the European hymn has been played to welcome a guest to plenary here in the European Parliament .
( Applause )
May I take this opportunity to mention once again today the historic significance of the enlargement of the European Union in 2004 .
It took over 60 years to bring your country back into a free and democratic Europe and unify our continent .
We live today in peace , freedom and democracy .
Our citizens enjoy prospects that our forefathers could only have dreamed of .
We must and should rejoice in that .
It is true that today the European Union faces new and serious challenges .
Even the people of Latvia have come to feel this quite clearly , for example as a result of the financial crisis , which has also hit your country hard , Mr President .
The gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine is also giving the citizens of Latvia justified cause for concern .
It is precisely in times of crisis that we understand the value of membership of a European Union based on the principle of solidarity between its peoples .
It is precisely in this time of crisis that we all feel the need for community and cooperation between our countries and the European institutions .
Together we are stronger , together we can defend our interests and values better throughout the world .
That is also why the European Parliament hopes the Lisbon Treaty , which gives the European Union a stronger capacity to act to overcome these serious challenges , will shortly enter into force .
In this respect , the European Parliament elections due to take place in June this year are immensely important , because we want to push ahead with the success story of the European peace and unification project together , in a democratic European Union with a European Parliament with codecision powers in nearly every area .
I truly hope that the citizens of Latvia - and of all the other Member States of the European Union - will understand that their vote is important because it gives them European powers of codecision and in this sense will turn out in force during the forthcoming elections to the European Parliament .
Mr President , it gives me great pleasure to invite you now to address the European Parliament .
May I warmly welcome you once again to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the President for his kind words of introduction and his invitation to address the elected representatives of the nations of Europe .
I am honoured to have this opportunity .
I take great pleasure in addressing the European Parliament in my mother tongue , especially because for five years now , Latvian has been one of the official languages of the European Union .
I am speaking to you today at a time when the term of office of the first Members of the European Parliament to be elected from Latvia is drawing to a close .
I thank you for having carried out your duties with distinction .
Dear friends , this year , 2009 , is a very significant year for Latvia .
It is five years since Latvia acceded to the European Union and to NATO .
Membership of these international organisations became a strategic aim for Latvia following the restoration of independence in 1991 .
Latvia clearly expressed its wish to participate in European and transatlantic economic and security structures .
The enlargement of the family of European democratic nations in the first decade of the 21st century represented the most dynamic changes in Europe since the foundation of the European Union .
These were significant changes .
European structures were joined by nations that had long been isolated by force from them , even though the values that lie at the heart of the European Union had historically been rooted in these nations .
On 18 November last year , Latvia celebrated the 90th anniversary of its proclamation .
That anniversary was highly significant for our people .
It once again affirmed our steadfast will to live in an independent , free and democratic nation .
In the act declaring the Republic of Latvia in 1918 it is written that : ' All citizens regardless of their ethnic origin are called on to give their assistance , for all human rights shall be guaranteed in Latvia .
It shall be a democratic and just nation , where there shall be no room for oppression and injustice ... ' .
I am very proud of these words .
Thirty years before the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the Republic of Latvia declared its loyalty to its fundamental values and principles .
Latvia has always felt itself to belong to Europe and its values , even when Latvia and other Central and Eastern European nations were long bound to a state where many values were looked at through a special ideological prism .
Peace reigned among the nations of the Eastern bloc , but it was the peace of the prison courtyard .
It was brought about by the presence of tanks , repression and threats .
Last year , ladies and gentlemen , both you and the whole of Europe were reminded of the inhumanity of totalitarian ideology by Edvīns Šnore 's film ' A Soviet Story ' .
We have a common history , but our fates have been diverse .
You have to look back into the past in order to understand one another and look to the future together .
That is why I should like to thank the European Parliament for the declaration adopted on 22 September last year to proclaim 23 August as the European Day of Remembrance for Victims of Stalinism and Nazism .
This declaration reminds the people of Europe of these tragic events in the history of Latvia and the whole of Europe .
Today , I should like to look at much more recent history .
This year marks five years since Latvia became a member of the European Union and of NATO .
What sort of time has this been for Latvia ?
What has our nation gained ?
What have our nation 's achievements been and what are the challenges still ahead of us ?
Firstly , the aspiration to become part of Europe encouraged the consolidation of democracy in our society and contributed to the development of democratic institutions .
With our accession to the European Union , Latvia signalled its determination for its own future , its determination to found its future on a European identity and on our common values : freedom and democracy , accountability , the rule of law and human rights , equality , tolerance and prosperity .
Secondly , membership of the European Union has improved the investment climate in Latvia .
' European money ' , as we commonly call European Union structural funds , has contributed significantly to the development of Latvia 's economy .
Thirdly , we can enjoy the privileges afforded by the free movement of persons .
Free travel in the Schengen area has become so customary and self-evident ; it has become so natural to learn , work and gain experience in other European Union Member States .
Fourthly , the free movement of goods and services has opened up new opportunities for business .
Every entrepreneur and consumer can operate in a free environment without borders and without customs duties .
For us in a country with a small internal market , this is particularly important .
Fifthly , and most important of all , Latvian voices are heard in Europe and European voices are heard in the world .
We can be proud that we have at our disposal such a unique mechanism of collaboration .
It allows all of us to search together for active solutions to global challenges , climate and demographic change , the reinforcement of energy security , the problems of migration , and in the case of financial crisis , on a worldwide scale .
Latvia now has at its disposal new political and economic instruments , but it must be noted that our nation 's responsibility for the common future of Europe , a responsibility before all the people of Europe , has also significantly increased .
Looking back at our achievements , we must also be critical and own up to mistakes that have been committed .
After accession to the European Union , the Latvian government lapsed into a sense of a ' job well done ' ; it had achieved its goal .
We did not recognise that we were only at the beginning and not at the end of the process .
The European Union offers great opportunities , but each nation and each society must grasp them by itself .
We in Latvia have not grasped all the opportunities ; we have not always wisely implemented cohesion policy or made use of the financial opportunities we have been offered .
Our state institutions had to learn how to live in the European Union .
We have not been sufficiently determined to adopt the euro ; that is one of the greatest mistakes we have made in the euro integration process , something that is acutely evident today in the circumstances of the financial crisis .
Yet even the most hardened Eurosceptic must admit that Latvia 's membership of the European Union has on the whole been positive .
Is there anyone in Latvia who wants to return to a Europe where there are customs barriers between nations ?
No !
Is there anyone who wants to wait in a queue at the border in order to enter a neighbouring country ?
No !
Is there anyone who wants to return to a world where there are restrictions on the free movement of workers , on their education and on their gaining experience ?
Of course not !
Even Eurosceptics soon get used to good things , and become simply sceptics .
Ladies and gentlemen , the deterioration of the situation within the financial system and economy in recent months has irreversibly changed the role and significance of national governments within economic processes .
Until now , the financial markets were able to develop very freely .
We were persuaded that the laws of the market would by themselves be sufficiently efficient in promoting economic development .
We believed that the market alone would put everything in its place .
That is indeed what happens .
The market regulates itself .
What we can see from this global crisis , however , is that our financial systems and our economies are suffering from that market , and most important of all , real people are suffering from the crisis .
The course of events at the end of last year has shown us that it is essential for national governments to play a more active part in the economic process .
The previous approach , of nodding off at the wheel of economic management , was irresponsible .
Unfortunately , we have awoken too late .
Late enough to still espy the obstacle - the financial morass - on the road ahead of us , but no longer able to avoid it .
In this situation , a complex approach at national , European and global level is what is needed .
At the global level , coordinated action to restart economic growth is essential .
That will only be possible by designing a new architecture and mechanisms for the financial system .
It will be vital to supervise the system strictly , without simultaneously limiting initiative or market processes .
The most difficult challenge will be to strike precisely this balance .
At the European level , we have a significant advantage , for we can implement coordinated measures , take united action and achieve a sustainable solution .
We welcome the Commission 's European Economic Recovery Plan .
It is an important step out of the morass in which we find ourselves at this time .
I shall spend a little more time on national-level solutions .
The global financial crisis has also hit Latvia .
There is a school of thought which suggests that Latvia is currently undergoing one of the most dramatic rescue operations of any financial system in modern European history .
Currently , Latvia is working on measures to stimulate the economy in order to stabilise the financial and economic situation swiftly and effectively .
It is a difficult task , but we shall succeed in overcoming the crisis only by seeing a clear way out of it , and not by mistaking short-term solutions for a long-term vision of economic development .
At the end of last year , six political parties represented in the Latvian parliament , from both government and opposition , agreed on a common stance of support for the economic stabilisation plan drawn up by the Latvian government .
This agreement provides for special attention to be paid to monitoring how the loan granted to Latvia is utilised .
The plan defines the medium-term priorities for Latvia 's economy : support for exports , the promotion of free and fair competition , a significant reduction in the current-account deficit in the balance of payments , and the introduction of the euro in 2012 .
Accession to the euro area has become one of our nation 's most important strategic goals .
It is important for Latvia not to be left alone in this situation .
We are being helped to overcome this difficult time not only by international financial organisations but also by the institutions of the European Union and by the nations of Europe .
Latvia is grateful for this expression of solidarity .
Ladies and gentlemen , each enlargement has not only brought the European Union new Member States , but it has also introduced new accents into its agenda , including its foreign policy .
Latvia 's accession to the European Union took place at a time when Europe 's Neighbourhood Policy , its goals , principles and implementation mechanisms , were being drawn up .
Since that time , there has been a particular increase in the European Union 's foreign policy activity towards its eastern neighbours .
This has happened thanks to the engagement and experience of the new Member States .
Latvia has always seen neighbourhood relations in a wider dimension .
Latvia will continue to play an active part in the determination and implementation of this policy in the future .
This policy is not just a matter of the European Union 's relations with particular states , that is , with those states with which it shares a land or maritime border .
In the context of this policy , we must address the European Union 's place and role in the world .
Together with other like-minded nations , Latvia has actively encouraged a closer involvement by the European Union in its eastern neighbourhood region .
A new political initiative , the ' Eastern Partnership ' has come about , whose mission is to reshape Europe 's common neighbourhood policy and adapt it to the specific characteristics of this region , thereby making this process more active , more courageous and more ambitious .
Latvia notes with pleasure the European Commission 's proposals in this regard .
In its practical work , the Eastern Partnership must strengthen the political and economic relations between the European Union and the states in this region , and also strengthen the mutual cooperation between those states .
In developing the Eastern Partnership , attention must be paid to the differentiation principle , individual assessment and the attitude towards each of the partners .
Each of these states is following its own path of development .
There are those states who wish to see themselves in the European Union , and there are those states that have chosen other goals for themselves .
Our policy will succeed only if we are able to work together with all the states of this region , helping with understanding where necessary .
I also received positive signals for extending and deepening cooperation on my visit to the Central Asian nations last October , when I visited Kazakhstan , Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan .
Latvia will continue to be an active supporter of Europe 's Neighbourhood Policy and play an active part in implementing it .
Every European nation has its own experience of history and its own opportunities to work on our common project for the benefit of the European Union .
Latvia 's particular contribution to the eastern dimension is the mutual trust demonstrated by our bilateral relations , which are rooted in a shared period in history , and the expertise born out of that trust .
Latvia 's duty is to make use of this special circumstance which could be lost within the next 10 years .
After several decades , to eastern eyes , Latvia will be only one of the Member States of the European Union , not the gateway to Europe .
Making use of these advantages , Latvia will maintain an active political dialogue in order to encourage a better understanding of the European Union and its values in the neighbouring states and so clarify the goals of the European Neighbourhood Policy and the Eastern Partnership .
That is of mutual benefit , and we have an opportunity to hear how neighbouring states perceive their future relations with the European Union .
I am convinced that Europe 's interests would be best served by an early inauguration of the Eastern Partnership during the Czech Republic 's Presidency .
Ladies and gentlemen , the question of energy security has very recently become topical during the first days of the Czech Presidency .
The financial and economic crisis is cyclical in its own way .
Questions associated with energy security and sustainable energy sources are , however , always on Europe 's political agenda and that of the world .
They are becoming more and more urgent .
Energy security has a pronounced external dimension .
This means that this question cannot be viewed divorced from the world situation .
The recent events in Ukraine and the conflict in Georgia are proof of this .
Even quite recently , European Union Member States regarded energy as an issue to be resolved at the national and not at the European Union level .
The events of the last year in the energy sector , the interruptions to energy supply , the shrinking of energy resources and price volatility have helped to create a common understanding in European Union Member States of the need for a common energy policy .
At the intersection of energy and politics , our main task is to secure a regular , sufficient , economic , sustainable and environmentally friendly energy supply .
You have to admit that the European Union has had only mixed success in this sphere .
On some issues , of which the development of an environmentally friendly energy economy is an example , we have adopted ambitious goals at the European level , which we must now begin to achieve .
On other issues - diversification of energy sources at European level and creation of a single energy market - we are right at the beginning of our journey .
The events of the last few days , involving a cut-off of gas supplies from Russia , has opened eyes to the need to find the quickest possible solution at pan-European level .
All of us have the responsibility of applying this common understanding to create a truly integrated and diversified European energy market .
We must not allow our resolve to vanish along with this spring 's snow .
The energy security question can only be successfully resolved by an active dialogue with the transit and supplier countries for energy resources .
The European Union has the foreign policy instruments to resolve this issue .
Our responsibility is to make use of them .
A further direction where we must make serious efforts is the integration of the Baltic energy market with the Scandinavian and Central European energy markets .
Integration in the Baltic region is patchy .
Trade and transport in the region are developing apace .
The energy market , however , is stagnating .
Here , the European Commission has done noteworthy work .
Its initiative to improve energy security and solidarity also includes the development of the interconnection plan for the Baltic energy market .
This will allow for a progressive integration of the Baltic States into the single European energy market .
I hold Sweden 's involvement in the strategic discussions on the Baltic Sea region in high regard .
Sweden will shortly have the opportunity to put it into practice during its presidency in the second half of this year .
I am convinced that strong regions from the Mediterranean to the Baltic Sea make for a strong European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , the initial aim of the European Union - the security and wellbeing of the people of Europe - has not altered .
What has altered is the environment in which we must achieve this aim .
The global economy is much more closely linked than it was half a century ago .
At the same time , powerful new economic players have appeared on the world scene .
It is only with coherent , far-sighted and , most important of all , common action by the European Union that we can hope not to be the losers in this global competitive struggle .
Only together can we fulfil the promises of security and wellbeing for our citizens .
Only thus can we attain the goal for which the people of our nations have cast their votes , in support of our participation in the European Union .
The European Parliament has already shown that it has a broad vision of the future of the European Union .
This is especially true of its uniform and balanced approach to the Union 's enlargement policy .
Europe 's dynamic growth has given Europe the opportunity to compete globally .
This growth is Europe 's potential , which it must exploit , so that the Union can , even several decades from now , be an equal economic partner for the rapidly growing Asian and Latin American economies .
It is you yourselves in particular , as the democratically elected representatives of Europe 's nations , who feel the responsibility for this process most acutely .
It is also impossible to overestimate the significance of the European Parliament in bringing the European project nearer to our people and extending its democratic legitimacy .
In the future , the role of the European Parliament will become even more important .
It is important to unite in our multiformity and diversity .
It is important to continue working on improving the European Union .
That is a task that all Europeans must take on together .
That is our common responsibility towards Europe .
It is essential to prevent fragmentation of the European Union .
Member States must seek solutions and avoid the development of a multi-speed approach to the European project .
The agreement reached in the Council last month for the furtherance of the Lisbon Treaty is welcome .
The Lisbon Treaty is the legal precondition for the future fully effective functioning of the European Union .
Only by putting the principles of the Lisbon Treaty into practice shall we be able fully to realise the positive potential that the new , united Europe offers .
How effectively the Lisbon Treaty will work in practice depends on the political will of the Member States and institutions and their ability to unite in achieving Europe 's goals .
Ladies and gentlemen , until 2004 , Latvia 's goal was membership of the European Union .
Since that time , we have shaped Latvia 's goals in the context of Europe 's goals .
We can no longer consider and perceive ourselves separately from Europe .
We can define and achieve Latvia 's goals only if they match Europe 's common vision of the future .
For their part , Europe 's goals are attainable if they correspond to the vision of every Member State .
The European Union was built and must be strengthened on a base of common values .
Only public discussion can tease out those values that are common to all of us .
Only in unison can we agree on those values that we are going to place alongside those on which the European Union was founded .
It is the task of all politicians , but especially of Europe 's leaders , to define European values and initiate discussion on them .
Let us look into the future .
How do I see the European Union and Latvia in the longer term ? In 2015 , say ?
The post-crisis economic world will have coalesced into several economic power centres .
One of them will be the European Union .
Europe will have the will and the ability to be united , for only union will afford us the chance to fulfil our tasks .
Moreover , the European Union will still be open to all those Europeans who accept its values .
This unity in diversity will be the key to the growing importance of Europe 's role in the world .
The European Union will have expanded , but it will not lose the capability of effective action .
The European Union will be able to look after its own security and provide for stability in its neighbours .
Education and culture will be the bridge joining the different experiences of the European Union 's Member States and that will help to regain Europe 's leading role in the world in the realms of science and culture .
There will no longer be old and new , small and large European nations .
In Europe , nations will be judged according to their achievements , not by geographical and geopolitical criteria .
Europe will be united , and this unity will be secured by powerful regions , which while defending their own interests will work closely together with others , thereby creating a network of wellbeing and development throughout Europe .
Every nation will contribute to this development according to its own abilities and particular knowledge .
What will be Latvia 's role in the European Union of 2015 ?
That will be a time when Latvia will have emerged from the crisis .
Latvia 's capital city , Riga , will be one of the flourishing centres of the Baltic economic region .
Latvia 's economy will be more balanced , more competitive and structurally transformed .
In 2015 , for the first time in the history of the independent state , Latvia will be entrusted with solving questions on the European and global scale as the presiding Member State of the European Union .
Our contribution to Europe will be our special relationships with the Eastern Partnership nations .
Latvia and our region will be the bridge to the East , just as the Mediterranean states will join both shores of that sea .
Our vision of an open Europe and our experience of integration will be the spur to Europe 's openness .
Ladies and gentlemen , 2015 is not far away ; only six years stand between us .
A century ago , the Latvian poet Rainis wrote : ' What changes , endures ' .
Those are still wise words today .
I am convinced that Europe will change materially .
It will grow more powerful in its economy , welfare and mutual cooperation .
It will consolidate its value system .
Europeans will be proud that they live in Europe and yet belong to their own nation .
Unity in diversity , development , preservation of values and every citizen 's responsibility towards his or her nation and for the European family as a whole , that is Europe 's future .
Ladies and gentlemen , Europe 's development and prosperity is the yardstick of our success .
It is how our work will be judged .
It is our responsibility .
I call on you , as Members of the European Parliament , to encourage Europeans ' understanding of our common goals and of how they will affect the life of every European in his or her own home .
The support of European citizens for the idea of Europe is the strongest guarantee of Europe 's future .
I thank you , ladies and gentlemen , for your work in this session .
I wish you success in your further work and in the next European Parliament elections .
Mr President , may I thank you on behalf of the European Parliament for your address , for your European courageousness and for your European determination .
We were of course glad to hear that you value the European Parliament , and rightly so .
I still remember very clearly that , during accession negotiations in the second half of the 1990s , Latvia , Lithuania and Slovakia were initially excluded .
It was the European Parliament that called on the governments to include Latvia , Lithuania and Slovakia in the negotiations .
As a result , Latvia , Lithuania and Slovakia were able to become members of the European Union on 1 May 2004 .
You addressed the energy question and I shall reply to you very briefly .
We have a very responsible Commissioner , a compatriot of yours , Andris Piebalgs , who acquitted himself admirably last week and during the gas dispute with Russia and Ukraine , but especially with Russia .
I should like to thank Andris Piebalgs for his work in the presence of his President .
( Applause )
Mr President , my closing remark is this : you spoke about how you are learning and Latvia is learning .
That is certainly true .
Yet even those who belonged to the European Community , to the European Union , from the beginning are learning from you and your historical experiences .
If we are prepared to listen to each other and to learn from each other , then we shall all be the better for it .
On the basis of our common values , we are strong , democratic and free .
Thank you , President Zatlers , it was a joy to welcome you here today .
Thank you .
( Applause )
Explanations of vote ( continuation )
( CS ) Madam President , I welcome the compromise , which will force governments of EU countries to create a timetable and draw up action plans to limit risks from the use of pesticides .
The restrictions on spraying by aircraft will surely be welcomed by EU citizens , as will the buffer zones for protecting drinking water and aquatic organisms .
I voted for the directive because it is in line with my views on health protection .
Madam President , I voted in favour of this compromise because it makes sense that we have sustainable use of pesticides .
I think the real problem is that there are such different rules across Member States : some countries apply training and education of operators in a very strict way and , therefore , have good sustainable use of pesticides , but not all countries do so .
I think this piece of legislation will make it appropriate that we have higher standards across the European Union .
That is good both for those who operate sprays and for those who come into contact with them .
I think we are talking about a very sensible package here , so I was very happy to support it , and I congratulate the rapporteur .
Madam President , I also supported this vote .
There is no question that we need a regulatory system for pesticides .
This is not in dispute .
The Klaß report extends the range of controls and limits the use of PPPs to essential use .
Interestingly , while there was a very vexed debate on hazard-versus-risk on the Breyer report , I have always felt that this issue is more suitable to the actual use as distinct from placing on the market - in other words , this report .
A wide range of common products can be hazardous if the handling and usage instructions are ignored .
Being on the market in itself is not a risk to the consumer , the environment or the user of such products .
Pesticides are only hazardous if the handler does not know what he or she is doing , if the application equipment is faulty , if the aquatic environment is ignored or if they are improperly stored and not part of an integrated pest-management plan .
The concept of quantitative use reduction needs careful management , as less frequent spraying with higher concentration of pesticide could result .
At the end of the day , these substances must be used to the least extent possible , as every farmer knows .
( CS ) Madam President , I would like to respond again to yesterday 's plenary debate .
I supported the new regulation because in my opinion it constitutes a tool for pursuing new and safer alternatives for protecting plants .
I consider the mutual recognition of approved pesticides according to geographical zones to be a positive achievement for our Parliament .
The preparation of a list of banned substances is also a step forward - these include carcinogens , genotoxic substances and also substances with neurotoxic and immunotoxic effects - and is based on scientific knowledge .
As the Commissioner said yesterday , it seems that it applies to a relatively small percentage of the substances still used today .
I would like to mention that we must apply these requirements strictly to imported goods as well .
Commissioner , I also wanted to have a say on other reports but I was not given the floor .
These reports have already been used for explanatory purposes or they have already been debated here , so I believe they will be adopted in their written form .
Madam President , I have a confession to make .
Since I was a child there has been one vegetable that I hate : peas .
But I have the misfortune to represent Britain 's largest growing pea-growing area , which has given me a huge problem with the Breyer report .
I agree with the aims of this report .
I agree with the aims of the legislation to promote the health of our environment , the health of us as individuals , but it really potentially threatens a huge agricultural industry in my region .
After much soul-searching , I have abstained , but I wish to make it clear that I think our legislative procedure in this respect was flawed .
We had so much information at the end - conflicting and otherwise - that I , and I think many others , would have welcomed the possibility of a third reading , or of conciliation , to make sure that we have protected all interests .
Madam President , I too found this a particularly difficult decision .
I felt that the report was , in general , very well-balanced and constructive , and it was certainly designed to ensure a high level of protection for human health , animal health and the environment .
However , I have concerns about the situation where we are making decisions for approval of a particular substance based on whether that substance is a hazard or not , and we are not taking possible exposure into account .
I think we need impact assessments conducted on a scientific basis .
One of my concerns is that , when I talk to citizens about the EU , one of the issues they constantly raise with me is that , at times , the EU 's legislation is not always proportionate .
While I believe there is flexibility in this report , I think we needed a little more , but crucially we needed further scientific evidence to support the case .
Yes , there is the precautionary principle , and we need to be mindful of this , but decisions also need to be evidence-based , and I would have liked a little more evidence in this matter .
Madam President , the efficient and effective use of pesticides is a necessity .
Whilst the protection of the environment and safeguarding of public health go hand-in-hand , I believe we have to balance the needs of consumers and producers .
Whilst I welcome the aims of the Breyer report to reduce red tape , I am not able to support this .
I have met with a number of experts and farmers and NFU representatives in my West Midlands constituency who all have deep reservations about the effects that this report will have on crop yields .
I share their concerns .
My biggest worry is that there has not been a proper impact assessment by the Commission and there is no clear indication of what this report will mean for agriculture .
At a time of rising food prices around the world , I do not think that now is the time for us to have a knee-jerk reaction to introduce measures which may have adverse effects on food production .
That is why my delegation introduced an amendment for a thorough and long overdue impact assessment .
Madam President , like other colleagues , I should like to say that this was a very difficult dossier .
While Diana Wallis was concerned about peas , you can imagine that , in Ireland , potatoes were certainly on our menu and on the agenda .
Overall , however , I believe that what we voted on is a much better proposal and package than the original one on the table - and I compliment those who worked on it .
Let me say a few things about this - and I will end up with the key point .
I think we are now in a position where farmers need to lobby the agrochemical industry to produce safer alternatives so that they can continue to produce food , and I think as much energy should go into that lobby as has gone heretofore .
When it comes to food imports , the Commission need to address the genuine concerns of EU farmers and producers that they will be banned from using certain substances but third countries continue to use them .
We need an explanation of that in order to bring farmers with us .
Madam President , I voted against this simply because the proposal has been hijacked in effect by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and Commissioners .
The rapporteurs yesterday boasted about standardisation , and yet this is allegedly a Union of diversity .
If there were one area where judgement , discretion and diversity are needed , it is perhaps this .
This was essentially an agricultural issue , but the Danish Commissioner for agriculture was nowhere to be seen at any time , and that is a disgrace .
The reason , of course , is because of a conflict of interests since the Danes fail to process their drinking water after it comes out of the ground .
Farmers in my part of the world feel totally let down and frankly insulted by the fact that there are some assumptions here that they do not know what they are doing , and they need to be told .
Essentially you have added yet another group to those in the UK who frankly loathe the European Union 's interference .
Madam President , exaggerated claims have been made and fears expressed by all sides on this report .
It is has been difficult to distinguish fact from fiction and to come to a decision on how to vote .
While I recognise the concerns of the soft fruit industry , the potato industry and the cereal farmers in Ireland who have spoken to me about this , I supported the compromise .
I feel the improvements made were worth our support , even though I still have some concerns .
I supported the vote as , in my opinion , the worst of all outcomes would be to deliver this report to conciliation .
The five-year derogation , renewable if necessary for essential plant protection projects , is an important safety net and also encourages the agrochemical industry to research and produce alternatives .
Madam President , I think that , when one considers the European project , there is a dialectic at its heart .
We talk about democracy , yet we ignore the democratic will as expressed in referenda in France , the Netherlands and Ireland .
We talk about food security , yet we vote on a report which has the potential to undermine food production in the European Union .
We talk about helping citizens and farmers in poorer countries , yet there will now be , as a result of this vote , a call to ban imports from farmers who have used pesticides that are now banned in the European Union .
I simply have a plea to my colleagues in Parliament and to the Commission : Please , let us think in future about the unintended consequences of our legislation .
I agree with Mrs Wallis about the legislative process and that there should have been a third reading .
I agree it has been rushed through and I think we all agree that there has been an insufficient impact assessment on a scientific basis .
Let us make sure that does not happen again .
Madam President , I tried to undermine the compromise by voting against those parts of this report .
I will explain why by reading out a letter to me from James Mowbray , who is a farmer near Skegness in my region .
He said , ' I have personally been involved in the application of crop protection products for over 40 years .
I have always applied products with a sensitive approach to other human beings as well as wildlife .
I have incurred no apparent detriment to my health or the wellbeing of the environment .
I therefore find it distressing that the possible withdrawal of many products , including the triazole fungicides , is based on less than scientific arguments and will make my business not particularly viable and reduce the availability of home-produced food ' .
I received these comments from him and from literally hundreds of other people , from Empire World Trade , based in Spalding in Lincolnshire , John Manby in Parker Farms in Leicester , John Clark , who is based in Nottinghamshire , Jonathan Reading and hundreds more names .
That is why I voted to undermine the compromise .
Madam President , now that this vote is over and the arguments have been made , I would like to come back to something that ran through the debate here and in the committee .
This was the noticeable mistrust of farmers and an assumption by many that farmers are somehow enemies of health and the environment .
In my experience this is the opposite of the truth .
Farmers in Ireland are , and have been , stewards who for thousands of years have protected and preserved the environment , keeping it alive , clean and productive .
Similarly , farmers have also been the basis of our health .
They produce the good food that is the basis of our good health .
I would urge you to renew our faith in our farmers , who are doing their best to feed us in very difficult situations , circumstances of weather , pest and , of course , EU policy .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - We have just voted on an agreement for civil aviation safety .
Although travel by air is one of the safest means of travel , however , one can never take measures which are too safe .
Linked to this discussion is that related to security .
Since the horrendous terror attack on the twin towers , innumerable security measures have been put in place .
Just like the issue of safety one can never be too secure .
Indeed , it is when we feel too secure that terror strikes again .
Of course , one has to find a balance between civil liberties and rights and security measures ; however , when it comes down to a choice one has to prioritise .
For instance , there has been a substantial deal of opposition to the sharing of passenger lists on the basis of data protection .
But surely such security measures will enable an in-depth analysis not possible at the frontiers .
We are living in a new era .
Innocent civilians are purposely targeted and the civilians of certain countries preselected .
In such an environment surely we are not expecting these countries to abstain from doing all that which is possible to protect the interests of its citizens .
I voted in favour of this report because the aviation industry in Romania will benefit directly too .
The negotiated agreement reflects by and large the structure of a conventional aviation safety agreement ; it is based on mutual trust in each other 's systems and on the comparison of regulatory differences .
This entails obligations and methods for cooperation between exporting and importing authorities .
However , the means of achieving this objective , namely cooperation and mutual acceptance of each other 's certification findings in the areas of airworthiness and maintenance , are set out in the annexes to the agreement , unlike in conventional agreements , where these measures are usually set out in separate non-binding agreements at civil aviation authority level .
The annexes broadly reflect the content of the Community 's Implementing Rules on airworthiness ( Commission Regulation No 1702 / 2003 ) and maintenance ( Commission Regulation No 2042 / 2003 ) to be modified by the parties based on a decision of the Bilateral Oversight Board .
The origins of the aviation agreements between the European Community and the United States ( US ) lie in and are based on the liberalisation of air transport .
These agreements established at EU level ( or rather , by the European Community - the only body that exists in law - and its single Community market , which they intend to fully liberalise ) are meant to prevail over any bilateral agreements established between various Member States and the US .
As in other resolutions previously adopted by the European Parliament , we would highlight that we are obviously the first to be interested in ensuring a ' high level of civil aviation safety ' and measures ' to minimize economic burdens on the aviation industry and operators from redundant regulatory oversight ' .
However , we must safeguard two important aspects : ( 1 ) the objective and presumed basis of these processes must not be to create and facilitate the conditions for increasing the liberalisation of air transport , through the harmonisation of standards ; ( 2 ) these processes must not promote harmonisation through a lowering of safety standards and rules , in particular where , when safety , minimisation of burdens and liberalisation are mixed together , it is profit and concentration that prevail .
We believe that air transport must be defended as a public service , provided by public companies in each country , which guarantee quality and safety in the services provided to citizens .
I agree in principle with Paolo Costa 's report on civil aviation .
It is important for the EU and the US to agree on a common line with the help of this agreement .
However , it is vital in this overseas partnership that we are real partners , not just on paper .
Criteria must be found to which both parties must adhere .
In the event of contempt on the part of either the EU or the US , a rescindable variation in the agreement will be indispensable .
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of an Agreement between the European Community and the United States of America on cooperation in the regulation of civil aviation safety .
I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal on the conclusion of this agreement .
I think that the objectives of the agreement , namely facilitation of trade in the goods and services covered by the agreement , maximum limitation of the duplication of assessments , tests and controls to significant regulatory differences and use of the certification system of either party to check conformity with the requirements of the other party are legitimate objectives .
I hope that the reliance on mutual trust of the other party 's systems will favour the implementation of this agreement .
As the European Parliament 's rapporteur for the legislative report on the expansion of the European Aviation Safety Agency 's ( EASA ) powers , I welcome the negotiated agreement with the United States on facilitating mutual acceptance of civil aviation safety certificates .
This agreement marks an important step in expanding transatlantic cooperation , which is a priority objective of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
It establishes sound conditions for boosting trade in goods and services in the civil aviation sector between the European Union and the United States , which undoubtedly benefits Europe .
The agreement offers enhanced guarantees as regards safety and reinforcement of the compatibility of products , components and aircraft with the increased demands of protecting the environment .
In these conditions , we can hope that the European Single Sky principles will be extended in the future to apply to transatlantic cooperation and that cooperation will be widened in the field of research , as well as the implementation of new technologies in this field , based on collaboration between SESAR and NextGen .
I believe that this agreement will facilitate in the long term the mutually beneficial extension of the cooperation framework between the EASA and the FAA , from which airlines , the aviation industry and , more significantly , passengers will directly benefit .
The future of the external transport policy requires good relations between the European Community and the United States .
As a result , one of the fundamental points of this cooperation agreement on the regulation of civil aviation safety is mutual trust in each other 's systems and the comparison of regulatory differences .
The objective of this agreement is to facilitate trade in goods and services in the aviation sector , by limiting as much as possible the duplication of assessments , tests and controls to significant regulatory differences between the two parties .
We therefore believe that a framework is being created which will work smoothly on a daily basis and which will allow technical issues arising from its implementation to be solved through a system of continual cooperation and consultation .
This agreement is another fundamental step in the external dimension of the European transport policy , which is why I voted in favour of this report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to state that I voted in favour of Mr Costa 's report on the conclusion of the agreement between the European Community and the United States of America on cooperation in the regulation of civil aviation safety , as set out in the proposal for a Council decision .
I concur with the rapporteur in considering that Parliament must declare itself in favour of the conclusion of the agreement because this would clearly streamline the trade in goods and services between the parties in the airworthiness and maintenance sector , avoiding the redundant duplication of assessments and checks on compliance with safety requirements , which until now have had to be repeated even if they are very similar to one another .
I believe , however , that the agreement should be applied provisionally at first , so that we can identify any practical and implementation difficulties and remove them before proceeding to final approval .
I voted in favour of this report for better legal regulation of companies within the EU .
I voted in favour of the report on the common system of taxation applicable to mergers , divisions , partial divisions , transfers of assets and exchanges of shares concerning companies of different Member States as these legal transactions result in fundamental changes to commercial companies ' legal status .
The European Union also needs to take the necessary measures to provide uniform , harmonised but effective regulation .
I also supported it because I am a lawyer and I will continue to support in the European Parliament every effort made to harmonise and codify at European level fiscal , economic , civil and criminal regulations .
I voted in favour of this report as the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance lack any provision as to the language required to be used in appeal proceedings ( against decisions of the Civil Service Tribunal ) .
There is , in fact , no equivalent to Article 110 of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice .
Madam President , following the last armed conflict in the Balkans , European states made widely differing statements on the subject .
However , by its active engagement in the situation which existed , the EU confirmed that the Balkans are an important region for us and are an integral part of Europe .
We are therefore obliged to support these countries in their efforts to achieve stability and full democracy .
I endorsed the Belder report because it underlines the need to assist the Balkan states , while treating them as individual , independent partners .
Furthermore , it is good that the report underlines the need to establish a common energy policy .
The diversification of sources is urgently needed , and this would benefit not only the EU , but the whole of Europe .
in writing . - The report by Mr Belder considers the current situation of the European Union 's trade and economic relations with this increasingly stable region , where many countries hold candidateship for EU membership .
The role of the EU as a major partner for the area in maintaining trade and economic relations while pushing for a stable , lasting peace in the area is a very important one .
The EU 's strength as an economic partner , but also as a model for a strong civil society , government and dynamic institutions , should be used to push for the development of the region .
A threefold and differentiated approach , taking into account the relative differences between countries in the region as well as association agreements and further support , provides a clear way to address issues of underdevelopment and shore up intensive regional and international economic cooperation .
As a means of cementing a lasting peace and promoting the ideals to which we are all committed , I support Mr Belder 's report .
I know the Belder report only deals with the economic and commercial relationships with the Western Balkans and the evident need for the European Union to assist in their reconstruction , in the economic , legal , political and social fields .
I am surprised , though , that , despite the statement that this aid , as well as the accession processes , must be differentiated and adapted to each country , the report does not really take into account the specific situation of each country .
Serbia , for example , is not even mentioned .
Above all , this Parliament , always quick to condemn violations of human rights around the world or to demand ' human rights ' clauses in international cooperation agreements , has achieved the master stroke of voting for a report on the Balkans without once mentioning the dramatic and inadmissible situation of the Serb populations in Kosovo , who have become pariahs in the historical land of their fathers .
Meanwhile , it congratulates itself on the hundreds of millions of euros given to the authorities who provoke , organise or tolerate this situation .
The consolidation of economic relations with the Western Balkans is of immense importance both to the EU and to the Western Balkans .
I therefore welcome the fact that the European Parliament is working intensively on this issue and that we adopted the Belder report today .
In light of the fact that the future of the countries of the Western Balkans lies with the EU , their economic and political rapprochement to the EU is very important .
In order to tie these countries to the EU in the long term , the development of their market economies and regional cooperation must be fostered .
That is why constructive and positive signals from the European Parliament are also important .
It is in the interests of the EU to champion the creation of political stability , legal security and hence good framework conditions in these countries for foreign investment .
The Belder report underlines the fact that the level of economic relations depends on progress in each individual country .
Moreover , it should be the EU 's objective to diversify the national economies of the countries of the Western Balkans .
All these important aspects are reflected in the report .
I am convinced that a positive development in economic relations between the EU and the Western Balkans will be of benefit to all countries on the continent of Europe and I await the implementation of our proposals with anticipation .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Mr Belder on trade and economic relations with the Western Balkans .
I agree with my fellow Member in considering that the European Union has a vital part to play in the process of economic and political revival of countries in the Western Balkan area , with a view to their membership of the European Union , firstly in terms of stabilising the political situation and secondly in economic and trade terms .
I would nevertheless like to emphasise the need for the Union to conduct an in-depth analysis of the situation with regard to respect for human rights and democratic principles within each country .
I refer in particular to Croatia and the numerous Italian expatriates who continue to be clearly discriminated against in that country , despite Croatia 's official application for admission to the EU .
This aspect is , in my opinion , at odds with the situation of Serbia , a country that has only been granted the status of potential candidate and to which the Union should be more open than it has been until now .
I voted for this report on trade and economic relations with the Western Balkans as the motion for a European Parliament resolution also includes the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and that of the Committee on Regional Development of which I am a member .
Economic growth and development in the Western Balkans region will provide the conditions for constructive partnerships with the EU 's eastern Member States , which ultimately includes Romania too .
At the same time , linking the economic and trade policies of the countries in the Western Balkans to the European Union 's policy will support the stabilisation and association agreements signed between the EU and these countries .
I voted in favour of this report because economic stability may also lead to political stability in this area , which has been particularly troubled over the years .
The EU should use all available means in order to motivate the Western Balkans region and persuade it to carry out essential reforms .
The expansion of regional economic cooperation appears to be especially significant in this context , as also is the prospect of membership for states in the region .
Extensive and stable economic contacts between particular countries would lead to specific economic integration , which would definitely help to limit the threat of conflict in the future .
A realistic perspective of membership can also prevent this .
The Balkans have already made huge advances on the road to rapprochement with the EU , but the prospect of accession will most certainly encourage states to continue their efforts at integration with the Community .
I would like to emphasise , however , that alongside instruments of economic support , initiatives which aim to integrate Balkan society with the EU are equally significant .
Therefore the introduction of changes , which should be as far-reaching as possible and which would make the movement of people easier , is very important , as also is broad support for the region 's young people .
Only if the people of the Balkans feel that they have equal rights with the other citizens of Europe will we be able to say that we have achieved success .
I totally agree with what Mr Belder had to say and with his recommendations on how to improve trade and economic relations with the Western Balkans .
The EU has a key role to play in the recovery of that region .
The stabilisation and association agreements , the trade preferences and technical and financial support are the three pillars on the basis of which the EU hopes to bring stability to that region .
It is true that the level of development and adoption of the acquis communautaire is not the same in all the countries of that region , and so , in defiance of having a single strategy , it is necessary to choose specific approaches , which must be tailored to the needs in question .
Albania is not Montenegro , and Bosnia-Herzegovina is not Kosovo .
The progress of the accession negotiations ( or their opening in the case of potential candidate countries ) with the Western Balkan states should , obviously , depend on full compliance with the Copenhagen criteria and unconditional respect for the principles of democracy and human rights .
Let it be clear , though , that all those countries have a future in the EU and that their membership will ensure that the dreadful conflicts which have typified that region for centuries are now a thing of the past .
The European Union has played an immensely important role in the process of economic and political reconstruction of the countries of the former Yugoslavia .
However , it has undertaken an enormous responsibility with regard to the whole of the Western Balkans .
In connection with this , the EU is currently faced with the difficult task of reconstruction of the entire region .
The EU has become the main trading partner of all the countries in the Western Balkans .
The three most important pillars of this cooperation are : stabilisation agreements , trade preferences , and technical and financial support .
The process of stabilisation should above all be directed at raising the living standard and ensuring permanent economic development in the Balkan states .
In undertaking its actions , however , the EU must bear in mind the membership of some of the countries in the EU and the status of the others as potential candidates for membership .
It is difficult not to agree with the rapporteur that a basic condition for development of the countries under discussion is membership of the World Trade Organization ( Croatia , Albania and the former Yugoslavia are already members ) .
For full integration with the world system of trade to take place , it is essential that Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia and Montenegro also join the WTO .
While appreciating the progress already made in terms of modernisation in the region , full integration of the Western Balkans with the EU economic system should be pursued .
in writing . - ( SV ) The report on the common agricultural policy and global food security discusses important issues such as the consequences of rising food prices in poor and rich countries and the importance of securing access to food for everyone .
We Swedish Social Democrats decided to vote against the report , as it contains problematic wordings in relation to agricultural policy .
Among other things , we would like to see a reduction in the proportion of the EU budget allocated to agricultural policy , the retention and development of cross-compliance and the adaptation of the system to the market .
The report is not in line with these views and we are therefore voting against it .
in writing . - Securing sustainable food supply is one of the greatest challenges that faces us .
This challenge will continue to grow as the world 's population expands .
The current population growth rate is over 70 million per year .
This means providing food for 70 million more people every year .
How will we manage this when already over 850 million people in the world are undernourished ?
While securing sustainable food supply is one of our greatest challenges , the EU is one of the greatest success stories of recent times , having brought peace , stability and prosperity to the region .
The EU is the largest giver of ODA and is a model for international cooperation , and can put this experience to good use globally .
The EU cannot afford to follow policy lines that are narrow in scope .
Just as international fortunes are intertwined , there is more and more overlap between policy areas .
This report is an acknowledgment of this and a recognition that the EU 's high standards and wealth of agricultural experience can be of a wider value in addressing global food security , including by providing funding for fertilisers and high-yield seeds , as well as training and practical support for farmers and food producers .
in writing . - ( DA ) Anne E. Jensen and Niels Busk have voted in favour of Mrs McGuinness 's own-initiative report on the common agricultural policy and global food security , as the majority of the report is excellent and it is only possible to vote either in favour or against .
However , we cannot support paragraphs 63 and 64 , which raise doubts about free trade in agricultural products .
We are strong supporters of free trade and believe that it is absolutely right to work to bring about a situation in which trade in agricultural products is based on free market principles .
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish Members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have voted against the own-initiative report on the common agricultural policy and global food security , as the report opposes the liberalisation of agricultural policy and criticises EU rules on the restriction of pesticides .
We believe it is necessary to have balanced access to the global food supply , but that this will not be helped by either maintaining or extending the EU 's agricultural aid .
The global food problem is increasing rather than shrinking and affects all grassroots classes , not only in the less developed countries , but also in the more developed countries .
The main cause of this situation is that the basic criterion for the production of agricultural produce and food is profit rather than global food requirements .
The trading of foodstuffs on international exchanges has resulted in spiralling price increases and , hence , spiralling profits for the food multinationals , a perceptible reduction in rural output and global food reserves and an increase in the number of malnourished people .
In order to address this unacceptable situation , which condemns one billion people to malnourishment and starvation , the report confines itself to wish lists which are cancelled out by its insistence on abiding by the same policy : support for the common agricultural policy and its reviews and ' health check ' , the completion of negotiations in the World Trade Organization , the decoupling of aid from production and the continuing production of biofuels , on the pretext of the environment and using land which could be used to produce food .
It barely touches on the principles of food sovereignty and security and the right to self-sufficiency in food .
The MEPs from the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report because , despite its findings and ' wishes ' , it supports the anti-grassroots , pro-monopoly policy which is condemning more and more people to malnourishment and starvation .
in writing . - ( SV ) It is important that we combat and alleviate starvation .
In this respect , I welcome the content of Mrs McGuinness 's own-initiative report on the common agricultural policy and global food security .
I have , nevertheless , chosen to abstain , because the report was strongly protectionist in places .
Subsidising and regulating our domestic agriculture does not promote our goal of an open , green , safe and enterprising EU .
A freer world market for agricultural products would make it easier for people in poor countries to develop their agriculture .
We are seeing this now in large parts of Africa , in particular .
We agree with various aspects highlighted by the report , in particular :
the fact that the policy shift has resulted in a loss of potential market opportunities for EU producers and has led to increased reliance on imported food from outside the European Union , produced to very different production standards , thereby placing EU agricultural products at a disadvantage ;
the concern that dramatic increases in agricultural production costs may result in less usage and reduced output , which will exacerbate the food crisis in Europe and the world ;
the need for policy instruments aimed at averting such large and damaging price fluctuations ;
the concern about increasing market concentration in the food retail sector , which has led to the development of monopolies , and the need for alternative solutions in negotiations with retailers , in favour of small farmers .
However , there are also aspects with which we cannot agree :
the increased orientation of the common agricultural policy towards the market and the devaluation of food sovereignty , with the emphasis solely being placed on food security , forgetting that this is difficult without food sovereignty .
That is why we abstained .
The McGuinness report tackles an issue that I regard as strategic : food security and the importance of strong and competitive European agriculture in a globalised world .
Following the recent crisis in food prices , food security should be an EU priority .
Despite the fact that another food shortage crisis is not foreseeable in the short term , it is likely that one will occur in the future , if we take into account the negative effects of climate change on agricultural production and the constantly increasing demand .
Bearing in mind that developing countries will probably not be able to produce food in sufficient quantities to supply their increasing populations , the industrialised countries will continue to have the important task of producing and exporting food .
The common agricultural policy must therefore once again become a European priority and form the basis of the European food security policy , given that , in a time of financial and economic crisis , it is more important than ever .
The Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) delegation has voted in favour of the McGuinness report on the common agricultural policy and global food security , despite the fact that it disapproves of some of the content in this report .
The VVD delegation would have liked to have seen the report clearly stipulate that the barriers to trade in the developing world should be phased out with reciprocity .
Alongside this , it would have liked the report to have argued in favour of a special , faster procedure for the authorisation of cisgenic products .
These still fall under the same procedure as ordinary biotechnological products , despite the fact that they make use of genetic materials from within the same species .
in writing . - The McGuinness report deals with issues of immense global importance .
In two years world food prices have increased by over 80 % and cereal stocks have fallen to dangerously low levels .
Pressure on global food stocks are also coming from relatively new sources such as the move towards increased use of bio-fuels .
I welcome the general thrust of this report and , accordingly , voted in favour .
Madam President , I voted in favour of adopting the report by Mrs McGuinness , but I would like to draw attention to the following issues in particular .
For the first time since the 1970s , we have been facing an acute worldwide food crisis .
This crisis actually began before the present global economic crisis , at a time when world maize and wheat prices skyrocketed in a very short time .
The food crisis may have changed its name to economic crisis , but the former has unfortunately not gone away .
It is dreadful to think that , even before the problems posed by the current food crisis , around a billion people worldwide suffered from chronic hunger and malnutrition .
Food security - access to a sufficient , safe and nutritious food supply - must now become a key political priority both here and elsewhere .
We cannot tolerate a situation where , while worldwide famine increases and the price of food soars , we in Europe are winding down agriculture drastically and for the oddest of reasons .
In Finland , as in the other Member States , people must have the right to engage in profitable agriculture both now and in the future .
The food industry has a massive impact on employment , as it provides work for more than four million people in Europe .
The entire food chain in Finland is estimated to employ approximately 300 000 people , which is some 13 % of the employed workforce .
There is an unquestionable need to protect these people 's jobs during these times of food and economic crisis .
in writing . - ( SV ) It is interesting to note that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has not chosen to include in its report a key issue proposed by the Committee on Development , which reads : ' the European Parliament calls on the Council and the Commission , in close consultation with the ACP countries , to give priority to the question of the impact on the ACP countries of EU subsidies on the export of EU agricultural products and to commit to providing specific , sustainable responses aimed at avoiding dumping , in compliance with the commitments made in this area . '
However , in the report it is claimed that the EU has addressed the potentially trade-distorting elements of EU agricultural policy that can negatively impact on farmers in the developing world .
The report complains that non-EU countries produce food to very different production standards , thereby exposing EU agricultural products to unequal terms of competition .
These two claims in the report are controversial , to say the least , and not something that all the political forces within the EU would agree with .
If this were the case , could the Committee on Development 's proposal not also be included in the text of the report ?
The report is also against reductions in aid payments within agriculture and is opposed to any reform of the common agricultural policy .
Moreover , it proposes a citizen information policy regarding the common agricultural policy , which I view as political propaganda for a system that is very controversial , particularly in my country .
I have therefore voted against this report .
The recent extraordinary surge in food prices rightly prompted a discussion on agricultural policies , food security and development .
Regrettably , the issue of international trade is often missing from such debates , thus leading to the search for solutions which ignore the positive potential that increased world consumption can have .
Although initially this food price inflation poses a threat of famine for countries and populations without resources , and demands increased humanitarian aid , it subsequently stimulates a global increase in food production capacity and a rise in global trade .
This is an opportunity for the agricultural populations of the world , of which full advantage must be taken .
As for Europe and the common agricultural policy , our adaptation to this new world context - with a potential for slower growth than expected - should not occur at the cost of either protectionism and new barriers to trade or market distortion .
The medium- and long-term profitability of European agriculture and rural development should be the criteria used in the common agricultural policy and its reform .
This report looks more like a defence of the current common agricultural policy than a comprehensive overview of food security in a starving world .
Despite this I have supported it , because it draws attention to the importance of securing access to credit for farmers in developing countries so that they can modernise agricultural production and increase the output and quality of their food .
I regret that the report paid little attention to the risks of land being bought up in the world 's poorest countries for growing and exporting the cheapest possible food to the rest of the world , at the expense of the economic development and needs of local populations in countries suffering from chronic food shortages .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Mrs McGuinness on the common agricultural policy and global food security .
I share the concerns expressed by my fellow Member and draw attention to the need , which is more pressing than ever , for appropriate measures to be taken to guarantee all citizens access to healthy , nutritious food , whether they are resident within the European Union or elsewhere in the world .
I wish to emphasise that our efforts must be viewed from a medium- to long-term perspective and not focused merely on the short term .
It will not be enough to earmark substantial funding for poor and developing countries unless this is backed by a serious commitment by industrialised countries to ward off the speculation on the prices of staple foods that we have seen recently and introduce international agreements that take into account the very varied situations of countries that belong to the World Trade Organization .
Otherwise the negotiations , which have already broken down , will continue to have little likelihood of success .
in writing . - The issue of the CAP and global food security is important .
We must make sure that we play our part in the EU ensuring that the hungry across the world are fed .
It is a disgrace that there are people in this world starving to death due to our lack of political coordination .
The purpose of the common agricultural policy is not only to increase agricultural productivity and ensure rational development of farming production through optimal use of production factors , especially the workforce , but also to provide rural populations with a suitable standard of living , guarantee security of supplies and ensure reasonable prices for supplies to consumers .
Access to sufficient supplies of safe and nutritious food is currently a key political priority at EU and world level .
It is disturbing that food prices are higher than in previous years , and world food stocks have fallen to a critically low level .
There is a danger that the world financial crisis may induce developed countries not to honour their obligations in the area of aid to developing countries .
Medium- and long-term action is needed to safeguard world food production and to support those people who are most seriously affected in terms of basic nutritional needs .
The greatest challenge now is to develop a policy for agriculture and food which will meet the needs of the increasingly numerous world population , which , according to estimates , by the year 2050 will have grown by 40 % , while world food demand is expected to double in the same period .
Development of a policy which will ensure farmers a decent income from the food they produce is a key political issue .
This is of fundamental importance in terms of safeguarding food production .
If the market is not able to ensure this , it should be done through appropriate policy .
in writing . - The Labour delegation will be voting in favour of the CAP and Global Food Security report , despite the strong reservations we have on the stance taken on the CAP .
We do not agree with the prominent role attributed to the CAP in ensuring food security nor with the criticism of the CAP reform , which has seen a shift away from quantity to quality production , the implication being that this has undermined our food security .
Our position is that we need to modernise our agricultural policy , and not return to a production-based policy that encouraged massive over-production and a distortion of markets , undermining the ability of other countries to produce and trade agricultural goods .
We do , however , feel that the report raises many very important points on the issue of global food security , such as recognising the importance of food security as a key political priority for the EU , urging for greater cooperation on a global level , calling for more investment in developing countries to build up their production capacities , and urging for agriculture to be placed at the heart of the EU 's development agenda .
All of these points are equally important and demand that we look beyond the narrow focus of those using this issue as justification for a more interventionist and protectionist CAP and that we support the report .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted in favour of the report by Mrs Grabowska on the perspectives for developing civil dialogue under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Strengthening the dialogue with civil society is important for creating an EU that listens to and represents the views of its citizens .
We also agree with the demands in the report for work in the Council to be more open in order to enable civil society to participate in the dialogue in a meaningful way .
However , we would like to make it clear that we believe it to be wrong for churches and religious communities to be given a special status among civil society organisations .
Churches and religious communities should take part in the dialogue with the Union 's institutions in the same way as all other organisations .
Madam President , every initiative which aims to bring citizens closer to the institutions which act on their behalf should be supported .
However , care should be taken to ensure that the proposed initiative is not by its own momentum transformed into another institution .
I endorsed the report because every step taken to bring citizens closer to the authorities which make decisions for them is a step towards a better and more transparent democracy .
However , I want to emphasise that , as is the case in every dialogue , so also in the one concerning the Lisbon Treaty the opinion of every party should be taken into account .
in writing . - This report refers to the Lisbon treaty , which , let me remind you , is not in force .
It is therefore highly presumptuous , not to say arrogant , to be invoking the name of the Lisbon treaty as if it was already a fact of life .
In case you had forgotten : the Lisbon treaty was sunk by the democratic will of the people of Ireland .
They put the brakes on the project because they wanted a different kind of Europe .
In voting the way they did , the people of Ireland also spoke for the citizens of every other Member State , including my own , who were denied a referendum by their governments .
Ireland has been bullied into holding a second vote , but the Irish people are unlikely to take kindly to being treated with such contempt .
In future , we should avoid bringing ourselves into disrepute by discussing hypothetical scenarios such as the Lisbon treaty .
It merely serves to expose the EU 's arrogant disregard for democratic opinion .
I voted against this report .
in writing . - ( NL ) I may be living on a different planet , but I seem to remember that the Dutch and French people rejected the European Constitution in a democratic referendum in 2005 .
That Constitution is dead and buried , at least if we call ourselves democrats .
The cursed Treaty of Lisbon , which is simply an airbrushed version of the Constitution , suffered exactly the same fate , rejected , as it was , in a democratic referendum by the Irish people .
Europe , however , refuses to accept the opinion of the people and wants to ram the Constitution down the throats of Europeans through the backdoor , pretending that everything in the garden is rosy and talking of a so-called ' dialogue with the citizen in the framework of the Treaty of Lisbon ' with the greatest cynicism .
This is supposed to be a ' dialogue with the citizen ' , ' a strong culture of consultation and dialogue ' , whereby the rapporteur , in her cynicism , quotes once more Article 10 of the Treaty on European Union : ' Every citizen shall have the right to participate in the democratic life of the Union ' .
This may be true , but Europe does not take any notice of the democratic voice of the people .
in writing . - This report by Genowefa Grabowska provides for increased mechanisms of participation and for vehicles for civil dialogue within the European Union .
It addresses the gap between members of the Union and the relationship they have with the institutions that serve them .
It recognises the need to increase civil dialogue to maintain true engagement with the aims of the European project .
The recent rejection of the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland was in part due to differences between the perception of the Union and the reality of the Union .
Addressing the generalised lack of information is key to achieving a genuine democratic partnership .
Central to this proposal is the insistence that dialogue is reciprocal , that the opinions expressed need to be heeded and respected .
For this report , Ms Grabowska highlights both transparency and representativeness as essential components of active civil dialogue and a genuine participatory democracy .
A more open and accessible Council , increased and more integrated inter-institutional cooperation , better use of new media as a means to connect with citizens and providing assistance to civil society institutions will help bring Europe closer together .
For these reasons , I support Ms Grabowska 's report .
in writing . - We support any and all efforts to empower citizens , communities and civil society organisations with regard to political decision-making processes , including the EU .
However , we do not believe that the Lisbon Treaty provides any real advance in this field .
Furthermore we believe that for the proposed Citizens Initiative to be meaningful , the Commission should be under a legally binding obligation to produce a White Paper outlining a response to the proposal , or the Treaty basis for not taking action .
This report is yet another one which goes against the majority of the European Parliament in its efforts to try and ' sell ' the Treaty of Lisbon project at any cost , a task which has not proved easy , judging by the results of previous referendums .
These repeated efforts have at least one merit : they clearly show how difficult and even painful it is for the Treaty 's advocates to find arguments to promote it .
No propaganda exists - and this is the subject of the report - which can disguise the anti-democratic nature of the insistence by the EU 's leaders on forcing another referendum in Ireland in order to impose this proposed Treaty .
We do not share the narrow view of those who consider that developing a ' civil dialogue ' or a ' citizens ' initiative ' is sufficient to counteract the nature of a proposal which , as a whole , prevents the citizens of each Member State from defining their collective future , and which insists on measures resulting in precarious jobs , increased working hours , easier redundancies and the privatisation of public services .
No propaganda exists which can conceal the neoliberal , federalist and militarist content of this Treaty project .
That is why we have voted against .
Mrs Grabrowska 's report recommends permanent dialogue between all the European institutions and the ' representatives ' from civil society to define policies and draw up legislation at EU level , in other words a formal , compulsory organisation of participatory ' democracy ' at Union level .
The trouble is , participatory ' democracy ' is merely a front for those who reject true democracy : it allows dialogue to be restricted to the most active organisations , which are rarely the most representative , and it appears to test citizens ' views in advance , the better to be able to refuse to consult them properly later on .
If the Europe of Brussels wishes to hear the citizens , let it take note of the French and Dutch ' no ' to the European Constitution and abandon the Treaty of Lisbon , which is a mere copy of the Constitution .
If opinion polls ought to be taken into account , as the rapporteur would like , put a stop to the negotiations for Turkey 's membership , because the majority of Europe 's citizens oppose it .
If it is right to respect the principle that decisions should be taken as close as possible to the citizens , let Europe cease to rule over our daily lives .
Then it would have some credibility when it spoke of democracy .
in writing . - ( SV ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Grabowska on the perspectives for developing civil dialogue under the Treaty of Lisbon .
I believe that it is important to strengthen the dialogue with civil society in order to create an EU that listens to and represents the views of its citizens .
I also agree with the demands in the report for work in the Council to be more open in order to enable civil society to participate in the dialogue in a meaningful way .
However , I believe that the inclusion of the Treaty of Lisbon was unnecessary , as it is no longer relevant after the Irish ' no ' vote in the referendum .
It is also wrong for churches and religious communities to be given a special status among civil society organisations .
Churches and religious communities should take part in the dialogue with the Union 's institutions in the same way as all the other organisations .
I agree with the report on the perspectives for developing civil dialogue under the Treaty of Lisbon .
I consider civil dialogue to be very important , so that the citizens of the EU can gain an insight into the areas of activity of their elected representatives .
I should like to highlight the comment that dialogue between the EU and the Union citizens should be a two-way dialogue , because it is not enough to inform our home countries about the implementation of projects ; we also have to listen to individual people and take their opinion seriously .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Treaty of Lisbon has not been adopted .
It was rejected by the voters of Ireland in a referendum and therefore must be considered dead .
What was , essentially , the same draft treaty had already been rejected in referendums in France and the Netherlands .
However , the European Parliament 's federalist majority is unwilling to listen , insisting , instead , on a Union that is governed to an even greater extent at the supranational level , despite the fact that its citizens have shown their scepticism in multiple referendums and that , given the chance , they would show this scepticism in even more countries , too .
The way of working demonstrated by the European Parliament 's federalist majority shows what sort of a civil dialogue it is that they want .
They only want to listen to those parts of civil society that fit into the federalist mould .
Outside the legislative procedure , the report we have before us is not particularly impressive .
Paragraph 9 of the report states that all EU institutions should maintain up-to-date registers of all relevant non-governmental organisations .
This entails an unnecessary increase in bureaucracy that leads nowhere .
Furthermore , paragraph 11 of the report talks about promoting an ' actively European mindset ' among EU citizens .
How would this mindset be defined ?
However , the worst aspect of the report is the call , in paragraph 22 , to give European associations and European civil society organisations a shared legal basis at EU level .
This proposal is yet another step towards constructing an EU state .
I have therefore voted against this report .
It may sound really nice to talk of a public debate on the Treaty of Lisbon in all the languages .
Despite all the camouflage manoeuvres , the people have understood full well that a treaty that is 95 % in keeping with the rejected EU Constitution is no Columbus 's egg , even if the EU establishment is trying to market it as such .
It is also interesting , given that we want to conduct this dialogue in all the languages , that we are not even in a position to ensure that the President-in-Office of the Council has an integrated website in the most widely spoken languages in the Union , namely English , French and German .
We must also look particularly ridiculous to our citizens in praising the new civil initiatives provided for in the Constitution as a step towards more democracy , given that referendums are being repeated until the result wanted by the EU is obtained .
As this initiative can only be yet another pure pro-EU-Constitution campaign , on which enough money has already been spent , I voted against the Grabowska report .
I voted in favour of this report as civil society plays an important role in Europe in the European integration process , by passing on the opinions and requests of EU citizens to Europe 's institutions .
For the European Union to be able to achieve its aims and objectives , it needs a broader public debate , a more effective civil dialogue and development of political awareness , all aspects recognised in this report .
The report also highlights the importance of the expertise which civil society makes available to institutions and emphasises the role and significance of functions for informing and raising awareness involved in civil dialogue .
I hope that the EU 's current initiatives , which promote greater involvement by civil society in the European integration process , will continue in the future as well .
I am referring in this instance to initiatives such as Europe by Satellite , Citizens ' Agora and other citizen forums on various topics .
I hope that this report will encourage the European Union 's Council to facilitate and simplify access to its proceedings , as this is a basic condition for initiating a proper dialogue with civil society .
Ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the fact that the report draws attention to the need for social dialogue at a time when European countries are experiencing a democratic crisis .
People either do not understand or are not interested in topics unrelated to their everyday concerns .
The low turnout in European elections is a logical consequence of the fact that European citizens do not know what positive contribution European legislation can make to them and they do not believe their vote can have any influence .
It is little known that the Lisbon Treaty strengthens participatory democracy .
I agree with Mrs Grabowska that the Member States should provide more fundamental support to non-governmental organisations .
However , it is necessary to ensure that they are representative and transparent .
I have backed the report also because it includes a request for the Commission to publish lists of the non-governmental organisations that have applied its proposals during the legislative preparations .
This will certainly reduce the anonymity of the whole process and contribute towards the non-governmental organisations being more representative .
I also take the view that the election campaign for the European Parliament provides a great opportunity for responsible MEPs to explain what decisions we make in Strasbourg , how civil society participates in our work and how it will be able to participate following adoption of the Lisbon Treaty .
The Lisbon Treaty accords dialogue with citizens the status of an imperative .
This is binding on all EU policies and spheres of activity .
The success of dialogue depends on representativeness , and therefore on the strong commitment of key entities .
National , regional and local authorities should use the method of dialogue , so that citizens can experience participatory democracy working in practice .
It should be admitted that the European Union has a lot of ground to make up in the area of communication , and indeed especially in the area of dialogue with citizens .
The citizens of the EU must be sure that no decisions at European level will be made without their involvement , and that by voting in elections they will have a real influence on the form of those decisions .
I fully support the call by the rapporteur to encourage the promotion of initiatives in the area of dialogue with citizens .
in writing . - It is premature to be talking about what will happen once the Lisbon treaty comes into effect .
The treaty remains in limbo and is still subject to a possible second ' no ' vote by Irish citizens in another referendum later this year .
While this remains the case , we should not be acting as if the Lisbon treaty is already in force .
Doing so lays us wide open to accusations of arrogance and contempt for the democratic process , which must still be concluded one way or another .
Furthermore , I am not in favour of EU funds being spent on promoting the Lisbon treaty through civil dialogue or any other means .
We have free media and vigorous democracies in the Member States and are quite capable of conducting this debate on our own terms without the Commission trying to influence matters .
In fact , in my country , the UK , the Commission 's attempts to promote further EU integration tends to be counterproductive .
I , like other British Conservatives , want to see the European Union going in a different direction by doing less and doing it better .
I therefore voted against this report .
The Grabowska report is yet another example of the scandalous way in which this Parliament handles the principles it claims to serve .
' Dialogue with the citizen in the framework of the Treaty of Lisbon ' : what a joke !
The Treaty of Lisbon , which is the ex-European Constitution in disguise , was consigned to the waste paper bin in referendums in the Netherlands and in France , and subsequently also in Ireland .
Other countries dare not even organise a referendum .
If it is dialogue with the citizen that Europe is after , then it should start respecting democracy .
If the outcome of a referendum is not to the liking of the Eurocratic nomenclatures , this does not necessarily mean that the voting public is lacking in brain cells .
The reverse is true !
At any rate , I emphatically voted against this report again .
Nec spe , nec metu or without hope or fear .
The European authorities must be open to dialogue and cooperation with the citizens and with organisations from civil society .
Anyone may contribute to the common good .
However , particular interest groups , lobbies that do not represent the common good , should not be allowed to infiltrate the legislative process under the guise of a dialogue with civil society .
Access to the dialogue must be equitable .
I insist that dialogue should be especially with associations that give a voice to the poorest individuals and families .
The fight against extreme poverty and social inequalities will have no lasting success without a permanent dialogue with the families and individuals who experience extreme poverty in their daily lives .
This dialogue is difficult but also a necessity .
The European , national , regional and local authorities cannot take the easy route when we are building an inclusive society and a Europe for all .
In terms of best practice , we should recognise the work of the European Economic and Social Committee and the International Movement ATD Fourth World which , since 1989 , have been organising European sessions of Fourth World People 's Universities , which allow structured dialogue between representatives of the authorities and people with direct experience of extreme poverty .
in writing . - I abstained on this vote because , although I and the UK Independence Party fully support equality between men and women , the UK already has equality legislation which can be changed or improved when required by our own democratically elected and accountable Parliament .
The EU is anti-democratic and undemocratic and is not a legitimate guardian of anyone 's rights .
I endorse the Weiler report and express support for measures aimed at transposing the directive concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market .
The idea of creating a blacklist of unfair commercial practices , not only for business-to-consumer relations but also for business-to-business relations , is laudable .
I also support the mechanisms for monitoring and enforcement of the implementation of legal regulations in the area of consumer protection concerning unfair practices , and I support the initiative to open a publicly accessible database of national measures adopted in transposition of the Directive concerning unfair commercial practices .
From the point of view of the Polish and the European consumer , the initiative is valuable .
We abstained on the Weiler report on protecting consumers and companies against unfair practices and misleading advertising as we have major criticisms of it .
The first is that the European legislation on these issues is presented as a directive , in other words the Member States are relatively free in the resources they implement to achieve the objectives assigned to them .
The rapporteur 's wish for uniformity , both in the substance and in the form of national legislation , will remain a wish unless there is unacceptable interference by the European Union in the legal and administrative systems of the Member States , with no real benefit to consumers .
The second is that the main added value that the European Union brings to these areas is the help in resolving cross-border disputes .
This issue has not been properly resolved either in the current applicable texts or in those called for .
The main objective of this legislation should not be to exist per se but to protect consumers and companies .
The Directive concerning unfair commercial practices and the Directive concerning misleading and comparative advertising have immense significance in terms of giving consumers more confidence and ensuring legal certainty for businesses in the internal market .
This has particular significance in relation to cross-border transactions , which are increasingly common in the European market .
National consumer protection authorities are still encountering difficulties in taking appropriate action in the target country in the case of such transactions .
Proper transposition , implementation and enforcement of these directives are essential for achieving the goals of the directives .
Unfortunately , a number of Member States have not yet fulfilled this obligation , which does not contribute to the building of appropriate relationships between businesses and consumers .
In 2007 the European Commission used for the first time the ' EU Sweep ' as a tool to check and enforce the implementation of consumer protection legislation as regards airline websites .
Irregularities were confirmed on as many as 43.6 % of the websites reviewed , which only confirms the necessity of greater monitoring in relation to the enforcement of existing provisions .
I welcome the Commission 's initiative concerning the creation of a publicly accessible database of national measures adopted in transposition of these directives .
in writing . - The EU has made significant progress in improving consumers ' rights .
It is disappointing that some Member States have yet to transpose the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive ; and this House has today sent a clear message that those Member States should address this shortcoming .
We adopted an EU directive protecting consumers from unfair commercial practices and misleading advertising back in 2005 .
However , we still refuse to protect citizens from Internet callers , unwanted advertising calls and Scammer & Co .
Rip-off companies hide behind post office boxes , front men and name-changing .
If you manage to catch any of these companies , they are sentenced to ridiculously small fines , which have no deterrent effect whatsoever .
Fines here need to be drastically increased , especially for repeat offences .
It is important for customers who have been ripped off to be able to file a compensation claim , otherwise we are just hanging them out to dry .
The planned changes will improve the situation for consumers , which is why I voted in favour .
I welcome the debate on the report on the transposition , implementation and enforcement of Directive 2005 / 29 / EC concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market and Directive 2006 / 114 / EC concerning misleading and comparative advertising .
While these directives form the backbone of consumer protection in the EU , they must be consistently applied in the Member States , especially for Internet purchases .
The internal market must not be fragmented and businesses and consumers must come under the same rules and protection regardless of which Member State they are buying or selling in .
I must draw your attention to the fact that some Member States , including the Czech Republic , have been late in transposing the directives into their national legislation .
The most important thing now is whether the national supervisory authorities will actually force unfair businesses to put these rules into practice .
The post-Christmas sales provide an excellent opportunity for checking .
It is also necessary for European institutions to support greater cooperation between the national councils for radio and television broadcasting which have to monitor compliance with the directives in the mass media and it is in our interest for the supervision to be applied consistently across the entire EU .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting in favour of Mrs Weiler 's report on the transposition , implementation and enforcement of Directive 2005 / 29 / EC concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market and Directive 2006 / 114 / EC concerning misleading and comparative advertising .
I am firmly convinced that the proper implementation of the directive will make it possible for the public to be fully aware of their rights .
The extension of consumer rights through the Directive on unfair commercial practices must be backed by the measures required to facilitate the exercise of those rights .
I agree with the rapporteur when she states that appropriate transposition , implementation and enforcement of the Directives on unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices and on misleading and comparative advertising are of fundamental importance to the achievement of the aims laid down in the Directives , particularly in the light of the different application and implementation methods and systems used in the Member States , the complexity of some of the legal concepts contained in the Directives , the quantity and exhaustive nature of national standards governing unfair commercial practices and misleading advertising and also the extensive range of application of the Directive .
Lastly , I am delighted by my fellow Member 's initiative , the aim of which is the legal regulation of a topic that is of paramount importance to the Community .
I definitely endorse Barbara Weiler 's report on the transposition , implementation and enforcement of the Directive concerning unfair commercial practices in the internal market and the Directive concerning misleading and comparative advertising .
The issue of misleading and comparative advertising in business-to-business transactions has been regulated by the introduction of a single , consolidated directive .
The issue of unfair commercial practices in business-to-consumer relations has been regulated by Directive 2005 / 29 / EC .
The Directives were prepared to give consumers more confidence ( their protection has increased due to the drawing up of a ' blacklist ' of commercial practices which should be prohibited , and thanks to better harmonisation of the protection of consumers against unfair practices ) and also to provide businesses with greater legal certainty .
A greater degree of protection could have been achieved if the provisions of the Directive were accompanied by legal measures allowing effective enforcement .
Member States must therefore screen their legal systems and increase the clarity of the transposition process .
The changes introduced must be supported by clear procedures for implementation and effective measures for redress , which will give consumers the right to bring claims for damages for losses incurred in connection with unfair commercial practices , like the mechanisms for monitoring consumer protection in relation to airline websites first used in 2007 .
At the Member State level awareness campaigns and campaigns which improve levels of consumer education on the subject of consumer rights and their use should be considered .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted against the report on the ecosystem approach to fisheries management .
We believe that the report does not make it clear that the fisheries policy must be devised with environmental and sustainability criteria as the starting point .
In addition , the report focuses far too much on holding back on the necessary reforms of the fisheries policy and protects the interests of the large-scale fishing industry .
Summarised very briefly , this own-initiative report of the European Parliament aims to integrate the Community requirements for the conservation of the marine environment with the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) , which has , as one of its operational objectives , the gradual application of an ecosystem approach to fisheries management .
The fundamental points of this report that I should like to highlight are the fact that it considers that the present system of total allowable catches and quotas does not serve the aims of the reformed CFP , having proven inadequate for both the Community fisheries sector and the conservation of stocks .
Alternative management systems should be quickly established and , against this backdrop , I consider that the EU should be swifter in discussing alternative approaches , given that some , such as management based on fishing rights ( for example ) , form the cornerstone in countries such as the United States , New Zealand , Norway and Iceland , all with a strong tradition and great potential in the fisheries sector .
Reformulating the recovery plan for hake and lobster is another fundamental point which should be considered .
I voted in favour of this report .
Although I do not agree with the whole content of the adopted resolution , it does contain a series of important objectives and principles that should prevail in a fisheries policy .
It will be particularly important to reaffirm and defend these objectives and principles ( as the Portuguese Communist Party ( PCP ) has consistently done ) , many of which are not respected by the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) ( even though some are included in it ) , when the European Commission announces the presentation , next April , of a green paper on the future of the common fisheries policy , indicating a possible reform of this policy by 2012 .
Given the objectives and intentions which have been set out by the European Commission and other EU institutions on the future of the fishing industry , this sector in Portugal - which is in deep crisis , the causes of which lie in the onerous policies followed for decades at national and Community level - should be alert to and should mobilise against new and even more onerous measures .
If adopted and applied , these would bring about the destruction of a large part of this strategic sector , with negative consequences for Portugal .
Such a policy is not a foregone conclusion .
There are alternative policies for the fishing industry in Portugal .
These are policies which the PCP has been proposing and defending at both national level and in the European Parliament .
in writing . - I voted in favour of Mr Guerreiro 's report .
The report correctly notes that EU fisheries policy should promote the modernisation and sustainable development of the fishing industry , safeguarding its socio-economic viability and the sustainability of fisheries resources , and guaranteeing the supply of fish to the public and food sovereignty and security , the preservation of jobs and improved living conditions for fishermen .
This is the opposite of what the CFP has achieved over the last three decades , and accordingly I support the repatriation of fisheries management .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Guerreiro 's report on the CFP ( common fisheries policy ) and the ecosystem approach to fisheries management .
It is of fundamental importance not to confuse sea or ocean policy with fishing policy : I totally agree with the rapporteur on this score .
A fishing policy must be based on the principle that an interdependence exists between the wellbeing of the fishing community and the sustainability of the ecosystems of which they form an integral part , particularly by acknowledging the specific nature and importance of small-scale coastal fishing and artisanal fishing .
I also agree with my fellow Member when he states that the main and paramount task of fisheries management , as an activity involving the exploitation of a renewable resource , is to control ( directly or indirectly ) the total fishing effort in order to guarantee the maximum sustainable catch .
If we adopt this approach , we will take a further step towards achieving the goals laid down by the European Union .
In this case also , the final compromise has ended up taking into account several of the criticisms that we made about the initial proposal , specifically with regard to reduction indicators and targets , measures and timetables to reduce the risks and dangers associated with pesticides and the dependency on pesticides .
In our opinion , it is more reasonable not to quantify these targets from the outset , so as not to create ever more obstacles to small-scale agriculture .
We also welcome the fact that the exemption from mandatory inspection of the equipment and accessories covered by the Commission 's initial proposal is maintained and that the mandatory inspection of everything , including equipment and accessories used on small-scale family-based holdings , has been dropped .
We consider that this differentiation - in practice and in principle - between family-based holdings and intensive agro-industry should be present in all decisions .
Incidentally , it should always be remembered that it was not family-based holdings and the non-intensive method of production which led to BSE , dioxins , nitrofurans and other food disasters ...
That is why we voted in favour of the compromise .
I agree with the rapporteur and congratulate her on the final report .
The entry into force of this directive will be extremely important in terms of increasing pressure for the urgent amendment of the pesticide risk reduction policy , which in the EU has been characterised by a certain lack of information and inspection of practices and products .
To protect human health and the environment , it is vital to help change the approach to agricultural pesticides .
This document is fundamental because it lays down rules on informing and training people who use pesticides and requires the inspection of equipment .
It also prohibits aerial spraying ( permitted in cases of absolute necessity and where there are no alternatives ) .
Another positive aspect is the possibility for each Member State to define protection areas and risk areas .
I abstained from voting on the ' pesticides package ' to protest against this anti-democratic method of submitting compromises to the European Parliament negotiated in informal trialogues between the Council , the Commission and representatives of the European Parliament , which are based solely on compromises reached in a single parliamentary committee .
In fact , by dispensing with proper democratic debate during a first reading , not only is every Member 's right to make amendments removed but this also produces European legislation which is conceived in defiance of any democratic transparency .
In addition , the legislation finally adopted is in many ways excessive , bureaucratic and counter-productive .
Madam President , I consider the adopted reports on pesticides and plant protection products to be the best we could achieve , as well as realistic and fruitful , and that is why I gave them my support .
Although at the last moment in plenary some Members tabled amendments that they thought would have ensured that the legislation was founded on stronger scientific evidence , at the same time allowing the possibility of derogations for individual Member States , it was clear to the majority that it would be audacious to start disregarding the outcome of negotiations between Parliament and the Council , even if the amendments were valid .
It was the report on the placing of plant protection products on the market that particularly aroused passions .
Differing national interests and approaches and the consensus that was absent in the Council were reflected in the mood of Parliament .
The debate was a heated one within our group too .
Nevertheless , the feedback from stakeholders in the sector shows that the legislation is consistent and will enable the realisation of the EU-wide targets set for them to improve and protect both the environment and public health .
Impact studies carried out by French technical institutes and centres show that the draft revision of the European directive on pesticides could lead to the disappearance of many products currently on the market .
It is important that this draft gives farmers in the Union the means to protect their crops .
Without this , crop production will fall off markedly and there could also be a noticeable impact on livestock production .
Entire agricultural sectors could be condemned in France and in Europe and the very role of agriculture , which is to feed our citizens with healthy and varied produce , would be threatened .
Without questioning the need to protect consumers and users , the new regulation must not threaten innovation or the diversity of chemical families .
It must therefore immediately include alternative solutions .
This is the only solution to avoid the migration of a large amount of agricultural production and the jobs and wealth that go with it .
Faced with these crucial challenges for farmers , as the producers of vegetables , fruit and cereals , we need to remain vigilant in the face of the current reforms and the measures taken to apply them at national level .
I voted in favour of both the compromises reached in the difficult trialogue negotiations between Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
Pesticides are unavoidable in modern farming .
They guarantee optimal use of farmland in Europe , thereby ensuring a high standard of food production .
I am , of course , satisfied that account has been taken of my resolution adopted in November , so that particular care must be taken when licensing pesticides which are toxic for bees to ensure that pesticides which are proven to harm bees are not licensed .
The objective is efficiency , which means as much as necessary and as little as possible .
A linear reduction in the number of products would be insane .
Farmers need sufficient different products , if only to prevent resistance from building up .
I still of course have concerns about the actual effects of the regulation on agriculture , viniculture and horticulture in terms of their supply with pesticides and the prices of them and we are still in the dark as to the effects on the industrial sectors affected .
A follow-up assessment here is indispensable .
I am delighted that Luxembourg now lies in the same zone as Belgium and Germany , with farmers and vine-growers able to use the same products on either side of the border .
The problem with France must be solved with understanding .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report presented by Mrs Klaß on the framework directive for the sustainable use of pesticides .
I am fully in agreement with the adoption of the European Parliament and Council directive .
The aim of the directive is to reduce the impact of pesticides on human health and the environment : a quantitative reduction in pesticide use should therefore be one of the practical aims , to be achieved by specifically setting targets and implementing national action plans .
Controls must also be much more restrictive in order to fully protect public health .
I also believe that the labels placed on such products should be clear and comprehensible to all so that implications associated with the use of each individual element are known .
Yesterday I mentioned during the debate that I consider the present compromise to be an honourable one and that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance in the European Parliament will be endorsing it .
I wish to stress , however , that , in order to reach agreement with the farming lobby and the pesticides industry , we had to make a few concessions .
I still regret the fact that we dropped the 50 % objective .
As a result , everything is left to the ambitions of the individual Member States .
It is perfectly possible for Member States not to be too ambitious , which can lead to too much reserve .
In addition , the result achieved in relation to the establishment of buffer zones adjacent to waterways has been moderated .
This , too , is now being left to the Member States .
A European minimum distance would have been preferable from an environmental and public health point of view .
What is positive , though , is that public places frequented by vulnerable groups ( parks , sports and recreational areas , schools and suchlike ) will be better protected .
This area had already received attention in Flanders and is now set to receive attention from all the governments of Europe .
in writing . - This legislation has the EU written all over it - a classic case of using a sledgehammer to crack a nut .
Its effect on farmers and horticulture businesses in north-east England , the region I represent , will be considerable .
Undoubtedly , businesses will shed jobs and even cease trading altogether .
Undoubtedly , our hard-pressed farmers will be faced with yet more bureaucratic headaches .
Undoubtedly , agricultural yields will go down .
The fact that we are also debating global food security this week is therefore richly ironic .
Pesticides are essential for growing food , and they are already subject to a stringent safety regime .
No-one disputes the importance of protecting the environment but this legislation is unbalanced .
It is overly prescriptive and lacks flexibility .
The Commission has failed to carry out a sufficiently comprehensive and up-to-date impact assessment study .
For these reasons I voted against this proposal .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have today voted in favour of Mrs Breyer 's report on the placing of plant protection products on the market .
The regulation , which seeks to improve both food safety and the impact on the environment of plant protection products , is sound and important .
Since its first reading in the European Parliament , analyses have shown there to be a risk of the regulation being extremely far-reaching and inflexible , and it may make the commercial-scale cultivation of common crops ( carrots and onions , for example ) impossible in Sweden .
The situation is not improved by the fact that the impact assessments of the rules differ in respect of important conclusions , for example between those of the Swedish Chemicals Inspectorate and its British equivalent , the Pesticides Safety Directorate .
We regret the fact that in this second reading in Parliament there has been no opportunity to vote for clarification of this , but we would point out , at the same time , that the adopted text contains improvements on that from Parliament 's first reading .
We would have liked to have seen the agreement reached between the European Parliament and the Council taken into account , which would have the effect of clarifying the regulation so that dangerous use would be more clearly prohibited while plant protection that is necessary , responsible and safe - which is now at risk of being prohibited - would continue to be permitted .
The compromise that has finally been reached in the European Parliament represents a climbdown from the maximalist proposals that were made on the elimination of active substances , particularly from the negative implications that these proposals would have had with regard to insecticides and pesticides .
This is particularly true in countries such as Portugal , which is seriously affected by certain insect pests on fruit and vegetable crops , potatoes and olives and by certain diseases such as pinewood nematode and chestnut blight , and where , not least due to the lack of effective plant protection campaigns , these pests and diseases are causing serious damage , particularly to family-based holdings .
Although we have many doubts about certain specific aspects of the compromise , such as the issues of non-chemical methods of control or prevention , and of pest and crop management , we feel it is correct to apply the principle of mutual recognition of plant protection product authorisations and the creation of zones encompassing regions with similar soil and climate characteristics .
However , we insist on the need for studies to give us a true picture of the consequences of these measures on productivity and , as a result , on farmers ' incomes , so that this cost can be shared by the whole of society , given that we are talking about environmental and food safety requirements .
in writing . - I voted against the amendments to the Breyer report .
There has been a degree of unnecessary scaremongering in Britain about this report meaning ' the end of conventional agriculture as we know it ' .
This is not the position taken by farmers in other Member States .
Nevertheless , the real impact is unclear with the failure to provide a satisfactory impact assessment on the proposal in its current form .
I therefore support the idea of a derogation post 2015 when current authorisations lapse in the event of any Member State having serious concerns about the availability of a pesticide having serious effects on crop yields .
This document will help to harmonise the legislation on pesticides .
I agree with the report adopted , particularly because the application of the principle of mutual recognition of plant protection product authorisations will end the competitive imbalances that exist between different Member States ( with different sizes of market ) and will especially reduce environmental and food safety concerns .
The creation of three zones encompassing regions with similar soil and climate characteristics is very positive .
There would be a risk in lumping together completely different situations .
The issue of endocrine disrupting substances has , in my view , a fundamental basis : the proposed text is based on scientific opinion .
The problem with endocrine disrupting substances is that , unlike carcinogens or mutagens , they do not have toxicological parameters , but produce a variety of effects ranging from minor hormone imbalances to genital malformations and / or cancer .
It is important to regulate substances which have a proven adverse effect on human health .
The regulation has a triple legal basis ( agriculture , internal market and public health ) which , in my opinion , is very positive .
In recent years the Union has constantly increased the limit values and a reduction was therefore long overdue .
That pesticides which are hugely harmful to health can finally be banned is progress , although there is still far too little research here .
The cumulative use of pesticides , which can be used to circumvent the limit values specified , still gives cause for concern .
We still know far too little about the possible interactions and legal specifications here are overdue .
The extent to which documentation and traceability are really effective is open to doubt .
The meat scandals in recent years show quite clearly how easy label fraud is .
Last but not least there is still the problem that , although we may impose pesticide specifications on our producers and farmers , we then import products from countries with laxer requirements .
The Chinese toy episode should be a lesson to us .
The planned regulations are a step in the right direction , which is why I voted for them , but far more is needed .
in writing . - I voted against the conclusions and recommendations of the Trialogue between Council , Commission and Parliament because :
this legislation was to be passed in too much haste , because both Parliament and Commission finish their terms of office this coming summer which is not a sufficient reason to legislate in a hurry ;
there has been no Impact Assessment of the proposals ;
the recommendations are not based on sound science , but more on emotional fears about the causes for the alarming worldwide disappearance of honey-bees and on fears about human health ;
the farmers whom I represent in Lincolnshire and in the East Midlands unanimously asked me to resist the proposals , and being practical people who grow our food their opinions should be respected .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report presented by Mrs Breyer on the placing of plant protection products on the market .
I agree with the purposes and goals , which are to ensure a high level of protection for human health and the environment .
The European Union has always placed particular emphasis on topics relating to the environment and this regulation is another strategy designed to achieve this aim .
I am also convinced that it is right to provide for experiments on animals to be kept to a minimum and carried out only in the event of absolute need and for the use of alternative methods to be promoted so that animals are spared needless suffering .
in writing . - I have decided to vote against this report for two reasons .
Firstly , we need to give our farmers the tools they need to do their job and this proposal will limit their ability greatly , especially for those farmers who work in damper and wetter climates and need to use pesticides to protect crops and their livelihood .
I am not aware of any farmer who wants to use pesticides , but they are an essential part of ensuring food for our population at an affordable price .
Secondly , no impact assessment has been done on this legislation which I find outrageous due to the serious implications it could have on the agriculture sector .
Yesterday I mentioned during the debate that I consider the present compromise to be an honourable one and that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance in the European Parliament will be endorsing it .
I wish to stress , however , that , in order to reach agreement with the farming lobby and the pesticides industry , we had to make a few concessions .
Whichever way you look at it , what was achieved in terms of the cut-off criteria is a watered-down result when compared to the EP 's position at first reading .
Derogation options were expressly created for 12 substances .
We also had our reservations with regard to the zonal approach .
The idea of three zones across such a vast expanse strikes us as problematic because the environmental circumstances within any of those zones can vary enormously .
What is positive , though , is that the legal basis is founded on agriculture , the internal market and public health , with the concern for public health being given top priority in the relevant recitals and in Article 1 .
Equally , the cut-off criteria for substances that have unacceptable effects on bees are a welcome addition .
The requirement to replace dangerous products with safe alternatives more quickly was also complied with .
Whilst the outcome could have been better , we voted on an acceptable compromise .
in writing . - I was disappointed to see the common position amended .
I would prefer the common position as it would give a better balance between public health and food production .
in writing . - The continued lack of a thorough impact assessment means that the EPLP is unable to support the compromise package negotiated between the Council and the European Parliament rapporteur , as there is no clear indication of its impact on food production .
Labour MEPs do wish to see better and safer pesticides , but we also have a responsibility to both producers and consumers to be sure what the eventual effects of the current proposals on agricultural production and food prices would be .
Whilst the deal certainly would not have the catastrophic effects that have been predicted in certain quarters , the uncertainty involved is great enough for the EPLP to be unable to support the compromise package .
in writing . - Today we have abstained from the vote on this plant protection legislation .
It is a very difficult vote .
We have been involved in all parts of the intense negotiations on this controversial package right up to this point .
The emphasis of this legislation is clearly on health and the links between chemical substances and cancer .
Farmers are most affected due to direct contact .
While this package seeks to limit the availability of carcinogens , Member States may allow substances on the market where there is a serious threat to plant health .
The proposal seeks to protect bees and reduce red tape for substance authorisation .
With a gradual withdrawal of substances until 2016 , we would urge industry to come up with biologically sound and effective products .
We cannot vote in favour of this legislation .
Despite repeated calls for a more recent impact assessment , none was forthcoming from the Commission .
We cannot legislate in the abstract !
Products will be banned based on hazard as opposed to scientific risk , which would be based on use and exposure .
In addition , the definition of " endocrine disruptor ” has not been agreed at scientific level and we have tabled amendments to await the opinion of Commission experts to address this .
With this text limiting the production and sale of pesticides , and the accompanying text setting out the framework for their use , Europe has finally achieved exemplary standards for pesticides .
Hiltrud Breyer 's report is on the right lines .
Whilst allowing low-risk products onto the market , it bans 22 substances deemed to be very harmful .
If we are to hope eventually for rational agriculture around the world , we must welcome this advance by the European Union .
European agriculture , which makes abundant use of plant protection products , will not be weakened .
However , with these texts , the EU will have the most rigorous legislation in the fight against toxic pesticides .
in writing . - The legislative regime for pan-European investment funds , Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities ( UCITS ) , has been subject to a considerable review .
These are formed of collective investment schemes , which , having obtained an authorisation in a Member State , are able to use this ' passport ' across the Union without the need for further examination .
In these times of generalised financial insecurity , the regulation of financial dealings must be fairly and consistently applied to bolster confidence in the sector .
Wolf Klinz 's report proposes the introduction of ' passports ' for management companies ( MC ) which are engaged by UCITS fund promoters .
This proposal allows for the cross-border management of funds without the current requisite for fully functioning management companies being set up .
It is vital that sufficient fund managers are available to maintain a proper watch on MC passports .
Mr Klinz has presented a compromise document that I can support .
UCITS ( Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities ) are a harmonised investment fund product that invest according to defined investment policies .
The UCITS framework Directive , to which the Klinz report refers , ensures cost transparency - and something which is particularly important at a time of economic and financial crisis in the EU - a high degree of investor protection .
The Directive sets basic requirements on the organisation , management and oversight of investment funds .
It is true that , in comparison with the American market , European investment funds are characterised by their small size , a consequence of which are the high costs for investors .
There is therefore a need to review the UCITS package , adapt it to investor needs and ensure the competitiveness of the EU fund industry .
The changes proposed by the rapporteur are primarily the introduction of new provisions concerning fund mergers ( so that they will be treated as domestic mergers and will retain tax-neutrality ) , the introduction of a document which provides key investor information ( replacing the simplified prospectus ) and simplification of the existing notification procedure by using direct regulator-to-regulator information exchange .
in writing . - ( SV ) We support the report , as we believe that sustainable public finances are very important .
However , we object to the wording in paragraph 8 , which states that a gradual and sharp reduction in the tax burden on mid to low-level salaries and pensions must be introduced , with tax deductions , revised tax rates and compensation for fiscal drag .
We believe that these are matters that should not be dealt with at EU level , but are issues that the Member States should decide on themselves .
The report on public finances in the Economic and Monetary Union ( EMU ) adopts the anti-labour decisions made by the Council and the Commission which are designed to strengthen the competitiveness of monopolies in order to safeguard the profits of capital and shift the burden of the deep capitalist crisis onto the workers ' shoulders .
The anti-grassroots framework shaped by the EU with the Stability Pact and the Lisbon Strategy for the Member States , especially those in the EMU , in order to exercise financial policy is being strengthened .
The European Parliament , like the Commission , is trying to contain the centrifugal trends and the logic of ' every man for himself ' by calling for even greater dedication to completing the internal market , harmonising taxes and strengthening competition and the rules of the market .
Criticism of the fact that the huge sums made available to deal with the crisis are not reaching small and medium-sized enterprises , let alone the workers , is misleading .
The outdated and failed models of state intervention to cover the shortcomings of the market are wishful thinking and an attempt to disorientate the workers by seeking social consent to a rotten system .
The only solution is for the workers to fight for grassroots power and a grassroots economy to overturn capitalist barbarity .
It is actually quite interesting that the report recognises that the analysis of the public financial situation in 2007 and the first part of 2008 ' clearly shows a change in the economic trend and the looming prospect of a slowdown in the economy and growth , coupled with a continued lower rate of inflation and increasing income disparities ' .
However , to tackle the crisis , it then fundamentally sets out the same recipes that led to the current situation , instead of taking advantage of this opportunity to propose changes to the neoliberal and monetarist policies that have contributed to the current serious social situation of increasing inequality , unemployment , precarious and poorly paid work , and poverty .
It therefore insists on price stability and the Stability and Growth Pact , albeit with a degree of flexibility , and on the Lisbon Strategy , which , as we know , has been used as a pretext in order to pursue privatisation and remove responsibility for social functions from the state .
This approach also involves the idea of the minimal state and the greater efficiency of the private sector , with the aim of imposing acceptance of so-called wage restraint , which actually results in a loss of purchasing power for wages .
That is why we have voted against .
What I take from Mrs Gottardi 's report on public finances is that it has learned no lessons from the world crisis .
Mrs Gottardi qualifies as ' market failure ' and ' insufficient supervision ' what is in reality the failure of a system which , for years , has been imposed upon us : that of deregulation , of extreme world-wide free market philosophy , of absurd financialisation of the economy , where the market rules and is supposedly self-regulating .
The vague cosmetic touch-ups decided on at the G20 or in Brussels will not fundamentally change the situation .
We need to call into question the economic dogmas to which we are still subject .
The crisis has shown that complete freedom of movement for goods , services , capital and people leads not to prosperity but to catastrophe .
It has also shown that the Nation-State is the appropriate and effective level for decision , action and reaction , even if Mr Sarkozy felt he had to be accompanied everywhere by Mr Barroso to make people believe that the European Union was useful in this situation .
In this context , the rapporteur 's good advice on the management of public finances and her call for compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact are , unfortunately , of little use .
in writing . - We welcome some of the positive elements of this report , and in particular the recognition of the need to spread the tax burden more fairly , the importance of public expenditure and sound economic governance .
However I abstained in the vote because of the report 's adherence to the flawed Lisbon Strategy , emphasis on competitiveness , support for flexicurity and the implicit threat to pension schemes , public health and long-term care under the guise of ' structural reform ' .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Security features and biometrics in passports and travel documents ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2252 / 2004 on standards for security features and biometrics in passports and travel documents issued by Member States - C6-0359 / 2007 - .

Mr President , Mr Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal we are discussing today is aimed at changing the regulations approved in 2004 , which improved and harmonised the security regulations relating to the protection of EU citizens ' passports and travel documents against fraudulent use , at the same time as it introduced elements of biometric identification .
Contrary to the procedure in 2004 , we are now in codecision .
I want to thank the French Presidency and Commissioner Barrot for the enormous commitment they have made in this case with a view to reaching agreement at first reading .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their work and their cooperation , which have been indispensable in obtaining this result .
This solution was necessary , if we bear in mind that this regulation came into force in 2004 , and as from June this year at the latest , all the Member States would have to collect the fingerprints of children from birth .
However , according to the existing studies resulting from pilot projects conducted in several Member States , it is very difficult to take or even rely on fingerprints of children under six years of age .
It is true that the national legislature could create derogations from this obligation .
However , that would mean that up to the age limit for which that exemption was granted only temporary passports could be issued .
It would be an excessive burden for parents to have to obtain a passport for each of their children whenever they wanted to travel outside the Schengen area .
We therefore succeeded in reaching an agreement stipulating a period of four years during which the age limit will be set at 12 years , with an escape clause which should allow those States which have already adopted legislation enshrining a lower limit to apply this , provided that limit is not lower than six years .
A revision clause was also expected , taking into account the results of the study which we requested the Commission to carry out concerning the credibility of children 's fingerprints , stipulating that the age limit will be definitively set and harmonised for all the Member States in four years ' time .
A second derogation was introduced relating to persons who , for various reasons , are physically unable to provide fingerprints .
The International Civil Aviation Organization 's ' one person-one passport ' recommendation was also accepted .
As the European Data Protection Supervisor said , it is a further benefit in the fight against child trafficking .
With the goal of protecting children , we also obtained an interinstitutional agreement , concluded between the three institutions , to develop a common position on the adoption of the necessary rules to protect children against abduction and trafficking .
The respective initiatives should be introduced by the Commission within the framework of the respective area of civil law .
I must confess that we are struggling with the issue of the Union 's reduced competence in this matter : the issuing of passports is a national prerogative and the European Union can only intervene with regard to the reinforcement of biometric data in passports and travel documents , with the aim of improving the security of those documents within the framework of border control .
I have to say that we have established rules that safeguard the exercise of the Community competence , determining which types of data will be included - fingerprints and photographs - and also the limits on the use that will be made of them .
They may only be used for the purposes provided for in this regulation - border control - and to verify the authenticity of the document and ascertain whether whoever carries it is or is not its legitimate bearer .
We also reached agreement on two studies : one on the so-called ' breeder documents ' , to guarantee that the documents which enable passports to be issued deserve the same trust as the passport we want to safeguard , and another on data matching in border controls , in order to be able to study the false rejection rates .
As a result of these studies , and bearing in mind the four-year revision clause , at some point the necessary changes should be introduced through a codecision procedure , without forgetting that it is important to consult the European Data Protection Supervisor , a rule which was unfortunately not taken into account when drafting this proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I firstly wish to thank the chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
I also wish to warmly thank the rapporteur , Carlos Coelho , for his remarkable report and also for the excellent cooperation maintained with the Commission on a delicate and sensitive issue .
The Commission proposal is to introduce harmonised exceptions to the requirement to collect fingerprints , so that all European citizens receive equal treatment .
In addition , the Commission wanted to protect children from human trafficking by making the internationally recognised principle of ' one person-one passport ' legally binding .
I welcome the European Parliament 's efforts to achieve an agreement on this proposal at first reading on the inclusion of fingerprints in passports issued by Member States by 28 June 2009 at the latest .
Had an agreement not been found , everyone would have been obliged to provide fingerprints , including the new-born , whenever they travelled abroad with a passport .
I , therefore , truly wish to express the Commission 's satisfaction with the negotiated compromise proposal .
Now the Commission will set about the task of the report requested and required by the European Parliament as efficiently as possible .
I do not think I need to go on further .
I will now listen with interest to the contributions from the Members and I again thank your rapporteur , Carlos Coelho , who has done an excellent job .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I am happy to support the proposals presented today .
I believe there is an urgent need to create a common set of standards for the verification of biometric data .
Colleagues may not be aware that at present there are wide discrepancies between countries as to how rigorously , for example , they verify passport photographs .
Many countries require that the citizen applying for a passport actually present him or herself in person , together with their documents and photographs , and in these cases the officials at the passport-issuing office can see if that person bears a resemblance to the photo presented .
However , in some countries - maybe most notably in the United Kingdom - applications by post are the norm , and the authenticity of the photo is only confirmed by a so-called ' professional person ' who has known the applicant for at least two years .
The list of persons eligible to do this in the United Kingdom makes for fairly interesting reading .
This verification can be made by your optician or your dentist , but also by a professional photographer or a fire service official - no disrespect to members of these professions .
It is also interesting that fairly lax rules on verification exist in the United States .
Verifications of photos for passports for first-time applicants can be carried out at so-called ' acceptable facilities ' .
In fact , this means the staff at the local post office .
It seems incredible for such a security-conscious country , whose citizens enjoy visa-free travel to Europe , to have such a system of verification .
So , in order to make passports secure , we really need to bring in much more reliable biometric data , namely fingerprints .
We also need to ensure that the agency responsible for their collection and verification complies with the same standards , not only within the EU but also in those nations whose citizens do enjoy visa-free travel to Europe , to assure us that they too are meeting the same stringent requirements as are our citizens here in Europe .
Mr President , when the regulation on security features and the inclusion of biometric details in European passports was adopted in 2004 , the Member States did not envisage any derogation from the obligation to provide fingerprints .
Current experience shows that the existing technology still does not ensure that the fingerprints of children under the age of 12 are reliable enough to allow them to be used as a security feature in passports .
I therefore welcome the compromise found with the Member States to set 12 as the age limit for the collection of biometric data , and which includes a clause for revision in three years .
On our side , we have accepted this derogation for those Member States that have already adopted legislation for children over the age of six .
The use of this type of data would only be acceptable if it truly offered protection to our children .
That is not yet the case .
We remain , however , open to any positive changes in the technology in this field .
Our priority is to ensure the safety of children travelling alone to avoid kidnapping and trafficking of children .
The inclusion of this data in passports gives a false sense of security as it does not prevent a child from crossing a border without parental consent .
The compromise found with the Member States will allow the Commission to present a report on the requirements for minors travelling alone across external borders .
This report will thus allow initiatives to be proposed that will guarantee a European approach to the rules protecting minors when they cross external borders of the Member States .
Finally , the biometric data in passports must only be used to verify the authenticity of the document and the use of sensitive personal data such as biometric details is only acceptable in conjunction with strict data protection rules .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I wish to congratulate our rapporteur , Carlos Coelho , and the former French Presidency which , as expected , is not with us , for bringing about an agreement at first reading .
It required the will to do it plus the ability to accept the compromise required .
I have a special word of congratulation for Mr Coelho , our rapporteur , because his explanatory statement , which I invite my colleagues to read , is a little gem of intelligence and political skill .
Proper analysis of the text before us will reveal a major principle , which is also this report 's revolutionary principle .
This revolutionary principle has nothing to do with biometric data .
That was decided in 2004 .
The principle is that of ' one person-one passport ' .
This raises the issue of children , and the age at which children 's fingerprints can be taken .
Let us not hide the fact that the compromise was extremely difficult .
Some , like Mr Coelho at the outset , wanted this to be at the earliest possible age , to give children the earliest possible protection .
Yet this would require reliable biometric data , which at the moment cannot be guaranteed .
Finally , the following compromise has been achieved : children 's fingerprints are obligatory from the age of 12 .
Those States that collect them earlier may continue to do so for four years , but in no case will the age limit be less than six and the Commission will , in coming years , report on an assessment of the system as it is operating and , if need be , and this is included in the text , any modifications .
We must therefore hope for major progress in the technology , because the ideal for child protection would be to have reliable , comparable biometric data as soon as possible .
With this in mind , we can register our agreement with this text , which I again welcome , and I congratulate the rapporteur , the Commission for its initial proposal and the Council for its sense of compromise .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on the excellent job he has done .
As the rapporteur for the EU strategy on the rights of the child , it falls to me to stress certain important points in Mr Coelho 's report , even though other fellow Members have already done so .
Firstly , the principle of guaranteeing a common approach to regulations protecting children who cross our external borders is very welcome .
Secondly , the principle of ' one person-one passport ' is important , because it directly links the biometric data to the document holder .
This does away with all the procedures currently in use that allow for children to be added to their parents ' passports .
This practice makes it much more difficult and unreliable to check the identity of the child , making it easier to snatch children involved in disputes and also to trade and exploit children .
Thirdly , the report also envisages that the Commission will submit a report examining the technical feasibility of using fingerprints for the purposes of identifying children under the age of 12 .
It is very important to work to improve the system and ensure its reliability , particularly for child protection .
I will conclude by saying that in my opinion it will be extremely helpful in future to identify the most sophisticated , appropriate and safe technical methods to record and thus categorically certify the identity and age of a child as early as is feasible , from birth if possible .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank Mr Coelho for his excellent work .
Although we all have different political opinions , he did his best in order to achieve a compromise .
The Verts / ALE Group strongly opposes the extensive introduction of biometrics until its necessity is proven beyond a reasonable doubt .
We believe that it has crucial implications for personal data safety and for fundamental rights .
We voted against biometrics in visas .
We are also against biometrics in European passports .
We see the current proposal as a possible way of establishing limits for fingerprinting people for a travel document .
Therefore , we are satisfied that the compromise with the Commission and the Council is achieved , the age limit of 12 years is established for those Member States where fingerprinting of children does not take place and the age limit of six years is established for other Member States .
I would like to stress once again that our support for age limits does not mean that we support fingerprinting as such .
We strongly believe that biometrics in passports can be used only for verifying the authenticity of the document or the identity of the holder .
Use of such data for other purposes , such as law enforcement , is neither legitimate nor proportional .
We cannot agree that everyone holding the European passport is a usual suspect whose fingerprints are to be stored .
That is our position , but I would like to stress once more than we congratulate Mr Coelho and the Commission and Council on this compromise .
Mr President , I am not in favour of taking fingerprints from small children or even tiny babies .
Children must be exempted from the requirements to provide biometric fingerprints for passports .
It is therefore right to create an exemption here for children .
There is still no secure knowledge about the use of biometric fingerprints from children under the age of 12 .
The main ambiguity is how long fingerprints from growing children are in fact reliable .
If we were simply to use these data , we might achieve the opposite of what we are trying to do , namely less instead of more security .
It is therefore disproportionate to collect and use data whose reliability cannot be guaranteed beyond all doubt .
The compromise which has now been found with the Council reflects these concerns and , thanks to Parliament 's insistence and thanks to the excellent work by the rapporteur , it is based on an age limit of 12 for a transitional period of four years , during which time a broad study will be carried out in order to investigate the reliability of children 's biometric data .
Unfortunately , the compromise also provides for exemptions for those Member States which already have laws allowing fingerprints to be taken from children under the age of 12 .
It is therefore even more important that we expressly establish during the course of the compromise reached that the European legal act on security features and biometric data in passports and travel documents cannot under any circumstances be used as grounds for appeal in order to set up databases containing these data at national level .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I am very pleased to say that the UK is excluded from this regulation because it is not part of the Schengen zone .
However , the British Government has said that it will keep in step with the regulation to ensure that its documents are not perceived as second class .
This implies that it thinks the proposals are first class and then it will be bound by the substance of the regulation anyway .
But , as this report shows , all kinds of issues are raised concerning the authenticity of biometric data and its verification .
What kind of originating documents are used for the initial identification of the applicant , and how can it be sure that they are authentic ?
Once a passport has been issued , it is not of much use unless the data on it can be checked against the identity of the holder on some kind of national or centralised identity database .
The report acknowledges that there should be highly secure storage mediums for keeping such information , but we all know from experience in Britain that there is no such thing as a highly secure medium for storing such data .
Personal and highly sensitive information for literally millions of people has been lost or disclosed from government databases over the last few years .
Everyone in the UK knows that their personal information is not safe in the hands of our government .
This report does not speak about the reliability of biometric data itself .
In fact the UK Passport Service 's biometrics enrolment trial in 2004 showed a failure rate of 1 in 3 for facial recognition , 1 in 5 for fingerprints and 1 in 20 for iris scans .
Biometric identification is an attractive idea , but it is not the fail-safe mechanism we all might imagine .
The UK Independence Party will therefore be voting against this report .
( NL ) Mr President , in my opinion the rapporteur is quite right to draw attention to a number of points which largely arise from the fact that the collection , processing and comparison of biometric passport data are relatively recent developments .
Hence , it would also be sensible to review the entire procedure , as suggested , in three years ' time .
It is also of the utmost importance that we introduce a degree of harmonisation as regards the handling of biometric data , because a chain is no stronger than its weakest link .
In theory , the abolition of internal borders in the European Union should have resulted in improved supervision of external borders , but in reality it is apparent that the system continues to exhibit quite glaring vulnerable spots .
International criminal networks , drug and human traffickers and illegal immigrants have all benefited from such vulnerable spots .
If we want a more efficient border supervision system , it is , in any case , high time that biometric data constituted an effective part of that system .
( NL ) Mr President , I too would like to thank the rapporteur , my colleague , Mr Coelho , for his contribution .
He has already succeeded in achieving a compromise with the Council and the Commission at first reading and I strongly support that compromise , including the ' one person-one passport ' principle .
However , I would like to explore this issue in a little more detail .
This principle should make it possible to offer greater protection against crimes such as child trafficking and child abduction , because every child should receive his or her own passport with a chip containing his or her biometric data .
Of course , this will carry a price tag .
This will certainly be the case in Member States which have until now allowed children to be included on their parents ' passports .
In the Netherlands , the maximum cost of a passport is upwards of EUR 48 and the cost of including a child on his or her parent 's passport is EUR 8.50 .
For a family with three children this will , therefore , result in a doubling of the cost of obtaining passports , from EUR 120 at present to more than EUR 240 .
Of course , every parent would happily hand over that amount if it contributed to their child 's safety .
Yet is it not true that , if it is possible to abduct a child , it is also possible to get hold of his or her passport ?
Once the amended regulation is in place , it will no longer be possible to include children on their parents ' passports .
However , is it not the case that including a child on his or her parent 's passport in some cases actually serves the very interest of the child 's safety , as it indicates which parent has custody of the child ?
How will it then be possible to carry out effective checks of parental authority ?
Within the next three years the European Commission will have to review the need for an additional regulation , for example Community rules concerning the crossing of borders by children .
At present , Member States are still fairly divided on this issue .
I call on the Commission to use the review to examine whether or not and how the introduction of a single passport per person has contributed to a decrease in the number of child abductions .
Has the current compromise produced the desired effect or has it merely led to side effects which require resolution ?
Commissioner , our children 's safety demands our permanent attention .
Today we are taking one particular step .
Should it be in the child 's interest to take further steps in the medium term , you will certainly find the Christian Democrats in this House on your side .
( EL ) Mr President , the fact that Parliament 's view prevailed today over the Council 's attempts to introduce biometric data records for six-year-old children is a victory for the fundamental principle that personal data can only be collected if it can be proven that it is necessary , proportionate and of course useful to do so , a principle which I fear the Council and the Commission have frequently ignored over recent years in their legislative initiatives .
In the case of children 's passports and fingerprints , obviously children need their own passports with biometric identifiers in an effort to prevent abductions , child pornography and trafficking in children .
At the same time , however , it is obviously illegal to collect such identifiers if they are not necessary .
As far as fingerprints are concerned , we have studies which show that they are barely of any use for six-year-old children .
Their fingerprints change so quickly that passports and recognition from them are useless .
So today Parliament has achieved a balance .
It is demanding a serious study from the Commission in order to see when in fact children can be protected using their fingerprints , and will only allow them to be collected at ages at which we know for certain that this is the case .
Finally , in any case , as far as biometric identifiers in passports are concerned , we have said ' yes ' for the purpose of recognising the holder , ' yes ' for identifying the holder , ' yes ' for ascertaining that the passport has not been forged , but ' no ' to the creation of electronic data files on millions of innocent citizens .
( PL ) The introduction of passports bearing biometric identifiers of the holder is a response to appeals to engage in the fight against the falsification of documents , terrorism and illegal immigration .
It is , therefore , exceptionally important to ensure a high level of confidence in the process of collection of biometric data and the creation of shared basic standards on collection of data , in a way which will ensure their security and credibility .
I endorse the rapporteur 's proposal for an analysis to be made of the differences between Member States in the area of documents which must be presented as grounds for the issue of a passport .
This is because normally the security of these documents is lower than the level applied when issuing biometric passports .
In connection with this , the risk exists that they will be more easily falsified or forged .
( PL ) Mr President , the harmonisation of provisions concerning security standards , in conjunction with the introduction of biometric identifiers , should have a beneficial effect on the verification of documents during their inspection , and so is an element in the fight against forgery .
These factors are in turn a guarantee of a more effective fight against crime , terrorism and illegal immigration .
In view of the lack of appropriate tests connected with the use of new technologies , Member States should introduce their own requirements in the area of protection of citizens ' rights .
An age limit above which children have to be passport holders needs to be established , and also cases in which a single passport is issued to a holder and his or her children without biometric data should be eliminated .
Situations of this kind may favour child trafficking , because checking the identity of the child is made difficult .
In order to preclude this type of procedure , each person should hold his or her own passport .
In closing , I would like to emphasise that , in order to ensure security for the holders of passports and other identity documents , a high level of discretion in the process of collection of biometric data should be introduced .
( EL ) Mr President , it is a fact that the amending regulation which we are being asked to approve will perhaps bring about an improvement in certain Member States in which biometric identifiers are even being taken from infants and will temporarily prevent certain Member States from dragging people under the age of 12 , who at present are not obliged in any case in certain countries to travel on a personal passport , through such procedures .
We must evaluate the exceptions being proposed on the basis of the real motives for adopting them given that , regardless of the age limit for taking biometric identifiers , at some point we may all of us without exception be on electronic record .
Regulations such as these essentially maintain and further institutionalise the use of methods for keeping records on citizens everywhere - and how many innocent citizens - and grant the right to move our sensitive personal data .
It is therefore our duty to remind the citizens , whom we shall be asking in a few months ' time to renew their vote in favour of principles and policies of the European Union , that we are not in favour of such measures .
( DE ) Mr President , in theory collecting biometric data is certainly one way of making sure that passports and travel documents cannot be forged .
First and foremost , the new technology will hopefully help us in the fight against organised crime and the flood of illegal immigrants .
However , all the Member States must understand in this respect that Frontex now needs to be upgraded in terms of funding and staffing so that it can actually perform its task really effectively .
If there are no internal borders , the external borders must be protected accordingly .
When hackers boast on the Internet about how easy it is to forge fingerprints on German registration records and point out that , if identity cards are reduced to credit card size , the photos are digitally cut to size , making biometric recognition more difficult , it is easy to start doubting this technology .
One thing is certain : if biometric data are used , data protection must be guaranteed for us normal citizens .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank my colleague Mr Coelho for his excellent work .
I wish to comment on just one point in the report .
Recent experience has shown that human trafficking , and in particular child trafficking , is reaching worrisome levels both within and outside the European Union .
Therefore I consider it a positive step forward that minors can in future cross the external borders of the EU with their own passport .
From the perspective of child trafficking , this can on the one hand offer greater security , but on the other hand it must be recognised that a child bearing his or her own document can travel with anyone at all .
I find it regrettable that the joint proposal failed to mention that the passports of minors should contain , in addition to their personal data , those of the person or persons who have parental responsibility for them .
It is true that the first article of the proposal states that the Commission shall present a report on the requirements for children travelling alone or accompanied , crossing the external borders of the Member States , and make proposals , if necessary , regarding the protection of children crossing the external borders of the Member States .
This offers opportunities for the future , and therefore I request that the Commission , along with all the organisations concerned in this matter , such as the OSCE , OECD , UNICEF , UNHCR , IOM and last but not least Europol , jointly evaluate the developments and take the steps necessary to provide children with more effective protection .
Experience shows that the number of children among the victims of human trafficking is steadily increasing .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate Mr Coelho , Mrs Roure and the other Members on their work .

In December 2004 the Council adopted the Regulation on standards for security features and biometrics in passports and travel documents issued by Member States .
We have now had to take new steps towards combating the abduction and trafficking of children .
The use of passports by children according to the principle of ' one person-one passport ' may be a fundamental means of winning this difficult and important battle .
In my country , Portugal , collecting the fingerprints of children aged six years and upwards is already a long-standing practice , which is perhaps why I have no objection to it .
As an upholder of the European cause , I believe that it is important to have harmonisation in this matter .
It reassures me to know that the Member States which , like Portugal , long ago set six years as the minimum age for taking fingerprints will not have to change their national legislation .
I must emphasise that the passport security which is now being reinforced does not end with the existence of a passport .
The passport in itself corresponds to an increased level of security , starting with submission of the documents required for issuing passports , followed by the collection of biometric data , to verification and matching at cross-border check points .
This report is one more step in affirming the rights of individuals and guaranteeing their security .
( SL ) I endorse the report by the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , who has produced an excellent piece of work , as always .
I agree with the proposals put forward , including that concerning the ' one person-one passport ' principle .
However , I would like to hear what the Commission , in particular , or perhaps even my colleague Mr Coelho has to say about the question of what we should do when children travel alone , unaccompanied by their parents , as there is no uniform policy as regards which documentation they have to carry with them .
The rapporteur 's proposal is that the names of those with parental responsibility should be printed in the child 's passport .
However , sometimes , children travel accompanied by other family members and may , in fact , even live with them and so on .
In short , we should be reasonably flexible in this regard .
On the other hand , I am concerned that no one has challenged the practicability of six-year-old children travelling unaccompanied .
It might be possible by plane ( let us not , at this juncture , discuss the possible traumas that the child - a six-year-old boy or girl - might experience on a plane ) , as the child could be accompanied onto the plane , met at the other end and chaperoned to one of his or her parents , for example , or to someone else .
However , what arrangements would pertain when children travel by train , coach or other means of public transport ?
How would that be monitored ?
If there are parents who are irresponsible enough to send their children on such journeys , I think that we should take a more positive stance on this and say that children are not permitted to travel on their own at such a young age .
That may , perhaps , sound somewhat harsh , but as much has already been said here on how precious children are and on the topic of kidnapping and so on , we should also make a bolder statement on this issue .
I would also like to ask the Commission how things stand with the joint statement of the Council and the European Parliament concerning the security of the original documents needed in order for a visa to be issued .
This is because I am somewhat concerned that , if it is true , the system in a particular Member State might be allowing abuse to take place at the point of issue .
I would put one final question to the Commission , or perhaps to Mr Coelho : what should we do when people arrive at a border , but the data in their passports does not correspond with that held in official databases ?
I think that we ought to include an instruction that benefits the child , or rather , the passenger .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thousands of children a year fall victim to child traffickers and even more are abducted .
A current study shows that it is unaccompanied minors who are the victims of such crimes .
That is why we welcome the fact that the European Commission , in its amendments to the old regulation , now takes due account of children .
When we demand that children too should have their biometric data in passports from a certain age , it is not due to mass hysteria , which I really do not share , but because we want to afford our children better protection .
However , such protection can only be afforded if every child has its own passport with its biometric data and the names of its guardians .
As with all data collection , it is especially important to my group that the highest possible security is guaranteed when collecting , storing and processing the biometric data of all citizens and we must always be able to track who can access what data .
The Council 's regulations and decisions which affect this point make provision for very high protective mechanisms and control bodies to prevent data abuse .
I have to say that I have fundamental confidence in my national authorities , unlike many private companies , some of which are able to pass unprotected data to third parties through scandalous security loopholes and receive due payment for doing so .
That is precisely why it is so important for national authorities to capitalise on their established credibility and work closely with the data protection authorities .
Contrary to what has happened here , this includes the European Commission honouring its legal obligations to consult European data protection officers .
( PT ) I would like to congratulate my friend Carlos Coelho on the excellent work he has done for this Parliament .
Thank you very much .

( BG ) Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , for the balance he has achieved in this report between ensuring a higher level of security for international travel documents and protecting the personal data and human integrity of the European Union 's citizens .
The suggestions made to improve a number of technical requirements will support the battle against cross-border crime , illegal immigration and human trafficking .
For border countries like Bulgaria , which are exposed to intense pressure from migratory flows and the activities of international organised crime , the rapid and successful introduction of the new standards will be vitally important in terms of protecting the EU 's external borders .
Unfortunately , in my country we have a few serious cases involving children who have disappeared , about whom there is still no information even now .
This is why I feel that this report provides sound guidelines for the future development of standards for security features and biometrics in passports for Europe 's youngest citizens .
The introduction of the principle of ' one person-one passport ' will provide them with an even higher level of security when travelling outside the territory of the European Union .
The proposal to introduce additional information in the passports of children up to the age of 18 years will limit opportunities for the illegal activity of child trafficking .
When it comes to applying the regulation within their national legislations , Member States obviously need to consider the possible financial repercussions for large families .
This was also mentioned by some of our fellow Members who spoke previously .
Freedom of movement must not be restricted for these families due to them having to pay a large amount of money for passports for their children .
Finally , on the subject of free movement of persons within the European Union , I think that the limits can be abolished on the age of entitlement to receive an identity card as this will also encourage and guarantee free movement for the EU 's youngest citizens .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur and by saying that I endorse this report .
I think the report is not only important , but also good .
I will perhaps begin with the statement which has been made here that a passport is a document issued by Member States in accordance with national regulations .
It is true that we have different passports , besides the covers , but it is important to find a balance between the security measures of these passports , so that they identify a citizen of the European Union or another person entering the territory of the European Union , and at the same time resist crime , much of which involves passports , such as illegal immigration , terrorism , child trafficking or forgery of documents .
That balance has , I think , been found in this report .
There are no indications that the restrictions which we are including in the report will in any way influence or restrict Member States in the issue of passports .
I want to draw attention to one principle which I fully endorse : the principle of ' one person-one passport ' .
In relation to children it is a good principle , but I would not like it to be a financial barrier to parents who want their children to have a passport , but whose financial means may be limited .
I also want to draw attention to one weaker moment in the report , although the rapporteur has drawn attention to it , namely to the fact that modern , untried technologies need to be reassessed , and it is good that in three years ' time we will be able to do this .
I also call for the role of the European Data Protection Supervisor to nevertheless be taken into account .
That EU institution must be more heavily involved in the whole procedure and it is for this which I call .
Mr President , I also wish to thank Mr Coelho .
This report is very important for the future of Europe and for its 500 million citizens : for their safety , their security and for anti-terrorism measures , amongst others .
If the technology is there , as Ms Zdravkova said , we should make use of it .
From the point of view of children , Ms Angelilli , Mr Lambrinidis and others have said that it can be a vital weapon to counter child-smuggling , for example .
However , the crucial point is really in the new Article 3 , which states that the purpose of biometric data is to verify not only the authenticity of the document but also the identity of the holder by means of directly available comparable features .
At the moment , most countries rely almost exclusively on photographs and very few people , I would suggest - perhaps not even you , Mr President , nor even Mr Barroso - look like their passport photos - nor , indeed , would many of us want to !
So I think that if there are new identity procedures and methods available , we should be prepared to use them .
As for Ms Gacek and Mr Batten and their anti-British , ' hit-and-run ' contributions - because they are not here now to hear any response - I would suggest that the UK system is probably no better or no worse than many others in the European Union .
We have checks and balances , but we can do better .
If new 21st-century technology is available , then we should be prepared to make use of it and , as Ms Grabowska said a few moments ago , we should be prepared to amend it constantly to make the best possible use of what facilities are around the European Union .
( SK ) Protecting children from abduction and trafficking requires the introduction of children 's passports .
The principle of ' one person-one passport ' means that every child travelling outside the Schengen area will be issued a passport .
The new method of identification will simplify border controls .
The instruments for protecting children from abduction will include a European helpline for reporting missing , abducted or sexually exploited children , passports with biometric data and the soon-to-be launched pan-European child abduction alert system .
Attention needs to be paid to ensuring a high degree of confidentiality in the process of acquiring and using biometric data .
I support the rapporteur 's view that a study needs to be performed into the possible shortcomings of fingerprint identification systems in the Member States of the European Union .
Subsequently , the introduction of a common European system for comparing fingerprints should be considered .

( RO ) I would like to congratulate Mr Coelho for this report .
I welcome this initiative , which marks real progress made , following the European Council of Thessaloniki , in establishing a link between travel documents and their owners and adopting the ' one person-one passport ' principle .
I would like to highlight three important aspects .
Firstly , we need to adapt the principles and exceptions provided for in this report to the results and problems which have appeared in practice .
This means that the focus must be put on the three-year review period set by this report during which both the Member States and the Commission must try to identify the recommendations between theoretical principles and practical obstacles .
Secondly , there is a serious problem with regard to the security of stored data and the protection of the owner 's identity .
Finally , I would like to draw attention to the need to devise common principles governing the procedures required for issuing travel documents or passports as this phase is crucial for both ensuring the databases ' security and preventing the forgery of these documents .

( FR ) Mr President , one second more to thank you , Mr Coelho , and tell you that it is a great pleasure to work with you as you always show great skill , you have a true capacity for listening and analysis and it is due to you that we have achieved this result .
( RO ) Romania introduced the use of biometric passports from 1 January 2009 .
This type of passport contains 50 security elements and includes for the first time in the European Union a feature for identifying both a person 's face and their fingerprints .
Romania has therefore taken an important step towards joining the Schengen area , scheduled for 2011 .
The introduction of biometric passports removes the final basic condition for Romania 's inclusion in the Visa Waiver Program .
As a result , the refusal to waive the visa requirement for Romanians going to the United States will now be based solely on subjective grounds and I hope that the United States will give this matter due consideration .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur once again for adding significant improvements to the regulation , in particular , the creation of a uniform European system for verifying compatibility between biometric elements and data stored on a chip .
( RO ) The harmonisation of security standards at European level for biometric passports is an extension of the provisions of the Schengen acquis .
The regulation stipulates a general obligation to provide fingerprints which will be stored on a contactless chip in the passport .
I support the exceptions regarding children under the age of 12 providing fingerprints and I urge a review and harmonisation of the specific national laws .
I feel that biometric passport data must be processed in accordance with Community legislation governing the protection of personal data and privacy .
The Commission and Member States must take the necessary measures to guarantee this provision for processing biometric passport data , both at the border and during the process for maintaining the relevant databases , in the situation where national legislation contains this provision .
However , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that limiting the validity of a biometric passport for people who are unable to provide fingerprints , temporarily or permanently , to 12 months or less will make life more difficult for people with disabilities .
I would therefore ask the Commission to reassess the relevant text .
Mr President , no law-abiding citizen should be worried about his or her identity or their children 's identity being substantiated .
I therefore welcome the use of biometric data on passports and other documents .
I just wanted to raise a point for future reference .
It is a fact that no biometric characteristic stays the same from childhood to adulthood except one : DNA finger-printing .
This stays the same from conception to death and even beyond .
It is possible today to identify someone even many years after his death by just obtaining some small specimen from the bone remains .
DNA finger-printing technology today is quick , it is cheap and it can be carried out on just a few cells which can be obtained either from a quick mouth mucosal swab or from a drop of blood taken from , for example , the umbilical cord .
I therefore submit that in the future we should consider using DNA finger-printing as the only one biometric identification - which is guaranteed to be the same for every individual - for all European citizens .
( DE ) Mr President , my thanks go to Carlos Coelho , together with my congratulations on his report .
We would have all been disappointed if his report had been below par , because we are already used to this standard of report from him .
I particularly liked the fact that Carlos Coelho clearly pointed out from the beginning that his report was about the security of children .
We can achieve this by issuing secure passports and by taking fingerprints to ensure that it is possible to check if the person crossing the border is actually the person shown in the passport .
This is therefore an objective which can be used to achieve security for children .
That we are now discussing whether fingerprints should be taken at six years old or at twelve years old is a technical question , not a question of perspective .
I would have no problem with taking fingerprints from the age of six , because this is all about children and their security .
For me it goes without saying that data protection laws must be respected .
We should not even be discussing that .
It is the duty of a constitutional state to control that .
If we achieve a situation in which we have secure passports and data protection laws are respected , then the European Union will have made a decisive step forwards in the interests of children and against child trafficking and child smuggling .

Mr President , I think the entire House has paid homage to the work of Mr Coelho and to his qualities , and I would add my voice to the praise from Mrs Roure .
I would like to say , echoing Gérard Deprez , that we must try to head towards increasingly reliable , increasingly comparable biometric data that will allow us to make better use of the most sophisticated technologies to ensure security in this free space that we inhabit .
That is why this meeting has been scheduled .
I , therefore , welcome the fact that Parliament has also committed to this effort to make the identification of children more secure , which is necessary for their safety .
I have been asked if we already have proof that these processes are effective .
I would say that only in use will we be able properly to verify the effectiveness but , a priori , everything suggests that increased security will come from improved identification of children travelling alone .
In any case , we cannot fail to take this major objective into account .
I will give the Parliament several answers to several questions .
First , I have to say that , in its proposals , the Commission has always stressed data protection .
The European Data Protection Supervisor was consulted on the basic proposal and he made remarks , which the Commission has taken into account .
I would also state that , as for the identifiers , our standards are harmonised with ICAO ( International Civil Aviation Organization ) standards , which , as has been said , will facilitate dialogue with the United States .
Next , I would remind you that for child passports , there is obviously a financial cost for families , but that is within the remit of the Member States and I would point out that for travel within the Schengen area , the identity card is sufficient .
The passport is only required for travel beyond the European Union .
Finally , I wish to confirm that the Commission will undertake a comparative study of the existing rules in the Member States on minors travelling alone .
At the appropriate time , we will propose that the Council takes the necessary measures to protect children more effectively and prevent child trafficking .
It is highly evident that this study is , rightly , desired by Parliament and , of course , I undertake to ensure that my staff produce it in the best conditions and in the shortest possible time .
That is all I have to say , except to repeat my thanks to Parliament for having , once again , made its very constructive contribution to European legislation .
Mr President , if one thing has come out of the debate it is that there is concern about effective combating of trafficking in human beings - and , in particular , trafficking in children - amongst a large majority in this House .
That is the greatest use of this measure that we will adopt and I am delighted by the fact that almost all the speakers have touched on this .
I would like to once again thank all the shadow rapporteurs for their collaboration , and that is not idle praise .
It is fair to say that my colleague Mrs Roure played a crucial role in securing the agreement , to which Commissioner Barrot and the French Presidency also contributed a lot .
I particularly wish to thank Commissioner Barrot for the Commission 's readiness to give institutional backing to invigorating the fight against trafficking in children , as well as its readiness to collaborate in the three studies which we requested : on the reliability of children 's fingerprints , on breeder documents and on false rejection rates , which are some of the concerns that we have in relation to the implementation of these rules .
Finally , Mr President , Mr Brejc raised an issue : he asked if we are able to say that the issuing of passports is secure .
To be completely honest , I have to say that this varies from country to country .
Some countries have more rigorous systems than others , and that is another reason why the study on breeder documents is very important .
I know that Europe has no jurisdiction over this area - the issuing of passports is a national prerogative - and that is why I was very happy when Commissioner Barrot agreed to having the European Commission collaborate in this study on breeder documents .
It makes no sense for us to have passports that are very secure if this security might be sabotaged during the issuing process .
It is a case not of imposing measures on Member States , but of sharing best practices so that we can guarantee that the European passport is a secure reality on our external borders .
Thank you very much to all of you for your collaboration .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Wednesday , at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the adoption of this regulation is an important step towards making EU citizens ' travel documents more secure .
As a result , by 29 June 2009 there should be a definite connection in the EU between a passport and its owner , which will go a long way towards protecting passports from fraud .
I particularly welcome the implementation of the principle of ' one person-one passport ' , which makes it possible to improve the security of travel , especially for children , and hinder the activities of persons involved in the trade in children and in kidnapping .
It is commendable that this requirement will now be enforced in all Member States .
In Estonia it has been in force since 2000 .
In addition to secure travel documents , the border guards of the Member States have an important role to play , and they must pay increasing attention to the inspection of underage persons travelling with or without a guardian and crossing external borders of the EU , as they do in the case of adults .
The security of travel documents is definitely not limited to passports , and the entire process is no less important .
Thus there is no point strengthening the security of passports without devoting attention to the remaining links in the chain .
I believe that , in addition to making travel documents more secure , the European Commission should consider adopting a common EU approach , in order to replace the different rules for the protection of children crossing the EU 's external borders that are currently in existence in the 27 Member States .
Terrorist threats have made it necessary to introduce some additional security and biometric elements to increase the protection of passengers travelling within the European Union .
The most important features in the proposal for a regulation are the fight against child trafficking by introducing the ' one person-one passport ' principle and the introduction of derogations with regard to taking fingerprints from children under the age of 12 .
However , the legislation in some Member States allows for fingerprints to be provided by children under the age of 12 , but this will only be possible for a transitional period of four years .
There will , however , be an absolute age limit of six years .
Some pilot studies carried out by Member States have highlighted that fingerprints provided by children under the age of six are not of good quality and can also change while they are growing .
Setting an age limit reduces the risk of an error being made when identifying people by taking their fingerprints .
It also makes the opportunity for child trafficking more difficult .
The need to protect travellers has become even more evident in the wake of the events of 11 September 2001 .
However , an increase in the level of protection and security needs to be accompanied by a guarantee of passengers ' rights and dignity , as stipulated by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
Public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Cappato , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents ( implementation of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a report on the status of public access to European Union documents and also an opportunity to make some suggestions .
In the short time we have available , I want to raise three important points .
The first is about the Council .
European Union governments meet in the Council with law-making powers and , like any law-making assembly , they should be bound to make their work and their decisions public .
I wish to emphasise this particularly because amendments have been tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for a split vote on certain paragraphs .
I hope the split votes are not taken to delete significant portions of the report .
For example , paragraph 3 of the report asks for action to be taken following the judgment in the case brought by Maurizio Turco , a former Radical Party MEP , who won a case in the Court of Justice over the publicising of legal decisions taken by the legal services of European institutions and also over the obligation to disclose the identity of Member State delegations to the Council .
We are entitled to know who is voting in the Council and how .
I therefore hope that no one will vote against this paragraph 3 , or paragraph 9 , which asks for information about what is happening within Coreper , the Committee of Permanent Representatives , and asks that they should disclose the meeting documents and not secrete all the international policy papers away as diplomatic documents .
This is a very important point !
The other point we raise concerns Parliament , our Parliament , because we must be the first to publicise what we are doing .
We Italian Radicals call it the ' public register of elected representatives ' , in other words a register where we can find out everything about the activities of MEPs , who is present , who is absent , how they vote and , of course , the money they are paid .
Beware though , and I say this because an application has also been filed for a split vote on paragraph 5 , it would be a mistake to think that if we keep some of this information confidential - I am addressing Mrs Cederschiöld , who I know is sensitive on this issue - we will really just succeed in leaving ourselves more exposed to aggressive , demagogic attacks on MEPs .
We know that some fellow Members have filmed other MEPs , they have turned themselves into spies on other MEPs .
The way to get around this is not merely to prevent it , but to publicise our work in full , foiling the people who want to peer through keyholes and opening our doors by broadcasting parliamentary committee work , meetings and all the proceedings of this Parliament over the Internet .
The third point I want to raise concerns document formats , because the PPE-DE Group has also requested a split vote on paragraph 7 , concerning this point .
In this paragraph we ask for documents to be created using open-source word processors , technologically speaking , as well as effective multilingualism and technologies that allow persons with disabilities to gain access to information and documents .
I hope that no one in this Parliament is against open-source multilingual access using technologies that facilitate access by people with disabilities , because this is an essential aspect for a portion of European Union citizens .
We know that the Commission has proposed a reform of our rules and we will deal with this in the Cashman report , but this resolution is our first opportunity to lay down some points of reference for this Parliament .
I hope it will not be wasted and that all the crucial matters I have sought to raise in this report will not be in vain .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking you for a very well-written and interesting report , and I congratulate the rapporteur .
This is an important and cherished subject , particularly in times of the revision of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 and also bearing in mind the changes that the Treaty of Lisbon - if it enters into force - will bring about on these important issues .
This report is in principle about the implementation of Regulation 1049 / 2001 and , therefore , let me start by recalling one of the positive elements in the implementation of the regulation because , as the quantitative data show and as the Parliament report acknowledges , the EU institutions have granted access to a higher number of documents while registering a decrease in the number and rate of refusals .
We are committed to continuing to enhance transparency and openness .
Quite naturally , some of the recommendations made in the report go well beyond the application of Regulation 1049 / 2001 in 2006 and some are not directly related to the activities of the Commission , as we have just heard .
The report addresses a number of issues concerning openness and communication with citizens , and I particularly welcome that as a valuable input for a general reflection on transparency , communication and outreach .
Let me just briefly go through some of the recommendations and the principles underpinning them , because they deserve due consideration .
On the Turco case , I can assure you that the Commission takes this judgment fully into account .
As has been said , it mainly concerns the need for increased openness where the Council acts in its legislative capacity , but it is also applicable to the Commission and all the institutions , and the Commission makes sure that each request for access is carefully assessed on a case-by-case basis against the parameters set by the Court of Justice .
Secondly , the proposal to lay down common rules on administrative procedures requires more reflection because many of these procedures are very specific in nature and unique , in some cases , for every institution .
This means that we will need some more time to see how that could be done .
The recommendation to merge Regulation 1049 / 2001 and Regulation ( EEC , Euratom ) No 354 / 83 on the opening of the historical archives is quite complex for a particular reason , because Article 255 of the EC Treaty and Regulation 1049 / 2001 do not apply to all institutions and bodies .
This might also change if and when the Lisbon Treaty enters into force , because it will then extend the right of access to documents to all institutions and bodies .
This is why it is not so easy to simply merge the two , because the coverage is different .
On the Ombudsman 's critical remark regarding the Commission 's public registers , I would like to assure you that we take this remark very seriously .
As you know , we have a public register of documents that has been up and running since June 2002 and since then the Commission has also put in place a dedicated register for comitology procedures and a register on expert groups .
We are always doing our utmost to modernise our internal IT systems .
This , unfortunately , will not happen overnight , but has to be worked on .
We always take into account the need to increase the coverage of the public register , and I hope you also know my personal commitment to this .
We acknowledge that we still have to increase the coverage of our public registers and we confirm our commitment to develop the public registers in the interests of enhanced transparency .
In the resolution you target the questions of document management and a common portal and the Trans-Jai project .
The Commission supports the idea of setting up a common portal in order to facilitate access for citizens to legislative documents .
I think this would entail a common methodology , and we have to look at all the practical consequences of that on document identification and references .
We would like to see a portal that could entail the full availability of public documents for each institution , so we are willing to work together with you on that .
On the Trans-Jai project , I come back to what I said in a reply in October , that this is expected to be open to the general public by 2010 .
Let me also comment on the issue of exchange of information between the institutions .
I understand what is meant there and what you are after , but I wish to remind you that between our institutions we already have an established working method with the exchange of confidential information held by the Commission and this is regulated in an annex to the framework agreement .
We should also keep in mind that the question of sharing information between institutions is not related to public access and we think that this should be handled separately , as it is currently .
This report and the debate is also a valuable and appreciated input for another time when we can discuss it on a broader scale .
I am grateful for Parliament 's efforts to keep the issue of transparency and openness high on the EU agenda .
We will come back to many of these questions in the very near future , for instance during the joint meeting of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs with the Czech Parliament next week which I shall have the pleasure to attend , and then in just a couple of weeks we will be dealing with the important issue of revising Regulation 1049 / 2001 .
I think the discussions should not end there .
We need to be open about transparency and think also what we can do proactively outside the formal legislation , such as on improved registers , on greater user-friendliness and accessibility , active dissemination and quicker publication of documents .
Something that I myself did last year was to make the register of my own correspondence directly accessible on the web .
I am sure that you all have similar ideas and examples of what can be done if we just put our minds to it .
So let us do that .
Mr President , Mr Cappato , your report is full of good intentions , the clearest proof of which is that no amendments were deemed to be necessary by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
You were the one who introduced 18 amendments to your own report .
It is those amendments that have given the report a radical edge - to put it in general terms - and that have raised very serious doubts for me .
I would divide into four distinct groups the amendments that you have proposed - amendments that you have proposed to yourself , I would stress - in a report that received the support of all groups initially .
Firstly , some are impossible ; you make some suggestions that are impossible .
For example , Mr Cappato , some of your suggestions have no legal basis as yet : until the Lisbon Treaty enters into force , it will be impossible to harmonise the rules of the different institutions .
Commissioner Wallström has just said something similar .
You also call for 2009 to be declared European Year of Transparency , but we are too late , there is no time .
Some of your suggestions are therefore impossible .
Secondly , some of your suggestions are inadvisable .
For example , you call for transparency in the meetings of the political groups .
This would not do .
There is a need for privacy , since privacy is a political asset .
If I want to disagree with my party and to maintain my opposition , I want to do so in private : that is not a lack of transparency .
There must be transparency within public bodies , but not within the parties , the privacy of whose debates must be guaranteed .
I cannot , therefore , agree with you on this point .
Some of your other assertions , Mr Cappato , are incorrect .
For example , you state that 90 % of legislative activity is done through comitology .
This is a bold exaggeration , Mr Cappato .
Furthermore , comitology has its own implicit transparency standards .
If we introduce more mechanisms , more bureaucracy and more controls , we will be going against what we want to achieve : transparency , which is closely linked to simplicity .
Lastly - before the President signals to me , because I am already nearing the end of my time - some of your suggestions are unnecessary .
For example , I understand that it is really wonderful and attractive to public opinion to speak of transparency in Members ' activities , so that it can be seen whether they attend plenary sittings .
It can already be seen , Mr Cappato .
It can also be seen whether they attend the committees too ; there are minutes for each of them , to which all citizens have access .
The allowances that MEPs claim are also public .
In other words , it is perfectly possible for citizens to gain access to this information .
I therefore understand that it is wonderful in terms of public opinion and it looks good to defend transparency , but you must realise that transparency means ensuring that things are seen as they really are and that if we contribute to distorting how things are seen , Mr Cappato , we are not contributing to transparency .
Thank you for your generosity , Mr President .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , thank you , Marco , for a very good report , but sadly I have to agree with other people in this House that you strayed beyond the remit - and I know why .
The previous speaker said that it is impossible .
If we do not ask for the impossible , how will we ever achieve change ?
But of course you have gone beyond your remit .
We are not going to have broadcasts of political groups .
MEPs putting up on their websites or through Parliament 's Information Service what they do and where they go does not mean that they are effective ; it does not mean they are good .
The Regulation is about access to all of the documents held , received or produced by the three institutions when acting in its legislative capacity .
That is what we need to get back to .
We need to define what the ' legislative capacity ' is .
We need to look at how the Regulation has worked up until now and we have to improve it .
That is what I want to do in conjunction with all the players , and I am pleased to welcome here the Swedish Minister , Cecilia Malmström , who worked originally on this .
We all want to take the whole issue of access forward .
Why ?
Because we recognise that many people realise that there are things that happen , particularly in the Council , as you have illustrated , whereby their ministers , their national ministers , are involved , but how they debate and how they vote is secret .
Once we reveal that element of secrecy and we expose how Member State ministers actually vote , then those ministers are held accountable back home in their Member States and suddenly national citizens feel connected to all things European .
So , Marco , you have sadly gone wider than the remit , especially with this dream that you have .
If you had not declared that you were an Italian radical I would never have known it from this report , but the fact that you expect political parties to broadcast their internal debates - it is not going to happen and indeed , as the previous speaker said , all you do is expose division rather than reinforce the fact that we are here because we believe in a Europe that is accountable to its citizens .
That is why drawing up the voting list will be difficult .
My heart is with you , but I have to follow my head .
Mr President , welcome Commissioner , tomorrow we will vote on the report prepared by my fellow Member , Mr Cappato , on public access to documents .
Mr Cashman , a very good and normally unbelievably efficient colleague , has already pointed out that the most important thing is to give the public access to documents that are discussed and decided upon here .
One might accuse Mr Cappato , as Mr Herrero-Tejedor and Mr Cashman have done , of going beyond the remit .
That is surely a matter of interpretation and in this case also not entirely justified .
The discussion as to whether or not , in principle , the group meetings should be broadcast is surely something we can talk about .
The question is , then , whether we would have the right , for example , to hold such a meeting in private at the request of the majority of the group members , as there are certainly sensitive issues - as we all know from our own meetings - that need to be clarified between ourselves before we can go public with them .
In my opinion , it is normal to wash your dirty laundry at home and not out in the street .
I might also add that this example shows that political parties - not the party groups in this case - always have a certain interest in the general public when it suits them .
Otherwise , party conferences would not be broadcast so extensively .
Interestingly , no one complains that the conferences of some political parties where things can get quite lively could be broadcast in full .
I think I can say , therefore , that Mr Cappato has produced a good piece of work here , even though - as we are accustomed to - suggestions for improvement may perhaps come from other groups .
In some cases they are , in fact , so good that they should be considered .
Compared to either of the other institutions , Parliament can still be considered to lead the way when it comes to transparency and so I would not make it my top priority , since with regard to both the accessibility of documents and to the transparency of its sittings and the activities of the Members of the European Parliament , we are more open than any national parliament .
That does not mean that there is no need for improvement , including in other institutions , particularly the Council , which , regrettably , is not here now .
Mr Cashman has just said that we need to know who has made what decision and how in order to be able to establish accountability for political actions .
It is even more important , however , to provide access to documents produced within the framework of the comitology procedure , for example .
A specific example is the Regulation on liquids in hand luggage , the annex to which was not accessible to citizens , and neither was it accessible to parliamentarians .
The requirement for transparency has not been introduced in most Member States of the European Union without good reason , and that is to give the people the opportunity to understand the political activities , to be able to establish accountability and then perhaps also to enable different decisions to be made in elections .
Thank you very much for the extra time , Mr President .
Good luck , Marco .
I will be with you in the vote tomorrow , and I believe that we will bring this to a satisfactory conclusion .
Mr President , if the European Union is to be for the citizens , rather than for the Eurocrats , then it obviously must be more transparent , as must the activities of the European Union 's bodies .
Only then may the Union regain the credibility it has carelessly tossed aside .
For example , its credibility has been damaged by attempts to push the Constitutional Treaty through and the failure to hold national referenda .
That is why it is right to demand that all Council debates , as they decide the fate of Europe , should be accessible to the citizens of the Member States of the European Union .
However , these debates do not include political group debates .
It is also important for Parliament , the Council and the European Commission to adopt the same principles for providing access to documents , so that they do not remain lone stars in the information and IT firmament .
I think that this report is a significant step towards transparency .
However , I firmly believe that , with regard to certain issues , it may be taking things a step too far .
Even Comrade Lenin once said that we sometimes need to take two steps forward , in order to take that one step back .
The rapporteur might want to bear this in mind .

Mr President , the report by the rapporteur , Mr Cappato , indicates that there are major shortcomings with regard to access to EU documents .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal for improvements in connection with the annual report .
I also support the amendments tabled by the rapporteur .
I furthermore assume that Parliament will vote in favour of a real principle of public access in the forthcoming vote on Mr Cashman 's report concerning the Regulation on public access .
As regards the annual report , I would particularly like to highlight the fact that it is totally unacceptable for public access not to be guaranteed in respect of delegated legislation , which includes 90 % of the legally binding legal acts that are adopted each year by the EU institutions .
Members ' participation in the work of Parliament and all their financial circumstances with regard to their appointment in Parliament must also be totally transparent .
I support the proposal for a combined public register .
Finally , I would like to say that increased public access is not a populistic requirement but a democratic one .
Mr President , in a democracy , transparency is a concept of honour .
In democratic countries , the citizens elect the governing authorities .
These authorities appoint officials to implement democratic decisions .
It would therefore be absurd for these elected representatives and appointed officials to be entitled to withhold information from their electorate .
The fact that this happens nevertheless has two explanations .
The first is a legacy from a pre-democratic society where the people were seen as subjects under non-elected rulers .
The subjects were not permitted to interfere in the ruler 's affairs .
The second is that the nation 's security , consideration of citizens ' integrity , business secrets , market influence and similar considerations may require exceptions to transparency .
The first explanation is completely irrelevant today .
The authorities must not , in their capacity as authorities , withhold information from the people .
The second explanation , however , is sound and involves a difficult balancing act .
These legitimate demands for finding the right balance are , unfortunately , often used by the authorities to preserve the option of secretiveness .
The EU does not have a proud tradition of transparency .
In its childhood and early youth , the EU was almost totally secret , even down to the Commission 's internal telephone directory .
The EU began as a mandarin empire , and still is today , but important steps have been taken : the 1993 Code of Conduct , the acceptance of the Swedish Journalists ' Association 's demands in 1998 , and the Regulation in 2001 .
It is with a certain amount of pride that I note that my own country , Sweden , has the longest historical tradition of statutory transparency .
That was why the Swedish state became involved in the Turco case and got the European Court of Justice to override the Council and the Court of First Instance last summer .
This was yet another step away from the mandarin empire , but the road to establishing democratic transparency in the EU is a long one .
There is a lot of internal resistance to quash .
Mr Cappato 's report should therefore receive the full support of this House , which would be yet another step forward along that long road .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am just going to speak for a few seconds to say that I agree with a good part of Mr Cappato 's report .
It would be surprising if I felt otherwise , because I believe I am the only Italian MEP who has tried to make public a list of attendances and the number of questions raised here in our Parliament by the Italian delegation .
I have done this , year by year , in the small book in which I report on my parliamentary activities .
I would be happier if , for example , the Italian press , which all too often points its finger at us , would publish information that may not be earth-shattering in itself but would nevertheless serve to illustrate the type of activities that an Italian MEP carries out in this place .
It would be all the better if it could serve to highlight how our actions , if properly performed , are independent of the political affiliations for which we have been elected , in the sense that we seek to be of service to the entire system .
I applaud Mr Cappato 's initiative .
I will vote for nearly everything contained in his proposal .
( RO ) The European Union is founded on the principle of transparency , which is referred to in Articles 1 and 6 of the Treaty on European Union , as well as in Article 41 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
Europe has advocated from the outset a decision-making process which is as transparent and close to the citizen as possible .
The European Parliament , by its very nature , is the first to promote public access to the decision-making process , since different opinions about legislative or non-legislative work help increase European citizens ' confidence in Europe 's institutions .
At the moment , public access to the European institutions ' documents is fairly good .
It is obvious however that the 2001 European legislation governing this right of access needs to be brought up to date .
Parliament asked the Commission back in 2006 to submit proposals for amending the Regulation , suggesting several recommendations :
all preparatory documents to legal acts should be directly accessible to the public , and
setting up a single access point with regard to preparatory documents .
The Commission took into account these recommendations which were also included in a new proposal for a regulation in 2008 .
In the course of the decision-making process , the parties involved are faced with different opinions , sometimes contradictory .
Negotiation leads to the most acceptable decision for all concerned .
Europe 's citizens must be informed about the process which has led to decisions being adopted because these decisions have a direct impact on their lives .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , democracy is based on transparency and openness .
This is especially important now , as we approach the June elections to the European Parliament .
The simplification of the web environment would help increase voter turnout in European Parliament elections .
If we provide citizens with clearly understandable information on the activities of representatives and the functioning of the European Parliament in general , we will be able to make young and old interested in what we do . The e-Parliament is a very welcome initiative .
On the basis of the search criteria , all information about the work of a representative should be available to citizens .
I concur with the rapporteur that , in addition to the activities of the plenary assembly , individuals should also have access to work done in committees and delegations .
Citizens must be able to acquire a full understanding of our activities .
I also support the idea of the creation of a joint register of information and documents .
It is important that citizens should be able to monitor proceedings that are of interest to them and access all documents from one location .
The creation of a unified portal will take time , but we should move in that direction .
This is our route now and in the future .
I support the Cappato report .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate my colleague , Marco Cappato , on his report .
It is important that we are debating it here in Parliament .
When we speak of accountability and transparency , we must start with ourselves and that means all of the EU institutions .
I agree with much of the report .
I have one or two caveats .
For example , we must ensure that , if we provide information on Members ' activities , say , that such information is comprehensive .
Otherwise we will end up knowing the price of everything and the value of nothing .
By this I mean that our workload is really quite broad .
It is not just attendance at committees or plenary .
Any such information on Members ' activities would need to include all the activities . Otherwise some very valuable work that is not concentrated in Parliament could be lost because it would be invisible .
I would like to say regarding my colleague Mr Romagnoli 's comments that his good work was not picked up by the media , that it is only news if you do not do your work .
Finally , I would like to say that the core of the matter is that there should be transparency when we are acting in a legislative capacity .
I agree with Michael Cashman that all citizens should know how their ministers vote in Council .
This is crucial .
Otherwise we play into the hands of the ' blame Brussels ' brigade when something goes wrong at home .
( DE ) Mr President , my experience is presumably very similar to that of millions of Europeans .
Commissioner , I entered this Parliament in 1999 with a great deal of enthusiasm that was not inferior to the enthusiasm that you continue to display .
Then I did what so many citizens do .
I wanted to know something , and that was : how are decisions made ?
Where does the money go ?
Who receives it ?
More and more voters have come to me and said : we do not know where we are with this EU .
This was also my experience .
Unfortunately , one then realises that behind many measures there is a deliberate intention to conceal the irresponsibility that we still have in our institutions , including unclearly assigned legislature .
I can only encourage you to keep to your convictions to go further than the Cappato report currently does and make this basic information available .
That would be an achievement , and I say this after 10 years .
( PT ) Mr President , Mrs Wallström , ladies and gentlemen , the transparency principle is a basic principle of the European Union .
It reinforces the democratic nature of our institutions and facilitates the participation of the citizens in the decision-making process , so ensuring greater legitimacy for public authorities by making them more effective and answerable to the people .
I support the principle that all democratic institutions have a duty to ensure that their activities , documents and decisions are made public .
Access to documents is a fundamental element in the loyal cooperation that is necessary between the European institutions .
During the investigation into the activities of the CIA in Europe , I criticised the Council forcefully for violating this loyal cooperation by imposing restrictions - full and partial - on access to essential documents .
That is why I also applauded the decision of the Court of Justice in relation to the Turco case , in which it concluded that there exists , in principle , an obligation to disclose the opinions of the Council 's Legal Service relating to a legislative process ; those opinions could be crucial to understanding the direction that the decision-making process took .
I agree that the revision of the 2001 Regulation should proceed , not just to provide a response to the deficiencies since detected in it , but also in order to incorporate the most recent case-law , specifically the judgment in the Turco case .
Nevertheless , we must clearly respect the legal basis at our disposal .
Some of the rapporteur 's proposals go much further than is permitted under the legal basis , as has already been mentioned by Mr Herrero and Mr Cashman .

There are , for example , rules aimed at national parliaments that have no legal basis .
In the judgment in the Turco case , the Court of Justice itself recognises that the application of the Regulation must respect a balance between the risks of publication and the public interest served by making that document accessible .
In some cases , Mr Cappato makes proposals that , in my view , put this balance at risk .

( RO ) I would like to emphasise the fact that while Mr Cappato initially enjoyed broad support for his initiative , the 18 amendments introduced later on have resulted in a loss of that initial support .
Nevertheless , I support the fact that public access to the documents held by Parliament , the Council and the Commission is vital in order to bring the European Union closer to its citizens .
I would first of all like to stress the need to publish the main documents created in the course of the comitology procedure .
Secondly , I think that on the European Parliament website under the personal profiles detailing the activities of each MEP , it would be a good idea to also publish the amendments submitted by each MEP in the parliamentary committees they belong to .
Citizens need to clearly see what amendments have been submitted by MEPs during the European decision-making process , in addition to the reports , resolutions and plenary debates .
Thirdly , when the European Council is acting as a co-legislative institution in addition to Parliament , it should publish its debates just like Parliament publishes its own debates .
The Council should demonstrate transparency by publishing its debates from now on before the Lisbon Treaty obliges it to do so .
( PL ) Mr President , civil rights include the right to information concerning the activities of representatives , elected by society , who fulfil important public functions .
This is particularly true in the case of the European Union institutions , including the Council , whose documents are more difficult to access .
Information programmes available on the Internet should be user-friendly and easily guide the interested person to the document for which they are searching .
However , although many people have Internet access these days , not everyone does .
We need publications that can be accessed in libraries and summaries that are more accessible to people who are not as comfortable reading texts .
However , we need to consider whether the full transcripts of political group discussions should be published .

( SV ) Mr President , transparency has indeed undergone a dramatic change within the EU - and I am sure that the Commissioner would very much agree - since the advent of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 and the websites .
I would also like to emphasise that I think that the Commission and the Commissioner have made extremely good and constructive contributions to this issue in recent years .
From the outset this was not an easy task , but I think that the cooperation in recent years has been very constructive , something for which you should receive praise .
Everyone is always complaining about the Commission , but I do not think this is completely justified in all respects .
Naturally , we cannot have a situation in which justice and home affairs legislation is not transparent with regard to the justifications .
Mr Alvaro is absolutely right in this regard .
This is , of course , impossible .
However , to go as far , for example , as an officer or MEP submitting a report each day on what he or she has done that day is quite unreasonable .
In the end , they will spend half the day writing a report about what they have done .
I would like to conclude by saying that we support Mr Cappato 's report , provided it results in a legally certain , clear piece of legislation that is not unnecessarily bureaucratic .
( PL ) Mr President , assuming that democratic systems , based on the rule of law , should be bound to publish provisions which are binding for their citizens , we should ensure that the activities of the institutions are transparent and open .
In practice , the meetings and debates of democratic legislative bodies , as well as their votes , should , where possible , be transparent and draft legislation should be accessible to the public .
Unfortunately , the Council often operates in a way which makes it difficult to relate a document to a procedure , which then makes it impossible for citizens to access these documents .
As we know , the Internet plays an extremely important role in providing citizens with access to EU documents .
We therefore need a single EU portal , which will facilitate access to documents , procedures and institutions .
We should define common rules for implementing administrative procedures , as well as for tabling , classifying , registering and disseminating documents .
Our Parliament must set an example for the other institutions .
Mr President , I noted carefully what the rapporteur said .
There are two categories involved here : access to information on EU legislative work , and access to documents in the non-legislative field .
In relation to the former , I support what is being called active transparency to the point of freedom of information as the norm and , indeed , very reduced use of secret meetings and room documents at Council level .
I think we should know how our Ministers vote so that they can be held to account to stop this ' blame Brussels ' culture that goes on in national parliaments at home .
I should also like easy access to MEPs ' records of attendance and voting during parliamentary work at all levels .
We are elected by the citizens to do a job and we are entitled to be held to account by them .
On the other hand , to suggest that all political groups or party meetings must be open to public scrutiny is patent nonsense and a recipe for an agenda to be hijacked .
I have no fear of transparency .
We do an honourable job here as politicians and we must stand up for the dignity of our profession .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am absolutely certain that the report by Mr Cappato has carefully avoided stepping on the toes of the public officials who are concerned with their privacy and the need to maintain confidentiality over certain situations that must stay that way .
This is certainly a very important reason to approve his report , but I would also like to overturn the concerns of some of us , who fear that our right to freedom of action and privacy is being violated .
Let us take a look at what happens when the tables are turned and the public administrator wants to find out what we citizens are doing .
We cannot have any secrets : in some of our Member States , private telephone calls are even intercepted between husband and wife , between parents and children and so on .
We must absolutely not fear citizens knowing exactly how laws are made and decisions are arrived at in the Commission or in the Council , and that also applies to the legislative decisions made by our Parliament .
I welcome this initiative .
( PL ) Clarity and transparency should form the basis of the activities of the European Union 's institutions .
Only if we achieve a suitable level of transparency will our activities become more comprehensible to the citizens , and therefore closer to them .
The institutional crisis facing the Union demonstrates to us all the consequences of adopting the wrong approach to this issue .
In my opinion , it was precisely this dismissive attitude towards the citizens of the European Union which resulted in the institutional reforms turning into a fiasco and the failure to ratify the Lisbon Treaty in France , the Netherlands and Ireland .
We should , therefore , draw the correct conclusions and be aware that social acceptance of the European Union 's activities should be our basic priority .
In order to achieve this acceptance , the citizens should be aware of what we do , how we operate and , ultimately , what decisions we take .
We need a clear , cohesive and legible source of information on the activities of all the European Union institutions .
The European Parliament 's place is certainly at the forefront of this change , as it is the institution that is closest to the citizens of the European Union .
We should remember that the Union was created for these very citizens .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for this debate and this discussion .
I think it is difficult to summarise but , if I were to do so , I would repeat what some of you have said about this being a fundamental element in any democracy .
I prefer to look at it from the point of view of citizens : the right of citizens to know what is going on and to have access to information and documents and to then be able to make an informed choice .
We will all have a very crucial year , because on the 7 June the citizens of Europe will vote in elections .
It is , of course , absolutely fundamental that they have access to information .
We are still carrying a burden of historical differences in culture and views on what should be made public or not .
I think we are still struggling with that in some cases .
I come from a country where we have a very long tradition of the principle of openness and access to documents , while in other Member States it has been the opposite : It is first secret and only the things you decide should not be secret should be made public .
I think this is still something that we have to try to tackle and deal with .
I think that the report has also shown all the linkages and the interlinkages between all these issues and we have to look at it from a political point of view .
Again , the beauty of the Lisbon Treaty is that it would actually extend the right of information and access to documents and hopefully help end the ' blame game ' , as it would also give us a chance to follow what goes on in the European Council .
Mr Cashman and others mentioned this and I think it is so important for all of us .
I hope you know that you can count on me to continue , on a daily basis , to strive to make sure that the Commission improves its access to documents .
We can look at what we do in the committees ; we can improve what we do on registers and on a number of points that Mr Cappato has raised and that are helpful to us .
I think you should keep up the pressure on the Commission , but you have also shown that it concerns Parliament as well .
You can also improve and add to openness and transparency .
This is certainly a part of strengthening democracy in Europe .
We will have the chance to do some work on this during preparations for the EP elections .
That would be one of the ultimate tests for all of us .
Thank you very much for the discussion and we will come back to it very soon when we discuss Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I offer my very warm thanks to the Commissioner .
I did not mention this before but the report acknowledges that there has been an improvement in effective access , in positive responses to applications for access to documents .
What I have tried to stress is the need for a change of mindset , you might call it , to a paradigm whereby information is already designed to be public the moment it is produced .
Mrs Cederschiöld , I am not asking for more paperwork due to the need to disclose and publicise everything , but for a system that is already set up to ensure that we not only have access to a document when we ask for it , but that we also have access to information at the moment it is produced , while naturally respecting confidentiality regarding political groups and political group meetings .
This is also addressed to Mrs Doyle , and to Mr Herrero , who has left .
I am talking here about greater and easier availability of information ; of course , this does not mean that groups would no longer be able to hold meetings behind closed doors .
I am not talking about an absolute and ideological obligation applying to any meeting , but about ensuring that the infrastructure is in place if we want it .
I do not believe it to be true , as Mr Herrero said , that information on attendances , votes and so on is fully kept and fully available .
That is not true .
Minutes are available for individual committees and the information can only be put together by conducting a meeting-by-meeting investigation .
I personally have been a direct victim of this .
An Italian newspaper published banner headlines saying that I was absent more than anyone else , simply because I started mid-term and they based their calculations on the few months after I joined , comparing the attendances to the previous three years .
This is an example to show that we ourselves must make the information available to allow maximum transparency , in order to prevent the manipulation and abuse of this information .
I am well aware that the worth of an MEP 's work does not lie solely in attendances and absences , but I cannot understand the reason why we ourselves should half conceal this information , opening the door to the worst and most demagogic kinds of manipulation .
I therefore hope that on these aspects and on the aspect of access to data by disabled people - I cannot imagine why the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has asked for a separate vote on this - I really hope that we do not have any last-minute surprises because I think this is a matter of fundamental importance for everyone .
Mr President , thank you for your understanding .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 14 January 2009 , at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Regarding the latter this is not the case of all Commissioners and it is unfortunate that currently we are not in a position to publish data relating to other funds received .
However , there is a general misconception on our revenues .
Firstly , to date all members of the European Parliament receive the same salary as members of their National Parliaments .
This means that the Maltese Delegation in the EP receives an honorarium identical to that of MPs to employ and run our office both in Brussels and Malta .
Perhaps it would be a good idea if Commissioners and Parliamentarians will have to fill audited financial statements on an annual basis , regarding all revenues received .
These statements should be available to the public .
I think that this suggestion may be the balance between the two important issues of data protection and transparency .
Mr President , I agree with many of the issues raised in this report on which we will be voting on Thursday .
In future the Council must ensure that all its debates , documents and information are open to public scrutiny .
I also support the proposal in the report that there should be more information on Parliament 's website on Members ' activities and attendance .
Public contracts in the fields of defence and security ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Lambsdorff , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the coordination of procedures for the award of certain public works contracts , public supply contracts and public service contracts in the fields of defence and security - C6-0467 / 2007 - .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , worldwide there are currently 13 EU missions through which we are helping to bring peace and stability .
Nine missions have already ended .
In many of these operations , armed forces , often including police officers , from our Member States enter difficult environments .
At the same time , we all know that there are still many more trouble spots and that demand for European intervention in international politics is more likely to increase than decrease , and , unfortunately , we also know that we Europeans are often not in a position to carry out our missions in the way that we really ought to , with optimum equipment and in an interoperable and strategically redeployable manner .
We must achieve this , as we owe this to our soldiers and police officers involved in operations throughout the world .
This goal is a long way off , however .
One of the reasons for this is our fragmented defence equipment market .
Our 27 Member States indulge in 89 different , sometimes even duplicated , research programmes .
The US has only 29 .
There is far too little cooperation between the Member States in connection with product development .
So-called traditional suppliers are preferred over non-traditional , but perhaps better suppliers and that is what we want to change .
Goods and services to the value of around EUR 91 billion are acquired each year on the European defence equipment market .
Of this , only 13 % is , on average , put out to tender Europe-wide .
The sorry country bringing up the rear in this case , I might add , is Germany with only around 2 % .
The bottom line is that the internal market for defence-related products is not working .
Many important innovations in this high-tech industry cannot be utilised , our armed forces do not get the best equipment and taxpayers ' money is wasted .
As a result , highly developed defence-related products are becoming increasingly expensive , while the defence budget remains the same or is even getting smaller .
In this situation , it is clear what it is all about .
It is not about greater arms expenditure , but about spending the existing money more wisely .
That is what we need to do .
We owe it to our taxpayers .
Therefore , in a report in 2005 this Parliament called on the Commission to submit a directive for this sector .
It has done so , in agreement with both Parliament and the Council .
It was important for us , and also for me as rapporteur , that President Sarkozy expressly mentioned the European defence equipment market in his speech about the priorities of the French Presidency .
With that it was clear that Parliament , the Council and the Commission would work together on this in a united effort .
The agreement at first reading is a result of this common political will .
Tomorrow , we will - hopefully together - lay the foundation for a new European legal framework , which will ensure a genuine opening of the market and greater transparency and competition with regard to procurement .
We must also view this directive in context .
In December , we successfully adopted the Directive on the transfer of defence-related products within the Community .
The directive before us today is the second important building block in the European defence equipment package .
Although the two directives function independently in theory , in practice they need one another .
This is another reason why the completion tomorrow of our work on the defence equipment package is so important .
It will not bring a revolution in the market overnight , that is clear , but it is an important step in the right direction and it is able to move European security and defence policy substantially further forward .
I would like to offer my sincere thanks to my colleagues , the shadow rapporteurs Charlotte Cederschiöld , Barbara Weiler and Gisela Kallenbach for their ever fair , sometimes critical , but always constructive cooperation .
I would also like to thank the Council and the Commission .
Everyone involved showed a wonderful mixture of political will , professionalism and a willingness to compromise .
We all owe it to our citizens to make constructive policy for Europe together .
I hope that we will fulfil this obligation tomorrow for our sphere of competence with the adoption of this package .
Incidentally , we should be having this debate in Brussels and not in Strasbourg . Thank you .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first of all apologise for the weakness of my voice , as I have a very heavy cold .
You are about to vote on the proposal for a directive on the procurement of defence and security equipment , which the Commission tabled in December 2007 as part of the so-called ' defence package ' .
This proposal is a major step forward towards the establishment of a common European defence market , which , by itself , is an important contribution to the Union 's security and defence policy .
In other words , this directive is a politically highly important instrument which will help to strengthen Europe 's defence capabilities , make public spending more efficient and enhance the security of our citizens .
The negotiation process for the proposal has benefited from the close cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
Therefore , I would like to warmly thank the rapporteur , Mr Lambsdorff , for his intensive and efficient work to achieve an agreement with the Council in first reading .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their constructive cooperation .
I also want to congratulate the French presidency , together with the Slovenian presidency , for the way they successfully spurred the negotiations in Council .
And last but not least , I would like to thank the Czech presidency for its commitment in finalising this file .
The Commission welcomes the text that we have now on the table .
The new directive is tailor-made for defence and security procurement .
It will give contracting authorities the flexibility they need to negotiate contracts which are often particularly complex and sensitive .
It will also allow them to ask for specific security clauses to protect classified information and ensure their security of supply .
All this makes the directive an instrument which Member States can apply to most of their defence procurement without putting at risk their security interests .
The new directive will also apply to sensitive procurements in the field of non-military security .
This approach is in line with today 's strategic environment , in which transnational threats and new technologies have blurred the dividing line between military and non-military , internal and external security .
Public procurement cannot ignore these developments : in cases where equipment for police forces , for example , has features similar to those of defence equipment , it is only logical to make the same procurement rules applicable .
All this will have major advantages : the new directive will make it possible for Member States to limit the use of the derogation under Article 296 of the EC Treaty to exceptional cases .
Hence , the principles of the internal market will , at last , apply to important parts of defence and security markets in Europe .
Fair and transparent procurement rules will become applicable throughout the Union and allow companies to tender more easily in other Member States .
European industries will get a much larger ' home ' market with longer production runs and economies of scale .
This , in turn , will reduce costs and lead to lower prices .
At the end , we will achieve greater openness of markets to the benefit of all : industries will become more competitive , armed forces will get better value for money , and taxpayers will benefit from more efficiency in public spending .
All this is also the fruit of your work and your input .
Let me therefore once again thank you and congratulate you on this .
Mr President , a European market in defence-related products is not created overnight , but the rapporteur has built up confident cooperation that has helped us , together with the Council , and in particular the Commission , to take a first , very important step .
Now defence-related products will be clearly incorporated within the ground rules of the internal market , which should help to lower prices .
Along with a more open market come increased European competitiveness and more efficient equipment production .
The French Government also deserves praise for its constructive role , but the rapporteur , Mr Lambsdorff , has , of course , been the most important contributor .
I would also like to thank the defence industry for its valuable contribution , which has increased flexibility .
Many elements from the 2004 Procurement Directive have been retained here .
At the same time , respect is shown for national security interests and special conditions for supply and the protection of information , for example .
Application of Article 296 is retained as per the current legislation , but misuse is prevented .
This should also be welcomed by the industry , which will , of course , continue to be able to influence the implementation of the directive as well as the development of new practices .
We in Parliament are pleased that the Council has met us halfway with regard to the threshold values and transparency , to name just a couple of examples of the many successes of the European Parliament , the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection and the rapporteur .
I , personally , am pleased that it has been possible to resolve the most controversial issues with regard to existing EC law .
If Parliament , as I hope and believe , widely supports this report , then an important and logical step forward will have been taken .
My sincere thanks go to all my fellow Members and other stakeholders who have helped to make this a constructive and exciting process .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of last year there were some remarkable headlines proclaiming ' the world is rearming ' , ' trade in weapons is booming ' , ' defence equipment industry - expensive through lack of competition ' and other cases of corruption in Germany as well as in other countries of the European Union .
We Social Democrats are absolutely clear in our opposition to this kind of arms race , this increase in weaponry , and also the laissez-faire attitude towards corruption .
We are in agreement with our national colleagues on this issue .
The aims of this legislative package , with these two directives on transfer and procurement that we are discussing here today , will ensure that it is not just a matter of competitiveness , but also of putting a stop to the wasting of taxpayers ' money on the production of defence equipment and of preventing corruption .
These are good enough reasons alone for the Social Democrats to accept the result .
There will be a European legal framework for awarding contracts for goods and services in the area of defence and security , there will be more cooperation between the Member States , in other words no unnecessary overlaps and no deceiving of Member States by the arms companies , and there will be more competition overall and fewer exceptions under Article 296 .
For us Members - for all groups , I believe - it was important for us to have introduced the Remedies Directive , in other words the directive prepared by Mr Fruteau .
For the Council , it was not at all so clear cut .
For us it was important for there to be sanctions in the event of corruption , even down to exclusion from contracts .
I think that is something new for this industry , which has been spoilt up to now .
However , it was also important to us that the results be viable for all 27 Member States .
Even if only six or seven Member States have their own production and a few less get involved in trade , it is important to have 27 States behind us .
We have succeeded in that .
I am not sure whether everything will work the way we imagine it will and therefore we have incorporated the fact that Parliament wishes to continue to have a certain amount of control .
We want to be informed , not just automatically by the Commission , but we want to be informed of the results and about the transposition of this package of directives .
In future , when we will have an even stronger European internal market and will gain European powers , as Mr Sarkozy has of course planned , then the European Parliament as an elected institution in Europe must be involved in genuine control , a control that we have in the national parliaments , but do not yet have in the European Parliament .
This , however , is a task for the future .
In Germany , for example , we have got our fingers burnt with the production of defence equipment and increased prices .
We have the Eurofighter - an excessively expensive , if not the most expensive , project - and I am sure that every Member State has similar experiences .
Finally , I do not wish to express my thanks .
The cooperation was quite constructive and the results are , above all , significant .
However , I would like to say quite openly that the parliamentary procedure was intolerable .
Reaching compromises with the Council and the Commission at first reading simply should not be the work of this House .
For this reason , this procedure must only be an absolute exception in future .
It was not , in fact , necessary for this legislative package .
We should stick to our guns and , immediately after the vote , do away with this type of procedure for non-parliamentary work .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating my colleague , Mr Lambsdorff , on his excellent report .
I know he dedicated himself to this very important work .
I consider it vital to create a common arms market and to establish a legal framework for this in order to further develop the European security and defence policy ( ESDP ) .
I also welcome the important achievement that the principles of the Treaty , in particular transparency , non-discrimination and openness , will also be implemented in the defence and security market and , as has already been said , this will result in an improvement of the efficiency of defence spending .
The Commission 's proposal , as well as Mr Lambsdorff 's report , managed to establish a set of rules concerning procurement contracts in the field of security and defence , which allow the proper functioning of the common arms market .
I want to refer to at least two major improvements for both suppliers and the contracting authorities which aim to protect the security of the EU and its Member States .
I would mention here the provisions relating to the security of supply , namely information about tenderers and subcontractors provided to the contracting authorities and the commitments tenderers have to make to ensure security of supply .
On the other hand , tenderers are also protected by the introduction of the review procedure , which guarantees the awarding process is fair and no discrimination occurs .
The proposal increases the transparency in the work procedure , but Member States should not at all be reluctant to it as their security interests are safeguarded , especially by maintaining the derogations from the disclosure of information when security interests are at stake .
In conclusion , I should like to emphasise the fact that it is very important for us to have a common European market for defence .
At the same time , when we are discussing this issue - the common European defence market - or perhaps if we discuss more sensitive issues like offsets in the future , we should seriously take into consideration the strategic interests and the concrete situation of each and every Member State .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Lambsdorff has done an excellent job .
Congratulations .
The spending of public money has always stirred up strong feelings .
This is especially true in the case of procurement for the army or defence forces .
Large sums of money are involved and we need to select manufacturers and service-providers who provide the best service , rather than the cheapest solution .
We need high quality at a reasonable price .
We also have to consider how thorough all the work will be and the quality of the materials used , as well as specific issues such as confidentiality , even secrecy , especially in relation to crucial issues .
These matters are also linked to the issues of offsetting and ensuring a return on investment .
I think that we will have to return to this subject .
I believe that the position presented in the proposal for a directive is correct .
In my opinion , the proposed solutions will increase the efficiency of the European public tender system in the field of defence .
They deserve our acceptance .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his constructive cooperation , because for all the justified criticism of the procedure at first reading , this cooperation was in actual fact the prerequisite for the voice of Parliament clearly being heard in the trialogue .
We are deciding today on a compromise with regard to an object of trade , the previous market for which was limited to just a few Member States .
It has been a really interesting experience for me just to see fundamental advocates of the internal market and competition suddenly pulling out all the stops to continue to be able to utilise national decision-making and isolation mechanisms .
They did not succeed and that is a good thing .
Why was that ?
It was because more competition in the trade in defence equipment will hopefully in future result in a move away from the dictation of prices and in the chance that the public money designated for this purpose will be reduced and used more efficiently .
The same goes for reducing corruption .
We owe this to our citizens .
It is also clear that unambiguous tendering conditions will now apply , which will lead to greater transparency in connection with the awarding of contracts and will at last also give SMEs a real chance of entering the market .
Moreover , all conceivable loopholes for avoiding the tendering process have also been reduced , and any envisaged deviations must be agreed in advance with the Commission .
The bartering which up to now has indeed been prohibited under law but has nevertheless been common practice has not been legalised by this directive .
Last but not least , legal remedy can now be utilised for the first time .
I had hoped that we would Europeanise it further , reduce the threshold values and so gain greater transparency , but this is a major step in the right direction and I am looking forward to its transposition .
Mr President , this directive is part of the defence package , the context of which is , and I quote , ' the strategy for a stronger and more competitive European defence industry ' .
The principal guideline , as with so many things , is the free market for defence-related products too , in other words weapons , and weapons are for killing and waging war .
The aim of the directive is to improve the efficiency and competitiveness of the arms industry in the EU .
Mr Swoboda spoke plainly in the previous debate .
He said that we need better initial conditions for the European arms industry in view of the competition , in particular from the United States .
In 2005 , the EU Member States jointly became for the first time the top arms exporter in the world .
Of these exports , 70 % come from the four large nations of France , Germany , the United Kingdom and Italy .
The main importer states are those of the Middle East .
Our concern should not be for a more efficient arms industry , but rather for disarmament , and unlike the efficiency of the arms industry , for this there is no directive .
It is very clear what this is really all about .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , but also to the Subcommittee on Security and Defence and its chairman and draftsman of the opinion on the Lambsdorff report , my friend Karl von Wogau .
We are not talking here about the export of weapons to states outside the European internal market , only about the issue of how the sale and trade in weapons within the European internal market , that is in the 27 Member States of the European Union , can be made more cost-effective and more efficient .
I very much welcome the fact that Parliament has taken up a common position here , because , as a result , citizens will ultimately make considerable savings in a market of around EUR 70 billion per year , and therefore can in some way be paid a peace dividend .
This work and - it is a little disappointing that so few representatives of the Council are here today - this decision are extremely welcome in the light of an extremely difficult discussion between the Member States in the past .
As much as I agree with the opinion about the difficulties experienced in the trialogue , as expressed by the Social Democrats , I have to say that one day we will achieve a milestone in European defence policy with this .
I am even more disappointed that so few fellow Members wish to be present for this decision .
This morning we celebrated 10 years of the euro .
I hope that in a few years we will also look back on today , as this is a milestone in European cooperation between Member States in the area of defence and of foreign and security policy , because in future it will , in principle , be the case that whatever requirements we set in our own Member State , the same will also apply automatically in all the other Member States .
This involves a large credit of trust that the Member States have now become willing to give .
For this I am particularly grateful .
However , I would also like to thank the Commission , which has worked with much vigour on this directive , which has overcome the opposition in the Member States and which has tried constructively to help Parliament to find a way through the tangled undergrowth of public procurement law .
The positive points have already been mentioned , including the improvements that will be made to procurement law and I do not wish to repeat these .
With the second part of the package for creating this genuine European internal market for defence-related products we have indeed come another important mile along the road .
This also strengthens the autonomous ability of the European Union to respond to international crises , work to which Mr von Wogau has devoted himself in particular in the Subcommittee on Security and Defence .
If then , as recently described , an autonomous operation of the European Union in Africa under the leadership of an Irish General with a Polish deputy and troops comprising members from 15 different Member States is possible , then it shows how far the European Union has come in building a Europe of Defence .
We need to go further along this road . Thank you very much .

( PT ) Mr President , firstly I would like to acknowledge the rapporteur , Mr Lambsdorff , and the shadow rapporteurs , particularly Mrs Weiler .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe it to be essential that we move towards integration of national defence markets and even strategic coordination of their production .
We must move forward , with all the necessary specificities and precautions , towards applying the basic rules of the internal market to the defence industries , increasing transparency in the tendering processes that are organised and the contracts that are awarded involving Member States of the European Union .
However , at the same time we must help to create the conditions that will make European equipment and products more competitive in world markets .
It seems important to me , Commissioner McCreevy , that this directive be able to guarantee improvements in the legal framework for public contracts in the fields of defence and security .
It must further the construction of the internal market while , obviously , respecting the rights and interests of Member States , especially in the field of security ; I refer specifically to those that manufacture arms , munitions and defence and security equipment , such as my own country , for example .
I would also , Mr President , highlight the provisions that allow easier access to this market for small and medium-sized enterprises , specifically by improving the rules for subcontracting .
I also emphasise the prospect of making a greater and more profound impact on the industrial fabric , in order to create a true European market in the defence industries .
That may also contribute to strengthening research and development , not just within these industries , but also in a section of European industry that feeds off their development .
In conclusion , I believe reference could be made to the obvious link between the defence industries and the foreign policies of the Union .
However , in response to a recent speech , I would like to quote a classical Roman saying : ' if you want peace , prepare for war ' .
In the European Union , as it is almost a pacifist superpower , we call these industries ' defence industries ' and not ' war industries ' because we want peace , not war .
That is also why we need defence industries .
( PL ) Mr President , the United States spends around USD 500 billion on defence .
The European Union spends a little over 200 billion on the same .
However , the question is whether , in return for this 200 billion , the military capabilities of the European Union Member States really reflect that investment , as is the case in the United States .
When I was defence minister , I met industry representatives and told them that I was the minister responsible for national defence , and not industrial defence .
I think that the sort of directive we are discussing today , and for which I would like to express my thanks and my gratitude to Mr Lambsdorff , will lead to the large sums that we spend on defence being used in a significantly more sensible and reasonable manner , and that the military capability of the European Union will reflect our level of spending on defence .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to point out once again that we are talking about a package : the resolution in December and this debate today .
Only when we view both together - the regulation on transfers of defence-related products within the Community and now the procurement directive - do they make sense .
I have prepared the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
We had a core political objective , namely that with the harmonisation of the European arms industry and the liberalisation within the EU , tougher means of control with regard to the issue of exports outside the EU should at the same time be implemented .
If we are going to mention the negative headlines , we should mention the good ones as well .
At its last meeting at the end of last year , the Council , under the French Presidency , adopted the Code of Conduct as a legally binding instrument .
That is a good thing and it is what this Parliament has always called for .
I would therefore like to point out once again that this harmonisation that we consider to be right - and not only the harmonisation , but also the development of a sanction mechanism that is to be used if this directive is contravened - is now also under the control of the nation states and the Members .
We will follow this process , and not only the harmonisation , with great interest .

( FR ) Mr President , I would like to add my support to the line taken by Mr Schwab a few moments ago .
I would say that adopting this directive today is a major decision and we owe it to the very remarkable efforts of our rapporteur , Mr Lambsdorff , our shadow rapporteur , Charlotte Cederschiöld , whom I thank and naturally , the French Presidency who , at the end of last year , made great efforts to achieve a compromise .
In fact , what we are doing today is to finish a cycle which has been remarkably fast , that is to say a few months , which includes both the directive on the internal market in defence products , adopted in December , the Code of Conduct for exports , which became law at the same time and , finally , this directive reconciling Article 296 of the Treaty with the common rules on public contracts .
In fact , this whole set , so to speak , commits us to what I will call ' communitisation ' of the defence economy .
This might , of course , appear to be inimical to the desire for sovereignty or even to the very characteristics of defence policies .
In fact , this translates a desire for integration of state sovereignties .
The same thing will be noted in the field of justice .
Throughout the French Presidency and since the Portuguese and Slovenian Presidencies , enormous progress has been made in yet another field in which national sovereignties wished to block any agreement or cooperation .
In fact , ladies and gentlemen , by adopting such a text , I believe we are helping to bring an end to the ideological debate on the nature and form of the European project .
It is an area and a power , and it will be increasingly recognised in the fields of defence and foreign policy .
Mr President , as British Conservatives , we are generally strong protagonists of open markets , but , as a number of speakers have confirmed , the underlying thrust of this report is strengthening ESDP and EU integration rather than any real economic benefits .
It certainly has nothing to do with strengthening defence capabilities .
I can see that there could be some marginal benefits in easier UK access to some other European countries ' markets in defence-related procurement .
But there is a far greater advantage for others to access the UK market , which has the largest defence spend - and , by the way , the UK already has the most open defence procurement market in Europe .
Of particular concern is that , under the proposed rules , a government or firm that has made huge investment in some aspect of defence R & D may no longer be in a position to recoup this investment in the development and production phase .
Development contracts are expected to be opened up to European competition , leaving a national government with no means of protecting intellectual property , jobs or export opportunities .
It will be a brake on R & D.
There are other concerns as well , but I have to say that this report is not really necessary from a defence , industrial or , indeed , economic point of view .
Mr President , the directive on defence procurement is an important step towards both the EDEM and the ESDP .
I recognise the difficulties of reconciling free market principles with inevitable discretion on defence deals , and common rules covering the award of public contracts with individual practices regarding defence contracts .
This very complex set of regulations has , of course , to pass the test of practice , because trying to fit in the same box adverse elements like transparency and secrecy , and commonality and individuality , will require constant monitoring and the determination to penalise any individual attempt to favour one over the other in a continuous effort to keep a fine balance between all four .
Proper functioning will then be both a function and a reflection of the determination of the EU bodies to referee this nascent European market , and of the true willingness of national defence champions and the Member States behind them to respect and play the game according to these new rules .
One word on offsetting .
For countries like mine , Romania , offset is , at least for the time being , an important mechanism to ensure the survival of our national industry .
( RO ) European unity and security have again been put in jeopardy at the moment by both the financial and economic crisis and the energy crisis .
This has shown once again that only unity and solidarity enable us to successfully tackle the major problems in the modern world .
The introduction of common , transparent rules governing procurement in the market for security and defence-related products is an important step in tightening European security policy .
It is also a mechanism specific to the market economy enabling European industry to compete successfully with major global players , especially in the United States .
A sound Community scheme needs to be set up as soon as possible for handling information security , while an adequate control system needs to be put in place for exports of security and defence-related products and equipment to third countries .
The ratification and enforcement of the Lisbon Treaty will allow well-structured cooperation to be established on a permanent basis in the area of security policy , which is essential to the EU 's future .
( PL ) Since the 1990s it has been clear that the fragmentation of the European defence markets has had negative economic repercussions .
During the past 20 years , defence spending has been cut , leading to lower turnover and employment levels , as well as cuts in investment in the field of research and new military technologies .
Today , even the large Member States have trouble funding new defence systems .
A European defence technological and industrial base should be created in order to develop the Member States ' fundamental defence capabilities .
This step is vital , in order to meet global challenges in the field of defence .
It is also important to have a harmonised European legislative framework , which would allow the Member States to implement Community provisions without threatening their own defence interests .
We should not forget an important element , namely the introduction of a control procedure .
It should aim to guarantee tenderers effective legal protection , foster transparency and prevent discrimination during the procurement process .

( EL ) Mr President , I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Lambsdorff , and the shadow rapporteurs on the important work they have done .
The main feature of the European market is the fragmentation that prevails at national level .
Exports of products relating to the defence and security sector in question are subject to national licensing systems which differ in terms of procedure , scope and deadlines .
This new legislation promotes transparency and lays the foundations for creating a single open European market in defence equipment , which is also a basic factor in strengthening European security and defence policy .
It is also important that there are fundamental provisions governing the security of supply and information .
The citation of Article 296 of the Treaty establishing the European Communities has also been clarified , but is now confined to actual derogations , as provided for in the Treaty and as requested by the European Court of Justice .
To close , I should like to point out that it is important that there are flexible arrangements which strengthen the role of small and medium-sized enterprises which , in some Member States , form a sector that employs thousands of workers .


Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Lambsdorff for the excellent work he has done and of course his shadows , particularly , Mrs Cederschiöld , but let me also underline something that Mr Toubon said : the fantastic work done by the French presidency in achieving agreement on this directive .
I hope that when we return to it in a few years ' time we will realise that we should not have been afraid to talk about a European defence equipment market because of a common European market .
It is in the common defence interest of Europe and it is in the common interest of Europe to have more competition .
Let me highlight one part of this directive which is highly important for many Member States .
This is particularly the text concerning subcontracting .
I am very happy that the agreements reached with the Council and the Commission on the text concerning subcontracting have reflected to a large extent what Parliament has been pushing for , namely that there is more transparency in terms of subcontracting ; secondly , that there is no discrimination on a national basis when subcontracts are being drafted and finally that national authorities have the ability to allow contractors to subcontract up to 30 % of their contracts .
This is in the interests of bringing our industry together across Europe .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank all the participants in the debate .
It is clear that the present text is a compromise and as such cannot take on board all the suggestions made with the attention of improving it .
At the same time , however , Parliament has many reasons to be satisfied .
Firstly , it was Parliament that asked the Commission in its resolution of 17 November 2005 in the Green Paper on defence procurement to prepare this directive .
Hence , it is to a large extent Parliament 's proposal .
Secondly , and even more importantly , the current text has benefited enormously from your input during the process .
A huge number of amendments from the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection report have been integrated , in particular with regard to the scope , the provisions on remedies , and transparency .
The Commission can accept all these amendments and therefore supports the text .
We are convinced that this directive will make a difference and contribute to a real European defence market .
Let us face it , only five years ago , the idea of building this market with Community instruments was pure science fiction to most people , but today it is about to become a reality .
We should not miss this opportunity .
Madam President , I would urge my fellow Member Mr van Orden to consider the fact that the only person here who supports him is the German far-left extremist .
To Mr Pflüger from the left , I would say that a glance at the law will facilitate its understanding .
It is not about exports at all , it is about the European internal market .
Otherwise , what Mrs Weiler said is correct .
She said that these products are expensive through lack of competition .
Yes , when there is no competition , they are expensive .
We will hopefully introduce more competition into the European internal market .
This will certainly not make these products cheap , but perhaps more reasonably priced at least .
This is a big opportunity , an opportunity for the industry to open up new markets and an opportunity for medium-sized companies to penetrate these markets , too .
However - and this is quite important - it is also an opportunity for transparency and thus for civil society , which will be able to keep a better eye on the way this market is structured and on what is happening , and for many non-governmental organisations .
I would like to expressly thank Mr Mladenov and Mr Toubon for their reference to the unusual work involved in this project .
In essence , it is a project under the second pillar , that is the strengthening of the European security and defence policy , using an instrument of the first pillar , namely an internal market directive .
Without the splendid work of the French Presidency mediating between the Member States - an extremely difficult task - it would never have succeeded .
We must expand these opportunities .
It will be an opportunity for the political Europe .
It will be an opportunity for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and an opportunity for the Europe of values and of peace .
This is an opportunity that we must take advantage of .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to make a request under Rule 145 of the Rules of Procedure .
If you are addressed in person , you have the opportunity to respond briefly .
It will become clear relatively quickly who the extremists are here , if you take a look at what all this is about .
It is about market extremism , which is evident in this area .
I said that a more efficient defence industry within the European Union would naturally have an impact on arms exports .
No one can deny that this is the case .
To suggest anything else would indicate a total fixation on the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I would like to highlight the importance of the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the coordination of procedures for the award of certain public works contracts , public supply contracts and public service contracts in the fields of defence and security , which I strongly support .
The directive opens the way for basing public procurement in the field of security and defence on transparent criteria , without discriminating against tenderers from other EU Member States , whilst simultaneously guaranteeing the security of these countries .
That is why it is so important to be able to invoke the clause in the Treaty establishing the European Community which provides that its provisions may be disregarded if that step is necessary to protect the essential interests of an EU Member State .
Joint production , joint purchasing , public procurement -especially in terms of the most technologically advanced , and therefore more expensive , equipment - will give the European Security and Defence Policy a better chance of success .
The proposal for a directive , which I support , is a positive step towards opening up the markets of the EU Member States and reducing rivalry in the sector between countries which could make use of shared and cost-effective solutions .
At the same time , I would like to express my reservations regarding the order of preference of standards examined during the process of drawing up technical specifications for the purchase of defence equipment .
Defence ministers should be responsible for establishing implementation priorities .
Moreover , I also noted the lack of any reference in this proposal to the Code of Best Practice in the Supply Chain of the European Defence Agency , which is implemented by suppliers .
It is therefore not clear whether this criterion should continue to be taken into account when selecting suppliers .
It is my firm view that defence and security are of paramount importance to each Member State , but they are above all areas in the interest of every citizen in the European Union , as well as of the European defence industry .
It goes without saying that the option of derogating from this directive will continue to apply .
For this reason , it is vitally important that Member States are urged to improve their legislation governing public procurement in the area of national security .
They should also use the opportunity provided by Article 296 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , solely on the condition that they have guaranteed a similar level of transparency , accountability , focus on results and efficiency , including an adequate mechanism for settling disputes which have arisen .
I would like to state that a directive , no matter how comprehensive and specific it is , cannot replace the need for the EU 's defence industry and , more generally , its security industry to have a clear vision .
The lack of any vision and strategy cannot be compensated for by rules and exceptions which will make countries ' cheat ' to protect their private interests , wholesale or retail , according to the size of their defence industry .
For this reason , a strategy must be devised in this area , which will be in the interest of upholding European principles .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0001 / 2009 ) .
We are going to deal with a series of questions addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Ten years of the euro
In light of the recent celebrations to mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the euro , can the Commission comment on the key lessons learnt in terms of the coordination of fiscal policy across the euro area , especially in light of the recent financial and economic crisis ?
Member of the Commission . - While the experiences with budgetary coordination have , overall , been positive , some lessons can be drawn .
The analysis of the first 10 years reinforces the case for strengthening the effectiveness of budgetary surveillance in good times .
It also shows the need to address broader issues which may affect the macroeconomic stability of a Member State and the overall functioning of economic and monetary union .
Fiscal policy coordination should better guide national budgetary behaviour over the whole cycle - that is , both in good times and in bad times .
Increased attention should be paid to monitoring public debt developments while medium-term budgetary objectives should be strengthened to address implicit liabilities .
All these kinds of developments call for deeper budgetary surveillance .
But surveillance should also be broadened to take account of developments within Member States that may affect budgetary sustainability , such as the growth of current account deficits , persistent inflation divergences , persistent divergences in the evolution of unit labour costs , or trends of unbalanced growth .
Surveillance must build on the existing instruments .
The key instruments for fiscal policy surveillance and economic policy coordination are clearly anchored in the Treaty and , indeed , in the Stability and Growth Pact .
The recent adoption of the European economic recovery plan by the Commission on 26 November last year also breaks new ground as far as governance and budgetary coordination is concerned .
It highlights the Commission 's role as a catalyst for short-term emergency economic stabilisation policies .
Based on our own economic assessment , the Commission has quickly set up a fully fledged and quantified economic response to the economic slowdown .
The Commission 's quick delivery is a response to the clear risks of bigger-than-ever national economic policies at this juncture .
The recovery plan recognises the inherent division of tasks embedded into the EU economic policy framework .
Since Member States are responsible for budgetary policy , the Commission set a global target for additional fiscal stimulus , taking into account the amount needed to kick-start the EU economy as a whole .
Member States are free to devise the size and composition of their respective fiscal stimulus .
It now implies challenges in terms of coordination and surveillance of the implementation of national measures .
The Commission and the ECOFIN Council will jointly monitor the implementation of the national measures in compliance with the principles laid down in the recovery plan .
Looking forward , judicious implementation of the fiscal surveillance framework will anchor expectations of future fiscal developments .
Together with the strengthening of national budgetary frameworks and rules , and the implementation of reforms curbing the rise in age-related expenditure , this will ensure that sustainable positions are restored .
It thus contains adverse effects of expectations of rising deficits and debt on risk premia and private consumption and investment .
Commissioner , I very much appreciate your reply .
In view of the fact that we have a common monetary policy , but given the ongoing problems , do you see a greater role for the Eurogroup , while respecting the taxation policies in individual states ?
Do you think that the implementation or the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty would in any way affect that area in relation to taxation ?
I think the important thing is that we need to work together .
How do you envisage new ways of trying to generate stimulus in economies of the EU countries ?
Member of the Commission . - What is the role of the Eurogroup ?
As you know , the Eurogroup is right now , and will continue to be after the Lisbon Treaty comes into force , an informal body .
So , the Eurogroup cannot adopt formal decisions even when they relate only to euro-area members belonging to the Ecofin Council .
But over the past three or four years , since we began with the presidency of Jean-Claude Juncker , in particular , in January 2005 , the Eurogroup has improved the content of the discussion agenda .
Members of the Eurogroup together with the Commission and the ECB discuss this deeper budgetary surveillance and broader economic surveillance that I mentioned in my introductory remarks .
The Eurogroup often discusses other issues concerning the external role of the euro and the external dimension of euro are .
Tax issues , as you know very well , are a very delicate issue .
According to the present Treaty but also according to the Lisbon Treaty in the future , tax decisions require unanimity at EU level , and I do not foresee any kinds of changes in the decision-making framework in the near future .
( DE ) Commissioner , I am interested in the following point .
Over the last 10 years the Eurogroup has been a huge success and , particularly during the most recent crisis , other countries have expressed an interest in joining the group .
Is the Commission already planning which countries could possibly become members in future ?
Are there other countries interested in joining the euro area because being a member has proved to be so worthwhile ?
( SV ) Firstly , I would like to ask the following question : if it has been so successful over the last 10 years , why do Italy and Greece , to take two examples , have a 10-year treasury bond rate that is a couple of percentage points above that of Germany ?
Secondly , why is Sweden 's 10-year interest rate 0.4 percentage points lower than Germany 's , and Finland 's 0.6 percentage points higher , when both are well-managed countries ?
Member of the Commission . - As you know , Slovakia joined the euro zone on 1 January this year , so we now have 16 of the 27 EU Member States participating fully in the EMU and sharing the same currency .
Who will be the next ?
It is not up to the Commission to answer that question .
It is up to the candidates who wish to join the euro area to apply .
At the present time we know which EU Member States would like to join the euro area as soon as possible but unfortunately do not fulfil all the criteria required by the Treaty - the Baltic states , Hungary and others - and we know that there are two EU Member States , namely the UK and Denmark , that got an opt-out so that they can be excluded from the responsibility of all EU Member States to prepare themselves and their economies to join the euro area one day .
I do not know who will be the first to join the euro area after Slovakia .
It could perhaps be one of the two Member States with an opt-out .
It is possible that in the coming months Denmark , for instance , might decide to no longer have an opt-out and to apply to join the euro area .
In fact , Denmark fulfils all the criteria to join the euro area according to the Treaty , but it is up to the Danish authorities , the Danish Parliament and maybe the Danish citizens in a referendum , to decide .
This morning we were commemorating here the 10th anniversary of the euro .
I am sure that in the next 10 years all - or almost all - the EU Member States will join the euro area because , in these times of crisis during this difficult economic period , the advantages of being a member of the euro area have increased a great deal . Those who have not yet joined the euro area realise that the advantages are much bigger and much more important than the responsibilities they must bear as members of the euro area , or the difficulties .
Regarding your remarks , if I were in your position I would not argue against the euro area in terms of interest rates .
Ask Denmark what has happened with their interest rates during this period of crisis .
Denmark is a non-euro-area member whose currency is linked with the euro and whose Central Bank closely follows the decisions of the European Central Bank .
The markets are not rewarding those who are not in the euro .
They are putting higher risk premiums on them .
Subject : Collapse in dairy prices on the EU market
According to a Commission working document dated 21 November 2008 on monitoring price trends , annexed to the communication on food prices in Europe ( p . 9 ) , between October 2007 and October 2008 the price of butter on the EU market fell by 30 % , while that of powdered milk decreased by 40 % .
Both prices thus appear to be descending unstoppably towards the intervention levels .
Does the Commission believe that the content of its proposal drawn up a year ago on raising the milk quotas , as approved by Parliament and the Council , should be maintained unchanged in the face of these market trends ?
Does the Commission believe that the limits existing under the current rules as regards intervention for powdered milk and butter are likely to be sufficient to prevent disastrous consequences for farmers ' incomes , as in a region like the Azores where farmers ' activity is totally dependent on the market in dairy products such as those mentioned ?
Member of the Commission . - I shall start by describing what the situation looked like just a few years ago .
We all remember that the dairy sector was very stable with very few price fluctuations , but over the last few years the situation has changed dramatically .
Firstly in 2007 , I remember clearly in August and September , we saw huge increases in dairy prices and then we experienced last year the same or an even worse reduction in prices , so the situation today is that prices are very close to intervention prices and in some parts of Europe even below intervention .
I can assure Members that I am extremely concerned at the quick deterioration of the European dairy market .
We have support measures in place that can be activated to support the dairy sector and we have already taken action .
Contrary to the normal situation , where the private storage scheme for butter is normally activated on 1 March , we have decided to activate the scheme from 1 January , which means that the production that has taken place in December is also eligible for this scheme .
Intervention buying or granting export refunds are other instruments that are available to support the dairy sector or the dairy market efficiently .
With regard to the intervention system starting in March - and therefore also covering the production that will take place in February - butter and skimmed milk powder may be purchased until the end of August .
First , for fixed quantities at fixed prices , followed then by a tendering system should the situation so require .
I would also like to remind you of the situation back in 2007 .
I think we all remember the immediate and quick reaction that was witnessed by the European Parliament , by the Council , by Member States , that put enormous pressure on me to increase immediately - yesterday rather than tomorrow - to increase the quotas to ease the situation on consumer prices .
I would also like to speak out very clearly today to try to stamp out misunderstandings which are circulating that the increase in milk quotas is to be blamed for the very weak dairy prices that we see today .
The reality is that despite the 2 % quota increase that took place after April this year , the production of milk has actually fallen .
That is what we see now , due to the fact that an increase in quotas is a possibility for Member States or for farmers to produce but it is certainly not an obligation .
This shows clearly that dairy producers are reacting to market signals .
The relatively small changes that we have seen in the quota system can therefore in no way explain the market volatility that we are seeing .
The lower demand from consumers is probably a reaction to the high prices that we saw last year as consumers then tried or wanted to step out of the high-quality high-priced dairy products .
Then , of course , there is the economic climate in which we find ourselves these days .
For the same reason it is important that we do not fool ourselves and think that by micro-managing the dairy market we decide for the whole sector .
The conclusion must be that the quota system has not been able to deliver market stability in the market place .
Concerning the question of the Azores , the Portuguese authorities have used any opportunity to ask for increased milk quotas for the islands because of the fact that the Azores seem to be extremely competitive and seem to be benefiting from the increased production .
I am quite sure that the larger quotas , and the ultimate end of the quota system , will benefit the Azores ' dairy sector .
That will be the case , I think , even in spite of the fact that those beautiful islands are quite remote and milk has to be moved around between nine islands .
To conclude , I can assure Members that I will manage our dairy policy instruments in a responsible way with a view to ensuring an effective safety net for the dairy sector .
( PT ) Thank you for your clarifications , Commissioner .
I regret that I am unable to share your optimism regarding how these increases in permitted production levels will benefit the Azores ' production .
I can assure you that these effects - according to a magazine published this week , they are already estimated at a drop of more than 60 % in the world market price of powdered milk since August 2007 - are having a profound effect on the incomes of farmers in the Autonomous Region of the Azores , and certainly also in several other parts of Europe .
These measures , which I hope will turn out to have some effect , have still had no impact .
That is why , Commissioner , I was asking you to devote your full attention to this situation .
Member of the Commission . - You know that I am always very happy to have a dialogue and a discussion with you on the importance of the agricultural sector and also on the Azores .
We find ourselves in a situation today where the market is extremely difficult .
This is not only the case for the Azores , but is the general situation in Europe , where we have to realise that prices are decreasing to a level that we would never have imagined just six months ago .
I can only assure you - and I think that you believe in my ability to find the right solutions at the right time - that this is going to be the way that we will manage the system under these circumstances .
Happy New Year to the Commissioner , although the news is not good on dairying .
Could I specifically ask you , Commissioner - because you have alluded to some of the factors which have resulted in the price fall - given that we were not clear on why prices rose so dramatically , is there a detailed analysis as to why prices have fallen so dramatically ?
Are you confident that the reforms of the health check are sufficient in view of all this uncertainty ?
Lastly , is a safety net enough if we erode producer confidence and they drop milk production , as is happening now ?
Member of the Commission . - Firstly , I think there are various reasons for the situation of very low milk prices .
Perhaps the biggest reason is the fact that the Russian market is of huge importance for the European Union and just recently we have seen a huge devaluation taking place in the economic sector in Russia , which means that prices for the Russian consumer have increased dramatically .
I do not know the exact figures , but the devaluation is at least 50 % .
The consequence has been that the possibility of selling our products in Russia has been receding dramatically .
There is also , as I said , the consequence of the high prices we saw in 2007 , where people stepped back a little from the high price of dairy products - and obviously they have not returned .
And then there is the situation today with the uncertainty in the general economic situation .
Ms McGuinness asked whether we think that what we did in the health check is good enough .
The fact is that the health check does not start until 1 January 2010 , with all the different tools available to support the different sectors .
We have seen during the discussions that we have new challenges and we have reserved the modulated money for those new challenges .
But these are not effective in 2009 .
That is why we have proposed to the European Parliament , the Council , and the Ecofin Council to spend some of the so-called unused money - EUR 5 billion in total from agriculture , and for the rural development policy it is specifically EUR 1.5 billion - now , in 2009 .
It is then in the hands of Parliament and the Council to see whether it is possible to spend some of this money .
If you remember the list of the new challenges , the dairy sector was also mentioned .
Therefore , I hope that there will be an understanding in Parliament as well to trigger some of this money to be used not exclusively but also on the challenges facing the dairy sector .
Subject : Microcredits
In May 2008 Commissioner Mariann Fischer Boel proposed reallocating EU funding that was previously used for export subsidies , price support and the storage of surpluses to microcredits , to enable farmers in the developing countries to buy seed and fertiliser .
Microcredits are unquestionably a major aid in combating poverty and an instrument for achieving the millennium goals .
Back in April 2008 Parliament called in a Written Declaration for more resources to be released for microcredit projects .
What practical action has the Commission so far taken to follow up that proposal ?
Is it not the practice to take two supplementaries after the questioner , and did I not indicate right at the outset of the question to the Commissioner that I had a supplementary question to ask ?
Why was it not called ?
Mr Allister , I was not at all aware that you had a question to ask .
If I had known , I would of course have given you the floor .
With respect , your staff indicated that my request had been noted .
So , if your staff were aware of it , then , by implication , you were aware of it .
Why were you not informed ?
I am sorry , according to my staff , no one saw you .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the discussions between Parliament and the Council on the adoption of the regulation establishing a European food facility led to the decision not to use the funds available under heading 2 of the budget to finance this facility , contrary to what was proposed by the Commission .
However , the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council , adopted on 16 December 2008 , did provide for a budget of EUR 1 billion under heading 4 of the budget for the period 2008-2010 .
It will be used to fund measures supporting agriculture and food security in the developing countries worst hit by the food crisis .
Microcredit features largely in many of these measures , as well as others aimed at strengthening agricultural and rural production .
Parliament will have the right to examine the programming of the work funded by this facility , in accordance with the provisions of the comitology regulation .
I am able to tell you that an initial package of approximately EUR 300 million , involving 24 to 25 countries , will be presented in February , while the general plan for the use of the entire facility will in any case be presented by the Commission and adopted by 1 May 2009 .
The Commission is in favour of developing microcredit and microfinance institutions more generally .
In addition to credit , the latter offer a wide range of financial services , including savings , insurance products , money transfers and payment systems .
The Commission is committed to helping the most disadvantaged individuals and those with low incomes to access these financial services .
It believes that the greatest barrier to the development of financial systems for the most disadvantaged is not the lack of funding , but rather a lack of institutional and technical capacity .
That is why the Commission is focusing its efforts mainly on strengthening the institutional powers of microfinance operators .
In addition , where access to capital proves to be a significant limitation for microfinance institutions , for example where a microfinance institution wants to develop its services in rural areas , the Commission can fund the capital needs of these institutions through specialised financial institutions such as the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , using credits to grant loans or to contribute to the capital .
In certain cases , where new microfinance institutions are created , the Commission may also decide to provide funding for these start-ups through specialised NGOs .
Moreover , on the basis of these comparative advantages , the EIB manages microfinance operations within the general framework of the facilities funded by the EU budget , namely the FEMIP ( Facility for Euro-Mediterranean Investment and Partnership ) in the case of the Mediterranean region , or via the European Development Fund , which is the investment facility for the African , Caribbean and Pacific States .

( NL ) Mr President , all of us here have welcomed the decision to earmark EUR 1 billion for the poorest farmers in the countries which have been hardest hit by the food crisis , but my personal regret is that the Commission 's proposal to employ unused agriculture funds for this purpose has come to nothing , as a result of pressure from certain Member States and also from one section of Parliament .
As the Commissioner said , the Commission attaches great importance to microloans as an effective instrument for combating poverty , but recently some questions and criticism have been raised , specifically as to their accessibility .
People are saying that this is an urban instrument to which rural areas have no access .
My question to the Commission is : has an overall evaluation of this instrument been carried out ?
( FR ) We are of course , as I said , working on preparing the mechanism that should allow us immediately to employ the financial resources that have been set aside for this purpose .
In my view , neither the nature of the funds nor their origin presents a problem in terms of capacity .
It is clear that , even in the case of rural projects , there will be no problem at all .
I can therefore reassure you on this subject ; there should be no difficulty and , in any case , the concern you feel will be largely addressed , as you will see , in the first package , which will come at the end of February and also in the general plan , which will be available by 1 May at the latest .
( DE ) I have only one brief question .
Have you considered putting in place certain controls on these microloans to encourage people to focus on fair trade or organic cultivation and do you believe controls of this kind to be useful ?
Or are you of the opinion that it really does not matter whether requirements of this kind are implemented or not ?
( FR ) Clearly I cannot get involved in the direct management of developing countries .
Developing countries generally have extremely fragile policies on these things .
I think I have understood the heart of your question and I believe the approach you suggest sounds promising , in principle .
I can see what you would hope to achieve by it , too .
Perhaps I might look again at this issue and try to incorporate it into the current discussions , and then come back to you to see how we might arrange it .
I imagine you are thinking of incentives that would enable us to direct certain policies much more towards small family farms , and so on .
I think that organic farming , in a number of developing countries , is undoubtedly an option , provided that it would be possible to create sectors .
However , this is just off the top of my head .
If we can create a sector , in a country where there is a surplus of agricultural production at any given time , that could of course represent an interesting diversification , with good added value .
Anyway , I can clearly see that your suggestion is useful and I promise to involve you so that you can work with my staff to see how we can incorporate it into our discussions .
Is the Commissioner concerned that the issue of global food security , which is part of this question , has slipped down the political agenda because of the global economic crisis ?
What action is the Commission taking to ensure that it is high on the political agenda , because 30 000 children are still dying of hunger and starvation on a daily basis ?
( FR ) I am sometimes surprised by certain questions , and not because we are not talking about these things and working on them every day .
Your question implied that the Commission does not appear to be keen to pursue the work that was largely in fact begun by the Commission , with Parliament 's help and support .
Rest assured ; I have to tell you that this is an interesting point since the fact that prices have fallen since the food crisis a few months ago could lead some to believe that the problem has been solved .
Although they have gone down , prices will not return to the relatively low level they were at before .
You are therefore right to highlight this and to point out that the food crisis is still ongoing and will remain a real problem for many years .
You may be assured that I will be monitoring this matter very closely ; it will not be forgotten .
Subject : Reforming the budget
The outcomes of the Commission 's public consultation on ' Reforming the budget - Changing for Europe ' called for the Commission to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency in the delivery of the budget by increasing transparency and public access to it .
In addition to this the recent publication of the Court of Auditors ' Report 2007 made various recommendations in terms of cost / risk balance , monitoring and reporting , simplification of instruments , and improving the information and control provided by Member States .
Can the Commission comment on what steps it will take to address the main results of the public consultation and the Court of Auditors ' Report in terms of increasing performance and minimising administrative burdens ?
Member of the Commission . - I have two questions today on the budget reform , one more general and one more concentrated on agricultural matters .
I am very happy to have at least two questions because we were asking for more interest from Parliament .
In response to the first question , this is more general and concerns more the delivery and efficiency of European budget delivery .
Part of the public consultation concentrated specifically on how to make delivery of the European budget more efficient , faster , simpler and more transparent .
The public consultation has made a strong call for the improved effectiveness and efficiency of the European budget , in particular through the simplification and proportionality of the administrative budget and control .
In this context , a number of issues were identified , some of which are already taking concrete shape in the Commission .
Among those initiatives which are already in place is the European Transparency Initiative .
Thanks to this initiative , the Commission has already provided a first response to the need for increased openness and accessibility to the budget .
Some other issues mentioned in the consultation deserve our serious attention .
The first is the integration of expenditures currently outside the budget - the so-called budgetisation of the funds .
This would obviously increase synergies , legitimacy and administrative simplification , but we have not been very successful over the years .
You are aware of this with regard to some funds .
The responsibilities of the Member States are another important element .
It is important to further strengthen the responsibilities of Member States , who manage over 80 % of the European budget , particularly in areas under shared management .
A clearer allocation of responsibilities between Member States and the Commission is needed .
This will also hopefully be partly improved if we have the Lisbon Treaty in place .
The third element is the rigidity of our budget .
The current European budget is still rather too rigid , recent examples being the negotiations for the food facility or the European recovery plan , especially in the current environment .
Then we have problems with the gas supply in Europe where we are not able to deliver or have an agreement between the Member States to invest in future projects such as interconnections or gas storage .
That again shows how much we need to invest in the European budget 's operational capacities to react .
The third group of problems which has been mentioned in the consultations concerned minimising the administrative burden .
The Commission has also already made various commitments .
In the action plan towards an integrated internal control framework , the Commission has committed itself to making proposals for simplified rules on cost eligibility issues .
This includes extending the use of lump sums or flat-rate payments wherever this is appropriate .
In its recent communication on tolerable risk , the Commission proposes to redefine the control system in terms of risk objectives and an acceptable level of error .
We hope for the support of the Parliament in these political discussions and later in negotiations with the Council .
The Commission looks forward to the Parliament 's support in general in rationalising and simplifying budget delivery and then in examining future legislation in general .
I thank you for the questions .
This is the least attractive question we usually receive because it is sometimes treated as being too technical .
No matter how good the political decisions being made are , good politics can fail if we do not have efficient delivery mechanisms .
Thank you for your comprehensive reply , Commissioner .
You spoke about the responsibility of Member States .
Can you specify the progress being made in simplifying the basis of calculation of eligible costs and making greater use of lump-sum payments , particularly in the area of the structural funds ?
My second question relates to the consultation document itself and the largely negative response to agriculture .
If we look at the consultation document , it lists tomorrow 's challenges as diversity , scientific and technical progress , the knowledge economy , climate change , energy security , but it does not mention food security .
So , is the negative response to agriculture unduly influenced by the document itself ?
( RO ) I would like to mention the fact that 2009 is the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
We also have another priority , climate change .
We must not forget that , as part of the European economic recovery plan , the need to finance priority infrastructures , such as those for energy and transport , are also a priority .
How is this reflected in the budget reform ?
Member of the Commission . - So , three additional questions .
On the structural funds and what we are already doing : In negotiations with Parliament in agreeing the 2009 budget , we already agreed and have made a declaration that we will accelerate the absorption and we will make the decision-making process more flexible for Member States , including on how to use structural funds .
This is also included in our recovery plan .
It is important , and we calculate that it will help to accelerate use of structural funds of about EUR 6 billion in 2009 alone .
It is our obligation to Parliament and we also agreed it with the Member States in Council , who supported these efforts .
Therefore , two packages of changes in regulations have passed from the Commission and I hope it is already somewhere in Parliament , at least in the Committee on Regional Policy and Planning , and in Council and we hope that it will be passed very fast for Member States to use it .
On food security and CAP relations : It is very interesting to hear your question and I can imagine what questions I will receive from other Members .
It is a very sensible question on CAP in general .
We have received a lot of criticism in the consultation process on the quality of CAP , not against the policy but against the quality and capability to react and help on time .
The policy is quite expensive by its very nature and that is how the participants mainly perceived this policy .
And of course you are absolutely right , it is our understanding that this policy , in the near future and medium term , will be changing to investing more in environmental and health aspects , including food security .
That is how we probably will see the medium-term future .
But , of course , not everything suited all participants .
We tried to be as objective as possible .
We published all consultation materials .
It was discussed in the November conference chaired by President Barroso and everything is published , including our research on think-tank inputs , all consultation materials and our summary .
So it is public ; it is available .
It is not yet our opinion .
We tried to be objective and not to affiliate ourselves with an opinion , but we wanted to see the public 's reaction .
We wanted to give you an objective opinion on how we are seen from outside with our policies or budget , and for us to use it for our future preparation of the political decision .
On the third question on priorities , you are absolutely right .
Everybody is discussing this .
We know what we need to do .
Member States know , governments know , but do not always agree when it comes to money .
Negotiations on budget finalisation usually centre on juste retour negotiations .
Who returns the same ?
Especially now during this downturn in economy - when we have such serious problems in energy and in the external world - especially now we need again to concentrate and not forget that the strategic goal , which we need to perform all together , Commission and you , is to prepare the strategic paper on budgetary reform .
Subject : EU budget reform
Is the Commission satisfied that the recent public consultation ' Reforming the Budget , Changing Europe ' reflects the view of the majority of European citizens ; or is the ' one message ' gathered from ' hundreds of voices ' really reflective of the whole of EU opinion ?
What are the key conclusions that can be drawn and what does the Commission consider will be the big shifts in EU spending in the future ?
Specifically , what does the Commission expect to be the key reforms of spending on agriculture ?
Member of the Commission . - The question was given to me with the main emphasis on the agricultural outcome of agricultural consultations , but more general elements have been included in the question so I would like to start with some general remarks .
As regards the consultations which we launched , we have been very satisfied because it was the first time in European history that the debate took place so openly , with all those who were capable and willing participating in the process .
We had a huge input from NGOs , governments , think-tanks , civil society , and that was very useful to us and will be useful to us .
It reflects , of course , a very wide range of opinions and perspectives that cannot be reduced to one or two particular messages , but the contribution largely endorsed the Commission 's general approach on the budget reform aiming at a strategic vision to maximise the European value added from any euro spent in the European budget .
They offer criteria to flesh out the notion and views on how to balance the stability and responsiveness of the European budget .
Many contributors agree that the budget has evolved significantly over time , but only few are fully satisfied with the current budget structure .
The consultations convene a sense of priorities in terms of challenges that Europe has to address , with climate change , global competitiveness at the top of the list .
Contributions also propose a range of possible reforms concerning specific spending policies , the financial system and the way the budget is being delivered .
More detailed information , as I have already mentioned , is available on the Commission websites .
Finally , on agriculture , the consultation shows a relative growth consensus on the need to further reform CAP .
Some consider it best to continue reform along the same lines as the earlier reform health check , or mid-term review , others favour more radical changes .
Most contributors emphasise the necessity of turning CAP into , or concentrating on , competitiveness of European agriculture , responsiveness to climate change , food safety and quality requirements , and other environmental objectives .
Opinions differ , however , on the nature and extent of the change that is needed .
The Commission 's expectations with regard to key spending areas , especially in agriculture , are subject to ongoing work based on consultation , technical assessment , scientific inputs and sectoral policy discussions .
They will be part of the political response that will follow later this year .
The Commission will then prepare our strategic paper , and I very much hope that we will be able in cooperation with you to perform our duty together .
Thank you , Commissioner , not only for your response but also your comments in relation to Marian Harkin 's words on food security .
I think it is a big gap in the market .
Let me draw your attention to the report I drew up and which was voted through in this Parliament today by an overwhelming majority of people supporting the CAP and its role in global food security , and to the discussion we had about falling dairy farm incomes .
We need to have some reality check here on those who suggest wild reforms .
We are talking about food for European citizens and incomes for those who live and manage the rural environment .
I would like you to bear those in mind as we go forward .
( SV ) I have a short question to ask the Commissioner .
I took part in the Commission 's excellent conference in December on the mid-term review of the budget .
At this conference , the Commissioner gave an excellent and proactive speech on the importance of tabling proposals for amendments now .
However , we are now hearing rumours that there will be no proposal on the mid-term review of the budget until after the European Parliament elections and after the German federal election in September .
My question is simple : will the Commissioner table a proposal for a mid-term review of the budget before the summer or not until after the German federal election ?
( LT ) Commissioner , I would like to thank you for your precise and open answers and to say that discussions on budget reform have been ongoing for some time , already more than a year .
What is the influence of the financial crisis on these discussions ?
I would also like to know whether any ways out will be sought while reforming the budget , so that in future we can avoid financial crises like the one we are experiencing now ?
Member of the Commission . - Concerning a reality check , I agree fully that any decisions we make , especially strategic ones , need to be very politically responsible .
We should not change the best , but we need to get rid of what is old or not very effective .
Concerning the mid-term review , I think there is a misunderstanding .
We have never been asked to prepare a mid-term review of the European budget .
We have been asked to prepare the full-range budget reform paper by the end of 2009 , and it is up to us to decide the timing - where politically it is more proper or where we can have a more efficient and effective response .
Personally , I would like it to be prepared earlier - maybe in the spring .
But I have to take a serious reality check because we have elections , perhaps the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty etc .
We should not waste a good proposal and allow operational events to overshadow it .
Let us leave it to President Barroso to decide on the final date , but we are ready and this Commission is ready to do its job .
( LT ) Mr Paleckis , your questions are really very important , very deep , I might even say so deep and important that not even the whole European budget would provide an answer .
In truth your questions are strategic , whereas no budget could react effectively now or in the future to the sort of financial crisis which has occurred .
The European budget represents just 1 % of gross domestic product , but the financial crisis was largely caused not because of a lack of money , but perhaps I would say because of supervision issues , the globalisation of the financial system , its monopolisation and many other reasons .
The European budget , like the budget of a very small international organisation , has no doubt a certain selection of instruments , but it really is not large .
That selection largely consists not of actual finances or money , but rather regulating measures , control measures , recommendation measures , also including in the field of macroeconomic policy .
This is probably even more important than how much money we actually have or can inject .
At the moment we really have the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , we have the flexibility instrument and others , but they are not really efficient or effective .
It was precisely for this reason that in our recovery plan the Commission proposed investing those EUR 5 billion in strategic structural changes to energy inter-connections and other energy infrastructure projects and so far countries are in no hurry and are not very willing to discuss this matter .
The crisis itself shows that investing in strategic energy projects and other strategic joint European projects is extremely important .
I hope very much that this crisis will be one of those lessons , which Europe should take very seriously .
I also hope that it will help to concentrate and in future use the European budget where we can gain most benefit , as it is far too small to cover everything and solve everything .
Therefore , it is not easy to answer your very general questions , but as I mentioned , I hope very much that this crisis situation in the world and the economic recession , which can now been seen throughout Europe , should really help politicians invest more in European strategy .
Subject : Cybercrime
With ongoing advances in technology and more and more people using the Internet , it is becoming increasingly difficult to police the Internet . What is the Commission doing to fight against cybercrime at EU level ?

Madam President , to answer Mr Ó Neachtain 's question , the Commission has pursued a policy on combating cybercrime for many years , in close cooperation with the Member States and other European Union institutions .
There are four ways in which the Commission helps to fight cybercrime : by encouraging cooperation between Member States , by facilitating public-private partnerships , by developing various legal instruments , and lastly by engaging in cooperation with third countries .
The 2007 communication entitled ' Towards a general policy on the fight against cyber crime ' enabled the Commission to promote information sharing in the field of cybercrime between Member States ' law enforcement authorities , either bilaterally or through Europol .
Member States must designate permanent contact points through which other Member States can request assistance or information .
The Commission also helped to draw up the Council conclusions on a strategy to combat cybercrime , adopted last November .
This strategy proposes a series of measures aimed at fostering cooperation between Member States to fight against crimes such as child pornography , terrorism , attacks on information systems and fraud .
A platform for reporting offences detected online must be put in place to centralise cyber-offences so that they can be collated by Europol .
At the same time , the Commission is developing a partnership policy between law enforcement authorities and the private sector to take action against cybercrime .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council of 8 December 2008 made recommendations on public-private cooperation against cybercrime .
The Commission also wants to set up a European financial coalition against commercial images of child pornography .
The purpose of this coalition is to unite the efforts of various public and private parties to combat the production , distribution and sale of images of child pornography on the Internet .
Lastly , the Commission played a large part in drafting laws laying down minimum standards for harmonising applicable criminal legislation .
This is the case with Framework Decision 2005 / 222 / JHA on attacks against information systems and Framework Decision 2004 / 68 / JHA on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
The Commission is now looking at how to update and implement these instruments .
I will conclude by saying that we must keep in mind that the Internet is a global information network .
The European Union cannot regulate it on its own .
That is why the Commission hopes to encourage international cooperation in this area and will be organising a meeting this year with international organisations and EU agencies to try to coordinate the respective activities of these bodies .
That is my answer to Mr Ó Neachtain .
( GA ) Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for that answer .
I would like to ask you a supplementary question , Commissioner .
As regards cyber-bullying or denigration , which mostly affects young people who use social sites such as Bebo and Facebook , the denigration or bullying committed against young people on those sites should be stopped .
What does the European Union intend to do to ensure that the community draws more attention to this bullying ?
( RO ) I would like to ask what measures the Commission is considering for enabling Member States to adopt the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime , what action plan the Commission is considering for making improvements and fighting against cybercrime and also what measures you are considering for digital signature interoperability .
If I could welcome the answer given so far by the Commissioner but also ask him to make sure that human rights in this field are kept in mind at all times .
In other words , I am all in favour of stamping out cyber crime , but can we make sure that internet companies are not , with police authorities and the like , too heavy-handed in dealing with the public who are using the internet for their own pleasure ?
( FR ) Madam President , you are right , and I will answer the question on human rights and the fight against cybercrime straightaway .
We must indeed pay very close attention to ensure that there is a commitment to respect human rights when combating cybercrime ; I would even go so far as to say that we must enforce respect for human rights .
Within the Stockholm multiannual programme , running from 2010 to 2014 , we will introduce an entire heading on combating cybercrime with , as I have said and would say again to Mr Ó Neachtain , the aim of having the Observation Centre within Europol , which will allow us precisely to better coordinate the monitoring of national institutions responsible for supervising questionable sites , from which child pornography is distributed to particularly vulnerable audiences .
You are right ; we must also learn the way in which young people are enticed to certain sites , leaving them at risk of being attacked in some way by the creators of these sites and those who visit them .
That is what I can tell you .
I would like to say again that this in fact represents a complete strategy to be conducted in an even more purposeful way than in the past , in light of our greater understanding of the risks of the web .
I also have high hopes of the European financial coalition against commercial images of child pornography .
We will bring together the different public or private bodies in order to tackle the production , distribution and sale of images of child pornography on the Internet , and also try to locate and apprehend the criminals .
If we reach agreement on the funding in the comitology procedure , I hope to launch this coalition in February 2009 .
I thank Parliament for all the support it will be able to give on this matter .
Subject : Terrorist threats
We saw last November the terrorist attacks in Mumbai , where many EU citizens ' lives were threatened .
In light of the Madrid and London bombings in 2004 and 2005 respectively , it is clear that we are under threat from similar attacks on the EU .
Can the Commission tell us what we are doing to strengthen and enforce information exchange between Member States ' police forces to respond to such attacks ?
Madam President , I will answer Mr Aylward .
The key to effectively combating terrorism and other forms of serious crime is to ensure that the right people have access to the right information at the right time , which is a huge challenge at European Union level .
We have tried to promote and facilitate effective information sharing between the police forces of the various Member States .
The Framework Decision of 18 December 2006 , known as the Swedish decision , which all Member States had to implement by mid-December 2008 , that is , very recently , creates a common legal framework for the rapid exchange of information and intelligence between Member States ' law enforcement authorities .
This Framework Decision stipulates that , when the police force of a Member State receives a request , it must be handled using the same criteria as those applied to national requests .
That is one way in which we are addressing this issue .
Another example is the ' Prüm ' Council Decision of 23 June 2008 which sets out a detailed mechanism for exchanging specific types of data , including fingerprints , DNA profiles and information linked to vehicle registration , all of which can lead to successful criminal investigations .
Under the Prüm Council Decision , Member States grant each other limited access to their DNA and fingerprint databases in order to check for matches .
This is very useful as this Council Decision makes for extremely effective sharing of DNA and fingerprints .
Europol also has a crucial role to play .
The Europol Information System , EIS , enables Member States to find out whether the law enforcement authorities of other Member States hold any information needed at operational level .
Of course , for Europol to play its part , the Member States must contribute to the EIS satisfactorily .
It goes without saying that we must now plan new measures for information sharing in the next five-year programme that will succeed the Hague programme .
This five-year programme will need to guarantee a coordinated , consistent approach to information sharing , and should incorporate a European Union strategy on information management .
However , of course , information sharing also raises concerns about the protection of personal data .
The strategy must allow an overall approach to information sharing that meets the needs of the police and is based on the interoperability of IT systems .
That is my answer to Mr Aylward .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply .
In a very brief supplementary question , what is the European Union doing to confiscate the assets of terrorists within the Union , and can the Commissioner outline how many criminal assets bureaux are currently in operation in the European Union ?
I would like the Commissioner to indicate whether he is getting full cooperation between all 27 Member States in relation to information exchange between police forces .
If not , which countries are taking a different line , and has the Irish Government requested any opt-out in this particular area ?
( DE ) Commissioner , I would like to ask you whether there is a security and safety policy relating to terrorist threats against nuclear power stations .
( FR ) We are currently in the middle of a study on the confiscation of assets generated by this illegal activity .
In particular , Judge Jean-Louis Bruguière has been given the task of monitoring the SWIFT terrorist finance tracking programme .
His findings will be available soon .
The European Union has benefited from information produced by the terrorist finance tracking programme , and Judge Bruguière has been responsible for checking that it has all been done in compliance with data protection .
I can say that this will , in the long term , help us to confiscate the assets of a number of individuals who have made illegal profits .
As for information sharing , I have already told you that the Europol information system could be much more effective if the Member States were to contribute information in a more trusting and transparent manner .
We will work on this .
Indeed , it is one of my chief concerns to build up this trust between the various intelligence bodies in the Member States , so that we move towards more effective exchange of information .
I have not heard anything about an opt-out clause in this field .
I think I have more or less answered your questions .
Regarding the threats to nuclear power stations , the Commission has also proposed a text designed to allow for improved surveillance of key infrastructure , which obviously includes nuclear power stations .
Subject : EU immigration policy
Given that EU immigration policy should have a major humanitarian element and guarantee respect for human rights ; that it should help promote integration measures rather than repressive measures , and likewise measures designed to put the rights and obligations of immigrants on an equal footing with those of nationals and to encourage cooperation between the Member States and between the latter and the countries of origin ; that it should promote solutions which strengthen intercultural dialogue and respect for differences , for minorities and for freedom , and whereas the French Republic has already signed protocols with various African countries , specifically Congo-Brazzaville , Tunisia , Benin , the Mauritian Islands , Senegal and Gabon , with a view to encouraging development and the possibility of legal immigration , what back-up and support has the Commission provided for those Member States which wish to initiate such processes ?



In answer to Mr França 's question , the Global Approach to Migration adopted by the European Union in 2005 aimed to provide a more adequate response to the challenges that migration poses to the EU as a whole .
This global approach is based on improving dialogue and cooperation with third countries in all aspects of migration , to build a partnership for better migration management .
In order to give practical content to the Global Approach to Migration , the Commission supports cooperation initiatives with third countries , in the areas of migration and asylum .
Examples of this include the Aeneas programme , which funded over 100 projects from 2004 to 2006 , or the Migration and Asylum programme that succeeded it , which was allocated a budget of EUR 205 million for the period 2007-2010 .
From the initiatives chosen in the context of an annual call for proposals , many are put forward and implemented by the Member States in collaboration with third countries .
Let us take an example : on the basis of the Aeneas programme , the Commission funds a Hispano-Moroccan project managing seasonal immigration between the provinces of Ben Slimane in Morocco and Huelva in Spain .
This programme also supports cooperation between Spain and Colombia for developing circular migration .
Similarly , we funded the temporary return to Cape Verde of highly qualified Cape Verdeans who live in Portugal , to inform and train potential emigrants in their home country .
In addition to these measures , geographical financial instruments such as the European Development Fund and European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument also help to give practical expression to the Global Approach to Migration .
For example , the European Commission recently backed the creation of the Migration Information and Management Centre in Mali , a project that a number of Member States are very involved with .
Furthermore , as part of the global approach , the Commission proposed new tools to encourage partnership with third countries and to develop greater synergies between Community action and that of the Member States .
We now have the mobility partnership , a new tool being introduced by the European Union , at present on a pilot basis .
These mobility partnerships are a means of developing dialogue and cooperation between the Union and third countries in the areas of legal migration , development , and the prevention and reduction of illegal immigration .
We have signed the first partnerships with Cape Verde and with the Republic of Moldova , detailing specific offers of cooperation .
For instance , under the partnership with Cape Verde , Portugal proposed signing a new protocol extending the scope of an existing protocol on the temporary migration of Cape Verde workers , to provide work in Portugal .
Other available tools include migration profiles , which consist of analyses of the migration situation in a given country , and cooperation platforms to bring together , in the third country in question , country representatives and the main funding providers concerned with migration .
We have put in place a cooperation platform in Ethiopia , on the initiative of the United Kingdom , and we are planning another for South Africa .
Lastly , the Integration Fund and the Return Fund can of course help Member States to introduce pre-departure measures in third countries to assist potential emigrants in finding work in their country of destination , and facilitate their civic and cultural integration , or , on the reverse side , to introduce short-term support measures for returnees .

There you have it , Mr França , I wanted to give you a whole series of examples , but most importantly I would like to say that I am completely convinced of the need for Europe to manage migratory flows through this global approach that links migration and development and genuinely enables concerted migration management .
This is the direction we should be taking , I believe , and it will make Europe 's migration management an example for the world to follow .
( PT ) Mr Barrot , I agree with you ; I agree with your dissatisfaction .

In truth , we must be dissatisfied with all these measures , which are sweeping .
The truth is that illegal immigration to Europe continues .
The trafficking of human beings continues .
There are areas in which there is a lot of immigration , specifically the Mediterranean and heading for Italy .
France has come forward with a set of important bilateral cooperation agreements , but other Member States have not been doing so .
The Commission must carry on without losing its enthusiasm for this policy of cooperation and aid for Member States ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the question refers to EU policy having a major humanitarian element and guaranteeing respect for human rights .
Just recently in Ireland someone was being deported even though the person 's daughters would be subject to female genital mutilation .
Has the Commission encouraged Member States to adopt a common position on this ?
In some states in Europe it is still not illegal , and would the Commission encourage Member States to adopt a common position on dealing with this very difficult issue ?

( FR ) Firstly I would like to assure Mr França that I will , of course , do my utmost to now develop the global approach through mobility partnerships between the Union as a whole and third countries .
You are right , some Member States have concluded bilateral agreements , but this should also be the case for the whole of Europe , and you were right to emphasise the risks of illegal immigration caused by a failure to organise legal migration successfully .
Next , the case that you mentioned , Mr Burke , is a case that clearly shows the wisdom needed in return policy .
There can be no case for returning people to third countries where their life or their person will then be in danger .
We must therefore conduct this policy wisely .
I do not wish to go back over the Return Directive .
It has been controversial , but it does , however , provided it is properly transposed in the Member States , enable us to monitor to some extent the way in which these return policies are managed .
I do intend , in any case , to keep a close eye on this matter .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Part three
Subject : Opening up of ' closed ' professions
In pursuit of the single market objective of the free movement of persons , goods and services , the Commission is encouraging the opening up of ' closed ' professions in those Member States where they exist , which in general terms is a move in the right direction .
Are there cases in which the closed professions could remain so , provided they successfully serve society as a whole by providing services without creating problems ?
What are the possible negative repercussions of opening up some closed professions ?
Has the Commission carried out studies into the impact on local communities , particularly in regions with specific features ( e.g. mountain and island regions , etc . ) ?
Member of the Commission . - Firstly I should clarify that the Commission does not pursue as a general objective the opening of closed professions .
However , in the context of its internal market policy , it considers that the legitimate need for Member States to regulate certain activities has to be reconciled with the need to ensure the free movement of professionals throughout Europe .
It goes without saying that better quality and wider choice in professional services must have a positive effect on the entire EU economy .
To this end , the Services Directive obliges Member States to screen their national legislation for requirements applied to certain professions , such as quantitative and territorial restrictions , in order to evaluate their appropriateness in the light of conditions established in the case-law of the European Court of Justice .
By 28 December 2009 Member States will have to present to the Commission their report on the results of this screening and evaluation exercise .
This will give them an opportunity to identify the possible negative repercussions of opening up certain closed professions and justify any restrictions .
On the basis of these national reports , the Commission and all Member States will undertake the process of mutual evaluation and will examine and discuss changes introduced in Member States ' legislation as well as any requirements that would have been maintained .
On 28 December 2010 the Commission will present a summary report to the European Parliament and the Council on the results of this mutual evaluation process .
Obviously , requirements to think about specifically regulating the professions will be discussed in this context .
In addition , again with the aim of ensuring the functioning of the internal market , infringement proceedings have been opened whenever national rules are found to impose discriminatory or disproportionate restrictions in the area of regulated professions as regards , for instance , access to ownership , incompatibilities or compulsory tariffs .
Finally , the Commission 's work in the field of competition also seeks to stimulate appropriate patterns of review of the existing professional rules within each Member State , as provided for in the two Commission reports on competition in professional services .
National competition authorities are invited to check , in the light of competition rules , whether a regulation has clearly defined both a public interest objective and the least restrictive means of achieving that objective .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I realise that what the Commission is trying to deal with is the creation of a single internal market and the free movement of professionals .
On the other hand , there are certain professions which I called ' closed ' and which can only be exercised once a sum of money has been paid .
I refer to taxi licences , which in many Member States of the European Union are costly , and the profession of pharmacist , which is exercised under demographic and distribution measures .
I should like to hear the Commissioner 's thoughts on this issue .
( DE ) Are you of the opinion that local knowledge and regional regulations should be a basic requirement to ensure that these professions can be carried out accordingly ?
I am not sure if bookmakers and tote operators and operators of the pari-mutuels qualify under the professions , but certainly in terms of the single market and free movement of services it is an issue .
Where is this debate at ?
I do know that the Commission 's offices have been involved and I am still receiving quite a lot of vexed representation in this area .
Secondly , as regards recognition of the professional qualifications directive and the whole area of mutual evaluation which the Commissioner referred to , are any problems likely there ?
Are we comparing like with like if we are opening up professions in one Member State to another ?
Member of the Commission . - There are two separate issues being spoken about here by the various Members who have addressed this subject .
One is the scope of the Services Directive ; the other is the regulation of professional qualifications .
The Services Directive has in its scope all of the services in the European Union with certain limited exceptions .
The question about pharmacists was raised by Mr Angelakas .
He may be aware that we do have some infringement proceedings against some Member States in this particular area .
On the question of mutual evaluation which is required under the Services Directive , each Member State has to go through all its rules and regulations before 28 December this year and then we will have a mutual evaluation to see what is proportionate and what is not .
The question that Mrs Doyle raises is that of gambling infringements .
She will be aware that we have , in one form or another , some actions pertaining to at least 15 Member States at this particular time .
There has been court jurisprudence on this particular matter .
Gambling is a service that comes under the scope of the Services Directive like everything else , and these matters have to be addressed .
There are various stages of proceedings against Member States in this area .
We are also inundated with lots of other possible infringements in this area .
Subject : Credit rating agencies
The Commissioner responsible for the internal market and services , Mr Charlie McCreevy , recently stated the following in connection with the regulation of credit rating agencies . ' I want Europe to play a leading role in this sector .
This proposal goes further than the rules existing in any other jurisdiction .
These very exacting rules are necessary to restore the confidence of the market in the ratings business in the EU . '
Will the Commission say why it did not propose the adoption of a more exacting regulatory framework at the stage preceding the financial crisis ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission has closely followed the activity of the credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) over the past few years .
Following the European Parliament 's resolution on credit rating agencies in February 2004 , the Commission considered very carefully what legislative measures would be necessary to regulate the activities of credit rating agencies .
In line with the advice received from the Committee of European Securities Regulators ( CESR ) in March 2005 , the Commission adopted in 2006 a communication on credit rating agencies .
In this communication the Commission concluded that various financial services directives , combined with self-regulation by the credit rating agencies , on the basis of the IOSCO Code of Conduct , the methods for CRAs could provide a satisfactory answer to the major issues of concern in relation to credit rating agencies .
It is stated that this approach would require continuous monitoring of developments by the Commission .
In addition , the Commission asked CESR to monitor compliance with the IOSCO Code and to report back on an annual basis .
At the same time , the Commission indicated in the communication that it might consider putting forward legislative action if it became clear that compliance with EU rules or IOSCO 's Code was unsatisfactory or if new circumstances were to arise , including serious problems of market failure or significant changes in the way credit rating agencies are regulated in other parts of the world .
The financial crisis shed a new light on CRAs .
Since August 2007 the financial markets worldwide suffered from a major confidence crisis .
This financial crisis is a complex phenomenon involving multiple actors .
The credit rating agencies are close to the origin of the problems that have arisen with subprime markets .
The crisis highlighted poor performance by credit rating agencies .
An explanation could be found in the unsatisfactory way the agencies managed their conflicts of interest , the lack of quality of the methodologies they issue , insufficient transparency around their activities or the inappropriate internal governance in the agencies .
The subprime crisis demonstrated that the framework for the operation of credit rating agencies needs to be significantly reinforced .
That is why in June 2008 I announced that the Commission would take regulatory action in this area and on 12 November 2008 the College adopted the proposal covering regulatory activity of credit rating agencies with the agreement of this Parliament and of the Council .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , you personally said in reply to a question of mine in 2006 that , in keeping with the recommendations of the Committee of European Securities Regulators , the Commission would not be tabling any new legislative proposals in the credit rating agency sector .
The massive financial crisis occurred and now here you are telling us that we need a stricter legislative framework .
We do indeed need a stricter regulatory framework .
My question is : do you acknowledge that the Commission 's regulatory reflexes were sluggish in this matter ?
I know that the Commission has put forward proposals on credit rating agencies and other initiatives that address instability in financial markets to try and ensure that a similar crisis does not reoccur such as CRD , deposit guarantee schemes and Member State balance of payments .
Could I ask him , what proposals does the Commission plan to put forward to encourage growth and competitiveness in the real economy , especially in the SME sector which is particularly important now as more and more European economies are experiencing recession ?
Member of the Commission . - In reply to Mr Papastamkos , let me refer to the report in 2005 .
We did say at that particular time that we would keep the activities of credit rating agencies on watch , and in 2007 , when the subprime crisis reached its peak , I met with the credit rating agencies and expressed our dissatisfaction as to how we perceived they had conducted their affairs .
The questioner will be aware that in December 2007 I wrote to CESR and to ESME for further advice as to what I should do in relation to certain areas .
I made quite clear in speeches and in comments at that time that leaving the status quo as it was just not an option .
As a consequence , we came forward with the Commission proposal in 2008 and that mater is now being debated by Parliament and the Council of Ministers .
I think that in the past , when keeping the activities of the credit rating agencies under review , I made it quite clear that we would consider the matter in the light of changing circumstances .
And in the words of a person in the last century , far more famous than me - when the facts change , we change too .
And that is what has occurred .
Mr Ryan , as to what we will do in the areas of financial regulation to which he has alluded - the proposals on credit rating agencies and the capital requirements directive - he put forward a legitimate question concerning what the European Union was doing to address the problems in the real economy because although the changes to do with financial regulation has undoubtedly been timely in areas where there was a lacuna in financial regulation , it in itself is not going to galvanise and kick start the European economy .
Mr Ryan will be aware that in the past couple of months the Commission was at the centre of coordinating the approach of financial stimulus which was adopted by the European Council at its December meeting .
Of course it still remains the prerogative of Member States to affect their own financial stimulus if they deem it appropriate because those matters remain the prerogatives of the Member State governments .
But the Commission in responding to that stimulus package also committed some funding within our remit and coordinated with the agreement of the other European players as to how we will kick-start things there .
I remember even before that we did adopt in the Commission some initiatives which should help to stimulate small business activity in the SME sector - such as the Small Business Act , such as the European Private Company Statute - and hopefully they will contribute in some small way to assisting in the turn around of the general economy in the European Union .
Subject : Financial crisis
In the light of the ongoing financial crisis , has the Commission changed the rules of the internal market in order to make it easier for individual Member States to take protective action concerning their economies and industry ?
Member of the Commission . - At this time of financial crisis and economic recession , both European governments and the European institutions need to show determination and flexibility , as mentioned by President Barroso in the preface to the recently adopted European economic recovery plan .
To show this flexibility , the Commission will , for instance , put in place a simplification package to speed up decision-making on state aid , allow for the use of accelerated procedures in public procurement in 2009 and 2010 for all major public projects , and request that Member States take corrective action in case of any excessive deficit in timeframes consistent with economic recovery to allow their economies to adjust .
However , this flexibility does not mean that the Commission has changed or will change the rules of the internal market .
A modernised approach to policies set out in the single market review of November 2007 needs to be pursued further as foreseen .
The 16 December 2008 progress report called ' The Single Market review : one year on ' highlights a series of recently adopted measures that will help create the conditions to relaunch the European economy .
They include , most of all , stronger contractual rights to enhance consumer confidence , lower costs and administrative burdens , and a single company statute for SMEs .
It is also evident that we need to restructure the European regulatory and supervisory framework in order to minimise the risk of future crises .
Over the year , we have been working alongside Parliament and the Council to , among other things , increase protection for bank depositors , dissuade banks and other financial institutions from taking excessive risks in the future and better regulate the credit rating agencies .
The rapid adoption and implementation of these proposals is elementary .
We need to demonstrate that Europe can provide concrete answers .
Over the coming months , the Commission will formulate in a comprehensive manner how the current regulatory and supervisory framework should be further reformed to bring back stability and confidence .
We should strive for a more stable system that does a correspondingly better job in providing opportunities to trade , hedge , diversify and pool risk , allocate resources and mobilise savings .
This calls , among other things , for better cooperation and coordination between national regulators and supervisors , as well as avoiding any protectionism .
To foster longer economic growth we need to reduce the cost of capital and to enhance capital allocation .
It will clearly require a further strengthening of the internal market .
This flexibility certainly does not mean any changes to the single market principles .
On the contrary : at a time of financial economic downturn , both European governments and European institutions need to hold firmly to the principles of the single market .
It is essential that any measures to tackle the crisis are guided by the fundamental freedoms and the principles of non-discrimination and proportionality .
For instance , a framework for national rescue plans is already in place to prevent any negative spill-over effects amongst uncoordinated national actions .
A level playing field which has benefited Member States ' consumers and businesses so much since 1992 needs to be maintained and safeguarded .
This is essential as any measure which would undermine the single market could further aggravate the impact of the financial crisis on the wider economy .
I hope the Commissioner 's voice gets a little bit better .
Let me thank the Commissioner for his reply and say to him that I am glad to hear that protectionism is not on the way back because that would indicate that there is not going to be a recovery .
There will be a recovery in Europe .
Could I invite the Commissioner to start talking about that recovery ?
The most hopeful thing we have heard in some time were the comments made by President Trichet reported in today 's press , where he said that he could see a recovery coming in 2010 .
Could I invite the Commissioner to start talking about the future so that we do not lose hope and also to talk about the opportunity there is for Europe to become more competitive while this particular crisis is ongoing ?
Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner as well for his response and advise him that a drop of whisky , some hot water and a slice of lemon is very good for clearing the throat .
With regard to your answer , and in particular concerning the economic recovery plans and so on , what has been highlighted over the last number of months has been that coordinated action is the only response that can deal with the present financial crisis .
The question I want to ask is whether any plans have been made or any initial contacts been made with the incoming American administration - the Obama administration - to see what further coordinated action at financial level is required ?

Member of the Commission . - I undoubtedly agree with Mr Mitchell when he says that protectionism is not the answer .
But I am sure that there are many Member States which probably see a possible opportunity to engage in some protectionist measures , but I would say two things on that .
Firstly , we will be vigilant in enforcing EU law in order to prevent any measures which are contrary to the rules of the European Union .
Secondly , I would say to those Member States : if people believe in that particular approach , it would be my view and I know that of Mr Mitchell that that would prolong the duration of the economic downturn .
But there have always been differences of opinion regarding this particular approach and there are probably many Members on other sides of this House who would not agree with either myself or Mr Mitchell .

I also agree with Mr Mitchell that it would be appropriate to balance all this negative talk of economic downturn - which there is - with a sense of realism and not to be overly pessimistic .
I am afraid that in the world in which we live - whether it is in the Member State we know best or in other Member States - there has always been a predisposition to concentrate maybe overly on the negativity of the economic downturn .
Now we have to balance this with realism because there has to be realism in economic forecasting as well and people will have to be realistic .
But there is a balance to be struck between being overly pessimistic and being realistic .
Confidence is a very fragile thing and it takes a long time to recover it and it can be gone in a flash .
So , I welcome the comments of the President of the European Central Bank in today 's paper as to the scene in the next couple of years .
But , as I said , there should be this balance and people should be aware of where this balance should be struck .
Mr Crowley asked a legitimate question as to what arrangements we have made to discuss these economic and financial matters with the US administration .
There is a very strict protocol in place in the United States , as you are undoubtedly aware , even for people who are in the transition administration as to what is done by them and they guard it religiously .
But as soon as the new administration is in place , we will be in contact with the new Treasury Secretary .
We already have a lot of fora in which we discuss matter , such as the Transatlantic Economic Council , the Financial Markets Regulatory dialogue , which are ongoing the whole time .
As soon as the new Obama administration takes office next week , we will be making contact with our new counterparts in that regard .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )
Pharmaceutical products package ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the pharmaceutical products package .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposals in the so-called pharmaceutical package which I am presenting this evening at Parliament 's request have a common theme .
The intention of the package is to strengthen the rights , needs and interests of patients in our healthcare systems .
In our view patients are not merely the subject of services available from healthcare providers or the subject of the financial interests of the pharmaceutical industry .
Patients are responsible citizens whose health is their most important asset and who are entitled to have the best and safest treatments and medicines at their disposal .
Patients are the subject of healthcare policy .
However , health or restoration to health is not just a right .
It also involves an obligation to take care of oneself by eating healthily , having a healthy lifestyle and playing an active role in one 's own treatment , if treatment is required .
Our proposal for more effective monitoring of the actual effects of approved medicines , for example , presupposes this type of active involvement on the part of patients .
If patients do not notify the authorities about anomalies relating to medicines that they have taken , the monitoring process will be a waste of time .
This also applies to protection against counterfeit medicines .
Patients can , and should , in future ensure that they are not taking fake medicines by checking that all the safety features which will be required on future packaging are in fact in place .
If we believe that active , informed patients play an essential role in healthcare , in monitoring medicines and in preventing the spread of counterfeits , it is hard to understand why patients are not allowed access to information about the most important medicines .
For this reason , the pharmaceutical package consists of the following four parts : a political communication and three legislative proposals on the safety monitoring of medicines , on counterfeit medicines and on patient information .
The rapidly growing numbers of fake medicines have forced us to act .
The number of counterfeit medicines confiscated at the EU 's external borders increased almost fourfold between 2005 and 2007 .
If we do not act now , the first deaths will be caused sooner or later .
The problem has also affected the legal supply chain for medicines .
We have discovered fake medicines at different stages of the supply chain .
Each individual case involves thousands of packages and , therefore , thousands of patients are potentially at risk .
In future , patients in Europe must be able to have total confidence in the quality of the medicines which they obtain from legal suppliers , such as pharmacies .
Our proposals are therefore as follows : firstly , clear regulations for all those involved in the legal supply chain ; secondly , stricter supervision of medicines in transit or for export ; thirdly , the latest safety features on medicines which are particularly at risk , including a seal , an identification feature and a barcode to ensure complete traceability for every package ; and , fourthly , regulations for the safety monitoring of active substances .
While the proposal was being drawn up , a misunderstanding arose which I would like to clear up once and for all .
The proposal 's sole objective is to improve patient safety .
It is not intended to prevent a specific form of medicine distribution , such as parallel trade .
The sector in question has been responsible for a striking information campaign .
In this case you could almost call it a disinformation campaign .
However , I would like to clarify once again that the parallel trade in medicines is an activity which is permitted under the EU Treaty and will remain so .
Parallel traders simply need to observe the new safety requirements , as do all other participants in the supply chain .
No one is being given preferential treatment and no one is being put at a disadvantage .
The legislative proposal on pharmacovigilance , in other words on monitoring approved medicines , will improve patient safety and reduce the unnecessary administrative burden .
This is a good example of how less bureaucracy can lead to greater safety .
This will be achieved by making responsibilities clearer and reporting obligations more effective .
In addition , manufacturers must introduce an efficient monitoring system .
Community-wide access to information about undesirable or previously unknown side effects will make Community-wide risk management significantly easier .
Finally , the pharmaceutical package includes a proposal for improved patient information .
I know that this is a highly controversial issue which we have often considered in this Parliament and I hope that we will succeed in discussing this issue calmly and objectively and without resorting to polemics .
Patients have a right to information and this applies in particular to medicines .
Health is one of our most important assets , if not the most important .
The significance of health will continue to increase in our aging society .
In a democratic society , it therefore goes without saying that patients must be provided with comprehensive information about matters which affect their health .
I must state very clearly , and this really is a fundamental principle of a democratic society , that we do not need to explain and justify the fact that people should be provided with information .
Instead , we need to explain and justify the situation when citizens are not provided with information .
Patients are already actively searching for information .
All of us will have come across this situation among our friends , acquaintances or even family members , when a seriously ill person or their relatives and friends search desperately , and in many cases these people really are desperate , for information about whether a better medicine or a better treatment is available .
The first place that these people look is the Internet .
They come across information from other parts of the world and are not able to tell whether it is product advertising or factual information .
In my opinion this situation is both dreadful and intolerable .
I would therefore like to make it absolutely clear that the current situation does not meet patients ' requirements for high-quality information .
It also results in discrimination .
People who can understand English and can use the Internet have access to information which is unavailable to those people who cannot understand English and cannot use the Internet .
These are generally older people and it is particularly important for them to obtain factual information .
As things currently stand in Europe , if a medicine is American , then the information is available , and if it is European , the information is not available .
Our considerations are based on the fact that the ban on advertising prescription-only medicines should under no circumstances be relaxed and that there is a significant difference between information and advertising .
Our proposal is therefore that certain information should be released and , in particular , the information which has been reviewed by the authorities and can be found , for example , on the package leaflets of medicines .
Secondly , this information should only be published on the Internet in written answers to specific questions or in healthcare publications specified by the Member States .
Thirdly , strict quality criteria must be followed and , fourthly , the Member States must put in place effective monitoring mechanisms .
The information must be monitored before publication .
Exceptions to this will only be permitted in the context of effective systems .
I would like to explain that there is , of course , a grey area relating to patient information and advertising for medical products .
Individual patients are not able to see through this grey area in which information of all kinds is made available via media of all kinds , with the media taking editorial responsibility .
Very often this information is controlled by interested parties , to put it cautiously , and readers are not able to identify the source of the information or the interested party involved .
I will be working with the media and with the pharmaceutical industry to draw up a code of conduct in order to ensure that this highly questionable practice is brought to an end .
However , to achieve this we need to find a better and more modern solution to the problem of patient information .
This package contains very up-to-date and progressive proposals .
It draws the obvious conclusions from the increasing importance which citizens place on questions that concern their own health .
I hope that I will have the support of the European Parliament for this package .
Thank you very much .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I very much welcome the Commissioner 's statement and in particular the tone in which he opened it when he was referring to patients as being the centre of this .
I am just taking through this Parliament a report on cross-border health , and fundamental to that is the safety of patients .
If I may say so , I wish this had come sooner so that we could have completed your package , along with other health measures within this Parliament .
That is not going to be possible , but at least we are on the road .
Perhaps you could mention to at least one of your colleagues that we would also like to see something on needle-stick injuries as part of that safety package .
But we are looking now at the three items that you have referred to .
You have referred , rightly , to information to patients and you have dwelt on the detail of that .
I believe that patients , and particularly the patients with conditions like neurodegenerative diseases , are very anxious to see this information to patients coming in in a way which is certainly not advertising but does give them confidence that what they read - whether it is on the internet , in the package or in advertising or announcements , shall we say - is bona fide and trustworthy .
At the moment they cannot do that and so they are , as you say , at risk .
The second one is counterfeiting .
Counterfeiting is one of the curses of our age .
It is one thing to have a watch or designer clothing counterfeited , but it is far more serious if it is a medicine .
If it is a counterfeit medicine , then patients are at risk and patients can die because of counterfeit medicines .
As we have heard , the statistics - 2.5 million packages a year seized at EU borders - have greatly increased over the previous two years , from 2005-2007 , and the frightening thing is that it is increasingly within pharmacies and it is not just the internet packages .
Thirdly , you referred to pharmacovigilance .
We reckon that 5 % of all hospital admissions are the result of adverse drug reactions and that adverse drug reactions cause a fifth of the unnecessary deaths in hospitals .
So it is vitally important that we have a simplified , more reliable package on pharmacovigilance too .
If we get these in place , then I believe my report and the safety of patients can go hand in hand , and that must be at the top of our agenda tonight , during the rest of this Parliament and in the Parliament that is to come at the end of the summer .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is good that we are discussing a new piece of pharmaceutical legislation this evening .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Verheugen for providing us with this opportunity .
Commissioner Verheugen has rightly raised the fact that a number of amendments to the legislation are necessary .
We need a greater focus on safety , better rules concerning information for patients and effective measures against counterfeit medicines .
I would also stress the point that the patient must play the central role in this regard .
Medicines are subject to strict supervision , which is why it is not possible to put any old thing on the market .
Strict tests are carried out on medicines before they reach the market , but once they are on the market it is extremely rare for them to be tested again .
Supervision of a medicine is limited once it reaches the market .
Side effects are reported , but there is little research into the effectiveness of medicines .
The proposed legislation gives us an opportunity to make very necessary improvements on this front .
For example , cholesterol-lowering medication is taken on a mass scale , although little is known about the effectiveness of various products and very little , indeed , is known about which product is the most effective .
The same applies to antidepressants and other drugs which have an impact on people 's mental health .
It would be a good idea if the pharmaceutical industry were required to undertake more extensive research into the effectiveness and side effects of its products .
Independent testing is necessary in this regard .
We all know that patient information about medicines is a controversial topic .
Anyone watching prime-time television in the United States can see what trouble this can cause .
' Ask your doctor for x medicine for breast cancer or y medicine for cystitis . '
So far , there has been a ban on the advertising of medicines in Europe and , as far as I am concerned , that is how it should remain .
We cannot allow anyone to saddle us with a diagnosis or talk us into taking a drug .
The pharmaceutical industry wants to inform patients about its products and thinks that it is the body most capable of doing that .
I imagine that that might very well be the case , but independent testing is crucial here , too .
The legislative proposal relaxes the rules on the circulation of information via the Internet and printed media .
As Commissioner Verheugen himself says , this is a modern and progressive proposal .
There must be a very clear dividing line between information and advertising and patients should have the right to reliable information .
For this reason , it would be a good idea to collect information in a European database , together with comparative information on the effects and side effects of medicines .
The third proposal in the package tightens the rules intended to prevent counterfeit medicines from being placed on the market .
That is only right , because , as my fellow Member Mr Bowis has stressed , placing counterfeit medicines on the market is a serious offence .
Commissioner Verheugen is also right in saying that this phenomenon is not so much a consequence of parallel trade as of altogether different mechanisms which we need to tackle .
In the upcoming period we should deepen our discussion about the advantages and disadvantages of information for patients , counterfeit medicines and patient safety , because it is certain that we are dealing with a number of public duties here .
The industry has a responsibility , patients have a certain amount of responsibility , but so do the authorities as well .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Commission for its statement .
I think that it is good to address environmental aspects , for example .
Contamination from pharmaceutical products is a growing problem in treatment works .
As regards advertisements for pharmaceutical products , I would like to see the toughest possible restrictions .
I have really become quite tired of this issue .
One evening when I was watching television , a quarter of all the advertisements were for over-the-counter pharmaceutical products .
I would like the Commission to carry out an impact assessment to see how great an effect the advertisements have had on sales of these pharmaceutical products .
Is it reasonable to have so many advertisements for pharmaceutical products on the television , even if we are talking about over-the-counter medicines ?
In Sweden , we had an example of the vaccine Gardasil , which scarcely falls within the bounds of over-the-counter or epidemiological vaccines .
I would therefore like us to tighten up the legislation in this area .
As regards the counterfeiting of medicines , this is probably also connected to our current patent system .
There is an extremely large difference in price .
I believe that a solution for better steering research in the direction of needs that are in the public interest would perhaps be to introduce the greater use of prize funds for pharmaceutical products .
Neglected tropical diseases , for example - that is to say an area where there is no buying power - would then be able to obtain new medicines .
This would better enable research to be carried out into producing medicines for groups in society that do not have a strong buying power .
I would like the Commission to look more closely into the possibilities of making greater use of prize funds , whereby a person who develops a new pharmaceutical product receives a one-off sum .
Manufacture would then be licence-free .
I believe that in certain cases this could be a better system for improving research and , above all , for eliminating the purpose of counterfeiting medicines .
I see many advantages to being able , from a political position , to steer research into solving a disease problem instead of treating the symptoms for 30 years with medication that is very lucrative for the undertakings concerned .
Finally , I would just like to say something about nanotechnology .
There are nanoparticles in medicine , but we know very little about their toxicological effects .
I would like better methods to be introduced for investigating the toxicology of nanoparticles .
( SK ) Many of us will probably talk about healthcare subsidiarity in connection with the pharmaceutical package .
Nevertheless , the situation on the pharmaceutical market indicates that , for Europe to be competitive in research and development , as well as in the distribution and sale of new medicines , closer cooperation or improved cooperation between the Member States is required in this field .
Patients need to be better informed about medicines and of course about their unwanted side effects , so that they can participate in treatment more effectively .
Due to limited funding for pharmaceutical research and development in Europe , the European pharmaceutical industry is unable to compete with America , Japan or Canada .
That is why medicine prices have been rising disproportionately on European markets .
We have discussed repeatedly in the European Parliament the insufficient accessibility of certain drugs , for example those for the treatment of cancer or so-called rare diseases .
We place patients who are already in a difficult situation in the position of beggars who have to find sponsors in order to obtain treatment .
The high price of many medicines forces the healthcare sector to seek cheaper alternatives , in other words generic medicines .
Unfortunately , it is precisely these that are frequently counterfeited and often contain no active substance apart from sugar and the tablet compound .
The aforementioned facts show us how important it is to exchange opinions , discuss and subsequently adopt a complete pharmaceutical package ensuring that patients are treated with high-quality and affordable medicines .
In this context , I am looking forward to effective cooperation with the rapporteurs appointed for specific parts of the package in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I have to agree with the Commissioner that it is medicines sold via the Internet that greatly endanger the safety of pharmaceutical policy .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it always surprises me when health matters are handled by the Directorate-General for Enterprise and Industry .
On reading the proposals on patient information , however , it soon becomes apparent that , one or two nuances aside , they treat medicines as if they were any other consumer product .
On this issue , I believe that information provided by the industry itself , other than labelling and statutory notices , is called advertising and it is by repetition that it becomes a competitive commercial asset .
The Commission may well put forward certain provisions to define its proposals , and it may keep telling us that it is patient associations that are impatiently awaiting such provisions .
There are many of us who are not fooled by the impact of this ' patient information ' directive and know that it will have no benefit in actually improving the health of Europeans .
We can already be certain that , if the text were to be adopted , the pharmaceutical industry 's marketing budget would skyrocket , undoubtedly at the expense of research .
Already today , 23 % of turnover is dedicated to advertising and only 17 % to research , and if we look at the United States and New Zealand , where this advertising information is already permitted , we can see that it has led to an increase in the number of prescriptions and health costs , without any visible improvement in the quality of care or in citizens ' health .
Let this be a lesson to us .
Finally , I would like to conclude by saying that a modern solution would be to have more faith in health professionals , or to train them better , so that they can provide information on treatments and prescription medicines .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner Verheugen , as you said , this package was much talked about even before it was tabled .
This is perhaps not particularly strange , as pharmaceutical products affect everyone .
However , they also affect powerful companies with strong interests as well as the use of tax revenue .
I , personally , asked the Commission to include the effect of pharmaceutical products on the environment in the information provided .
I am very pleased that the Commission has included this in its proposal as something that may be included in the information that may be provided .
However , I think , in fact , that this information probably could be mandatory when providing information about the pharmaceutical product .
I do not want to see advertisements for prescription pharmaceutical products .
I am therefore pleased that the Commission appears to share this view .
However , like the Commission , I believe that patients and the general public should have the right to sound and accurate information on pharmaceutical products .
In several cases this already exists today .
In Sweden , for example , we have a system called FASS .
It is important for it to be possible , as an ordinary citizen , to find reliable information quickly , particularly in view of the fact that there is plenty of information that is downright misleading , in particular in various chat rooms on the Internet that are easy to find if someone is in a vulnerable situation .
However , just as the Commission has proposed , it is necessary for the information to be monitored objectively so that it can be relied upon .
It is this part of the Commission 's proposal that I am quite dubious about .
It will be extremely important to regulate how these information channels can and should be set up , so that they are easily accessible while at the same time only accessible to those looking for the information , so that the information is not given to people who have not asked for it like an advertisement .
I am also a little dubious about whether it is really necessary to have full regulation of this matter at EU level .
When all is said and done , this is an area that relates to health services and medical care and that should fall mostly within the competence of the Member States .
I would therefore prefer to be a little more convinced that the legislative regulation of this matter at EU level was really necessary .
( FR ) Madam President , I have two questions I would like to put to the Commissioner .
Do you intend to find a way to prevent a magazine , distributed free of charge in pharmacies in Germany and subtly funded by the pharmaceutical industry , from being affected by this directive ?
My other question relates to the names of medicines in cross-border regions .
The names are often different despite the fact that the medicines contain identical substances .
Could there not be a way to simplify things for those who live in cross-border regions ?
Madam President , I welcome the Commission 's statement tonight and look forward to reading in more detail exactly what is in this package .
Some years ago here we had the pharmaceutical review .
That included veterinary medicines , as well as human pharmaceuticals .
I am just wondering why the two have been divorced at this stage in the proceedings .
The Commission will be aware of my interest through the legislation on maximum residues , which feed into the food chain through veterinary pharmaceuticals .
I have been critical of serious shortcomings in the Veterinary Medicines Directive now for some time .
Could the Commissioner just comment on drug interaction and multi-drug therapy and drug-resistance issues in relation to this discussion here tonight ?
I , like others , feel there should be far more patient information now .
Patients should not have to ' compete ' - if that is the word - with what is on the internet , where there is sometimes a lot of misinformation .
They should get properly reviewed scientific information at first hand with their medicines .
Finally , I also have concerns with the role of drug companies in influencing doctors ' prescription habits .
Could the Commissioner comment , please ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in response to Mrs Corbey 's comments , I would like to say first of all that I gave the go-ahead for a European database of prescription-only medicines several years ago .
Work on the database is going well and it will be available in the foreseeable future .
Not only Mrs Corbey but also several other Members of this House have asked the question : is it possible to make a clear distinction between information and advertising ?
Let me state clearly once again that the Commission is totally opposed to allowing advertising or publicity , or whatever you want to call it , for prescription-only medicines in Europe .
We will not permit this under any circumstances .
However , I do also have to contradict you when you give the impression that there is no difference between information and advertising .
Anyone who says that it is not possible to distinguish between information and advertising is insulting hundreds of thousands of journalists who clearly demonstrate every day in their work in newspapers , on the radio or on television that there is a difference between information and advertising .
The regulations which we draw up are so accurate and so precise that there is no question of blurring the lines between information and advertising .
The information must be based on data that has already been authorised by the approval authority .
It must be authorised before it is published and it is subject to strict quality controls .
I really do not understand how anyone could believe that this was advertising .
Mr Schlyter has highlighted the question of vaccines .
I must state clearly at this point that vaccines are , of course , not freely available .
Vaccines are normally made available to ordinary citizens by the public health authorities in the context of information campaigns which aim to ensure the highest possible vaccination density .
That is how things should be , but the difference between information and advertising must , of course , also be taken into account in the case of vaccines .
I fully share your opinion in this respect .
The issue of counterfeit medicines is unrelated to intellectual property .
Fake medicines are not produced as a result of a dispute about intellectual property .
The medicines which are being faked have already been approved , which means that any issues of intellectual property have been resolved .
Counterfeit medicines are produced for reasons of pure greed .
There is no question of violating rights to intellectual property .
This is simply a criminal act .
At the very least faking medicines involves bodily harm , if not attempted murder , but it has nothing to do with questions of intellectual property .
I would like to draw your attention to statistics produced by the European Medicines Agency which has been investigating the possible effects of improved patient information .
In Great Britain , 5 % of all the people who are admitted to hospital are there because they have taken the wrong medicine , in other words , a medicine which they are allergic to or which they should not have been given .
Of all the patients in hospital in Great Britain , 5 % have been hospitalised because they have taken the wrong medicine .
We know that in 50 % of these cases this could have been avoided if the patient had been informed about the nature of the medicine they received .
However , this information was not available to them .
I also use this argument in reply to healthcare authorities in the Member States who are not enthusiastic about the prospect of well-informed patients because they believe that well-informed patients are demanding and will ask for more expensive drugs .
These statistics show that patient information can even save money .
In answer to Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges ' question about brochures and magazines which are made available free of charge , I do not think that it is possible for European legislators to prevent anyone from distributing free brochures .
This happens in several Member States .
However , the ban on advertising also applies to these magazines and brochures .
I am thinking , for example , of the very well-known publication Apothekenumschau in my native country .
These publications are not allowed to contain advertising for prescription-only medicines .
I have said something about the grey area , in other words , the surreptitious advertising which you also mentioned .
Yes , it does exist .
We are familiar with these practices and our proposals are specifically intended to prevent this surreptitious advertising which is found in a number of areas .
As far as the border regions are concerned , the circumstances described are related to the fact that we still essentially have national approval of drugs .
European approval is the exception , not the rule .
This means that manufacturers have their medicines approved in the different markets in the Member States and no one can prevent them from registering the medicines under different names .
This is where the problem lies .
If a medicine has European approval , then it is available throughout Europe , including the border regions , under the same brand name .
Mrs Doyle , I do not believe that there is a one-to-one correspondence in the areas which we are discussing between human medicine and veterinary medicine .
I think the structures are very different in these cases .
For example , animals are not able to find out about medicines themselves .
The relationship between demand and availability is quite different .
However , I will be very happy to consider this problem further .
I would also like to point out that in the case of the question of residues we issued a proposal a long time ago , as you know .
The debate is closed .
Dangerous substances and preparations ( dichloromethane ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Carl Schlyter , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC as regards restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations ( Dichloromethane ) - C6-0068 / 2008 - .
Madam President , I actually wish that the French Presidency were here tonight , as I have to say that the cooperation that we had was extraordinarily good .
Without its commitment and its willingness to find ways forward we would never have been able to reach an agreement .
During the process , there was always a blocking minority on some issue or other .
It is thus thanks to very good collaboration with the French Presidency that this legislation is now being realised , which is a very good thing .
What we are discussing is dichloromethane ( DCM ) , a paint stripper .
It is also an industrial chemical that is actually used a lot in the pharmaceutical industry .
In its industrial application , however , it is entirely possible to protect workers and the environment when using this chemical .
It is predominantly when it is sold to consumers that there are problems .
DCM is a noxious chemical in that it is carcinogenic , has a narcotic effect and has harmful effects on health .
It is easy to be affected by it .
By the time you smell DCM , you have already exceeded the safety limit by a factor of three , which makes it extremely difficult to protect yourself against .
A proper protective set-up consists of very high-spec gloves that have to be changed every three hours .
You have to have equipment that usually costs around EUR 2 700 with an independent ventilation system .
The fact that this chemical is used today is very much dependent on the fact that it is used illegally .
This meant that it was also important to restrict and prohibit use by professional users .
It is often the self-employed and companies consisting of just a few staff who are out there cleaning up graffiti or stripping paint .
The protective equipment is very often left at home or just not available at all .
Banning this chemical is therefore , to a very large extent , a worker-protection issue .
We know that , in those countries where it is used - which means 24 of the 27 Member States at present - DCM is hardly ever used properly in accordance with national and European legislation .
I think it will suffice to quote the German Chemical Industry Association 's own text , which states that even if there is good ventilation , paints are stripped in restricted areas , the paint residues removed are collected and the DCM pots closed immediately , the exposure limit is still exceeded on a regular basis .
That is why self-contained breathing equipment is needed .
I think that it is very positive that the Commission put forward a proposal and that we have now reached a compromise that will , in practice , also prohibit professional use , with countries having the ability to obtain national derogations .
However , those who obtain such derogations must guarantee that those who work with this chemical have suitable protective equipment , adequate training and awareness of the alternatives and they must be able to justify why they are unable to make use of these alternatives .
It is , in fact , the case that there are functional alternatives available in all the areas in which dichloromethane is currently used .
We are talking about the 5 % that is used in the dangerous way , which is to say for paint stripping .
The other 95 % of the volume of DCM used is used within industry .
It is a good thing that we are tightening up the protection of workers and the environment there , too .
All in all , I am , in fact , very satisfied with the agreement .
It will improve people 's ability to strip paint safely without being exposed to dangerous , carcinogenic chemicals .
My fellow Members of this House have helped to make it possible to achieve this agreement so quickly , and I thank you all for that and for all the shadow rapporteurs and myself being able to reach agreement with the Council .
This bodes well .
This was , in fact , the last chance before REACH to ban chemicals in the old-fashioned way .
It was therefore a type of grand finale for the old style of chemicals policy and it was certainly a good finale for us to reach agreement so efficiently .
In respect of DCM , there are those who argue that the alternatives may possibly be at least as dangerous , if not more so , but the assessments by the Commission and others have clearly shown that the alternatives are significantly less dangerous .
We are now creating a market for the alternatives .
The reality is that those companies that are currently grumbling will , in many cases , also manufacture the alternatives , while there are also smaller companies that manufacture alternatives .
It is a good thing that they will now get the chance to exploit their competitive advantage of greater environmental protection in the internal market .
We are heading for a safer future , and I thank everyone who has been involved in the process .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Schlyter , for his hard work on this proposal .
We have now come to a good compromise with the Council , which can be accepted after the first reading .
It is question here of restricting the marketing of dichloromethane and its use in paint stripping products , in order to reduce the risks identified in several major studies carried out on behalf of the Commission .
There is no doubt that dichloromethane is hazardous to human health because it is highly volatile .
This volatility causes highly concentrated vapours to form in the ambient air which can easily be inhaled by users of paint strippers and which then have a direct toxic effect on the central nervous system .
In poor working or operating conditions , this has led to or contributed to fatal accidents in several Member States .
The majority of accidents and fatalities have taken place in a commercial and professional environment , in particular as a result of inadequate ventilation and failure to use personal protective equipment .
However , consumers have also been involved in accidents , although the number of accidents reported in this case is much smaller .
The Commission 's proposal is intended to reduce as far as possible and as far as technically feasible the risks involved in the use of this hazardous chemical .
In the version amended by Parliament and the Council , the sale of paint strippers containing dichloromethane to consumers will be banned completely .
There should also be a ban on consumers using this substance , because they do not generally have the necessary personal protective equipment and cannot be trained or supervised to ensure that they use the substance safely .
The marketing and use of dichloromethane by professionals will be subject to a general ban .
However , as some Member States believe that it is essential for professionals to continue using this substance in future , these Member States will be given the option of permitting its use under specific strict conditions .
These Member States must impose specific rules and regulations for authorising professionals which fit into their existing national systems .
Professional users will only be granted authorisation after they have completed a training course .
The training course must , among other things , provide information about the risks of dichloromethane and the availability of alternative substances .
Employers and self-employed people should preferably replace dichloromethane with other substances or procedures , taking into account the relevant workplace safety legislation .
The use of paint strippers containing dichloromethane will continue to be permitted on commercial premises , provided that all the necessary measures have been taken to keep the exposure of the people working there to a minimum .
For example , it is essential to ensure that there is adequate ventilation in order to remain as far as possible within workplace limits .
Measures to minimise evaporation from containers of paint stripper must also be put in place .
In addition , protective respiratory equipment must be worn when the workplace limits are exceeded .
Mr Schlyter recommends that you support the compromise text negotiated with the Council .
I also believe that this compromise represents a good balance .
I am therefore in a position to give my full support to the compromise on behalf of the Commission .
Madam President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur and reiterate that we have worked very well together to reach this compromise , which has the support of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Attention must be drawn to the fact that this is a highly toxic product and that viable and safe alternative solutions do exist .
Indeed , we cannot deny the hazards - as you mentioned , Mr Verheugen - associated with the use of dichloromethane , particularly if the conditions do not guarantee user safety .
Often dichloromethane is used by individuals carrying out restoration work in their own homes .
They find it to be an excellent and effective product , but do not realise that by using it in an enclosed space they risk losing consciousness very quickly , and that there is even a risk of death if due care is not taken .
Contrary to the extreme position of a total ban , as first proposed by the rapporteur , the compromise we have reached now leaves Member States the option of providing an exception for professional and industrial use , but under clearly defined conditions .
This is a valid compromise and it is important to recognise that dichloromethane is responsible for many accidents .
I regret , moreover , that we have very little information on the accidents at work that have happened .
I would also point out that an impact assessment was performed before the Commission 's work began and that its findings shaped the text .
We must nonetheless ensure that very specific information is available to those individuals who may still be tempted to use this product , even though it is the Member States that are now responsible for drawing up clear rules and enforcing the general marketing ban on this product that is hazardous to health .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Carl Schlyter , and the shadow rapporteurs , on the very thorough and professional work that they have done on this dossier .
It is a rare pleasure for me these days to be able to participate in debates arising from committee work and particularly at this time of day , or should I say at this time of night .
I have not had the privilege to participate in the debates in committee other than on one occasion when I wished to ensure that my colleagues understood the importance of voting to support the rapporteur 's proposals .
But this is an important issue , indeed an issue of life or death , and one that for me is doubly important because I have a particular constituency interest in it .
Dichloromethanes , as we have heard , are substances with a uniquely hazardous profile .
They are so volatile that inhalation , even just the casual smell of them , is above all recognised health limits .
They are carcinogenic and they cause neurotic effects with nerve damage .
Under normal temperatures their use causes them to evaporate to dangerous levels .
To work safely with dichloromethanes one needs an air-proof suit at a cost of about EUR 2 000 , and to protect one 's skin , gloves at a cost of EUR 25 or EUR 30 , which need to be replaced every two or three hours .
Of course nobody does this , even if they know of the harmful nature of the substance .
There is no effective way to ensure the safe use of dichloromethanes for the public .
And , because they are so toxic , the rapporteur and the committee wanted to ban them , even for professional use , in order to prevent fatalities .
Over the last eight years the Commission has on record some 18 fatalities from the use of these products and some 56 non-fatal injuries .
I am sure that in reality there have been more .
But there has been an industrial lobby which has created a blocking minority in Council , and for that reason the rapporteur and the committee reluctantly agreed to allow the Member States a derogation for professional use .
However , we have achieved not only strict protection for workers using them professionally , but also a commitment to control and inspection by the Member States .
A complete ban on these products already exists in Sweden , Denmark and Germany , and I hope no Member State will ask for such a derogation .
Industrial use is a different matter .
These products can be used safely industrially in the right conditions .
Some Members have argued that they should be allowed to be used for the protection of cultural heritage , for the removal of paint from old monuments without damaging .
But experts have suggested this would not be a good idea , and therefore my group will not be supporting any amendments tabled in that direction .
I mentioned that I have a constituency interest in this .
I have been in correspondence with Commissioner Verheugen for seven years now on this issue .
Why ?
Because I have in my constituency a company called Eco Solutions , which has developed a perfectly safe alternative to dichloromethanes .
It is a water-based alternative .
It has the same effect even if the process takes a little longer .
I am sorry to say that the only Member State lobbying hard for the retention of dichloromethane use was the United Kingdom , which also produces in industrial quantities many such substances .
It took me four years ' work with Commissioner Verheugen to get the Commission 's expert committee even to look at the existence of this safer water-based alternative , and it has taken three years to get that water-based alternative recognised as an effective and useable technology .
But I am pleased to say that , as with all the best stories , this one has a happy ending .
Dichloromethanes will come off the market for non-industrial use .
My constituents will become richer with their new technology , and everybody will live happily ever after thanks to the excellent work of Carl Schlyter and his colleagues on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Madam President , dichloromethane or DCM is a dangerous chemical that can cause cancer , eye damage and acute damage to organs such as the heart , liver and kidneys .
DCM is used in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals and as a paint stripper and degreaser , amongst other uses .
Some Member States , such as Sweden , Denmark and Austria , have already introduced a ban on DCM .
It is a great thing that the issue of DCM is now on the agenda .
It is even better that this agreement will mean a total ban on DCM when it comes to ordinary consumers .
For this , I can but give high praise to our rapporteur , Mr Schlyter .
Well done , Carl !
Unfortunately , workers in the pharmaceutical industry and those working on cleaning up walls and façades will continue to run the risk of suffering the effects of dichloromethane .
This agreement will not , I am sad to say , mean a total ban on the professional use of DCM .
This is a serious failing , and one that I hold the Commission entirely responsible for .
This derogation , however , has been framed in such a way that what I hope is the small number of Member States that want to use DCM must guarantee that their workers do not suffer as a result .
The burden of proof is thus on those countries that want to engage in the limited use of DCM , which must prove that the substance will be used in the safest possible manner and guarantee the protection of workers .
In the end , this is quite acceptable .
By and large , this is a good agreement .
I would like to urge the Commission to draw inspiration from this decision .
Yes , we can !
Let us now go further .
I urge the Commission , please , is it not possible for you to give us an indication that , in the future , there will be more bans on hazardous substances such as carcinogenic azo dyes , bisphenol A and the flame retardant deca-BDE ? If the EU cannot do this , why can you not permit individual Member States to go further and introduce their own bans ?
You , in the Commission , even go so far as to force the Member States to lift restrictions that they sometimes already have .
My own country , Sweden , for example , was forced to allow azo dyes after joining the EU in 1995 .
Following threats from the Commission about legal action in the European Court of Justice , Sweden has now begun to permit deca-BDE .
That is unacceptable and , more than anything , it is not environmentally friendly .
That is not the way to conduct a progressive programme of environmental legislation .
Commission , Commissioner Verheugen , please do convince me otherwise !
Prove that environmental considerations take priority over the demands of the market in more cases than this single example .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , dichloromethane , which is available on the market and is authorised for common use in the shape of various commercial products , is also widely used in the chemical industry , as well as the textile and pharmaceutical industries .
Dichloromethane is easily absorbed by the human body , it is highly toxic and carcinogenic , and is responsible for many cases of poisoning , including fatal accidents .
In Poland alone , the number of people exposed to this chemical agent in the workplace is estimated to stand at several thousand .
While industrial use of the chemical can be effectively controlled , the use of dichloromethane by individual consumers , or even by professional companies , is inevitably associated with a risk to human health and life , not only due to the fact that there is no way of implementing proper controls , but also due to the high cost of implementing protective measures .
All warnings and measures to regulate the use of dichloromethane have proved to be ineffective , in view of the high toxicity and the volatility of this chemical compound , which is why it is necessary to completely withdraw dichloromethane from widespread consumer use .
Economic factors should not be used as a reason for maintaining this poison in common use .
We must also avoid using the interests of industries which manufacture products containing DCM as an argument to support restricted consumer use of dichloromethane .
As far as the common usage of this compound is concerned , the cost to society far outweighs any material benefits .
Madam President , I agree with the very last phrase that the Commissioner used , that we can welcome this compromise and , on that basis , I congratulate the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs on bringing this together .
It has been a hard road to get to this .
Originally the Commission came forward with a proposal to ban this substance for individual use - not for professional use - and the rapporteur brought forward these proposals to extend this to professional use .
And so we listened to the evidence of our constituents , as Graham Watson has done .
He has talked about industrial lobbies .
He has also referred to an industrial lobby in his constituency , which successfully persuaded him of the alternative .
We know that 90 % of paint strippers use DCM , so we had to look at the balance of this .
None of us wants to go over the top in our descriptions of the dangers .
Sometimes when I was listening this evening to the hazards of this substance , I wondered why we are satisfied that industrial workers should be subjected to it but not allow professionals to use the substance , within the rules and under strict guidance ; and all the clothing that Graham Watson is going to issue to people in the future - these white suits , or whatever they are , a space-age parliamentary benefit - will be coming .
I think that this , among many other substances , poses a high risk .
It is potentially hazardous .
There is evidence that there have been accidents and people have been hurt .
It is probably right that we take stronger action than has been taken in the past .
That is why I accept and genuinely welcome the compromise that is being sought .
It leaves the door open to Member States that wish to , and believe it is right to , continue under the tight rules that have been laid down to allow professionals - and only professionals - to use this in addition to industrial use .
But , Commissioner , you now have a responsibility to go back and do the research on the alternatives .
Look at the alternatives that are available : NMP has been available for 11 years , but only now is found to be reprotoxic ; there are flammable solvents that can cause glue-sniffing problems ; there are date-rape drug substances that are seen as safe alternatives ; there is DBE , about which not much is known ; and there are the more basic blowlamps and sanding methods that can be used , although dust and other problems arise there .

So let us now go back and thoroughly investigate the alternatives so that we really can be sure that we are providing a safer alternative for our constituents .
If we find that some of the alternatives are no less dangerous , then I am sure the Commissioner or his successors will be back to tell us so and to bring forward a proposal - and if they do not I am sure Carl Schlyter will .
( CS ) Madam President , dichloromethane has narcotic effects causing damage to the central nervous system and loss of consciousness , as well as cardiotoxic effects .
If it is misused there is a direct risk of death and this factor has implications for terrorism .
I therefore support a ban on its use by ordinary consumers and strict restrictions on professional use .
As alternative and possibly less toxic bleaching substances exist , then in my opinion it is unnecessary to permit exceptions .
However , the proposal we will vote on tomorrow will allow Member States to apply to the Commission for exceptions in justifiable cases , although under very strict conditions .
I would like to know how the Commission or anyone else will assess the validity of applications for exceptions and how they will monitor compliance with the restrictions .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by saying a few words to Mr Watson .
You have played an important role in bringing about this proposal .
At the time when you told me in person about the problem which you had had for several years with the Commission , I realised that there were alternatives to this substance and I am sure you will agree that from then on things moved very quickly .
I personally instructed my Directorate-General to present the proposal because it was clear to me as a result of my dealings with you that there were alternatives .
I have stated on another occasion in this Parliament , and I would ask Mr Holm in particular to listen to this , that although I am the Commissioner with responsibility for enterprise and industry , I do not believe that an industrial product which is hazardous should remain on the market simply so that it can be used to earn money .
I am of the opinion that , when there is an alternative which can replace a hazardous industrial product , it should be replaced .
This is the principle which I have adhered to when we discussed and adopted REACH in this Parliament .
All the substances which you referred to , Mr Holm , are now governed by REACH .
Dichloromethane would normally also be covered under the terms of REACH , but because the health risks are so evident and because there have been so many cases , we have given priority to this substance .
It is possible that we will have to act in the same way in the case of other substances if the health risks are equally obvious and if we cannot wait until the very comprehensive and demanding REACH procedure has been completed .
I would also like to make it clear , Mr Holm , that I would also have voted in favour of a more far-reaching compromise .
If Parliament had been able to agree with the Council on banning the commercial use of dichloromethane , I would have voted in favour this evening .
Please do not hold the Commission responsible for the fact that there are several Member States who did not want to take this further for reasons which I am not familiar with .
This is the reason why the Commission presented its proposal in the way that it did , because we wanted to produce a proposal which had a chance of being accepted and this is now what has happened .
My last remark concerns the comments made by Mr Bowis in relation to the toxic effects of the alternatives .
With chemicals it is always a question of weighing up the degree of risk involved .
Our thorough and comprehensive studies have shown that none of the alternative substances currently on sale have the properties of dichloromethane which are so dangerous , in other words the direct toxic effect on the central nervous system .
This occurs only with dichloromethane and not with the other substances .
We are aware of very few accidents involving the alternative substances .
This also applies to countries where the use of dichloromethane has already been banned , such as Denmark , Austria and Sweden .
If the situation should change , the Commission will , of course , investigate and , if necessary , propose measures governing other substances .
Finally , I would like to comment on the remarks made by Mr Holm , which I temporarily forgot , concerning the question of whether the Commission will force Member States to abolish progressive environmental or health regulations , because they conflict with internal market regulations .
The Commission will not do this .
Current legislation states explicitly that Member States have the right to enact national regulations which differ from those of the internal market if they believe that this is necessary for health or environmental reasons .
As I am responsible for monitoring the notification of these differing regulations , I can tell you that the Commission acts on the basis of a clear and unambiguous principle in this case .
We take the healthcare-related and environmental arguments of the Member States seriously .
If they enact different regulations for these reasons , we do not force them to revoke their environmental and health regulations .
If you have any information from recent years to back up your accusation , I would like to find out more specific details , so that I can refute your claim .
The case that you mentioned dates back to 1995 , which means that I had nothing to do with it .
Madam President , I would like to come back on what Mr Watson said .
He , too , has played his part .
Though you are not a member of our committee , you have still had an impact on our committee and helped us to reach a compromise .
Of course , the staff who have helped me to reach this agreement have also played an important role .
I can only reiterate what Commissioner Verheugen said .
The Commission has been clear throughout the process , at least with me , that if the Council and Parliament had reached a more far-reaching compromise involving a total ban , the Commission would have accepted it .
There has been no lack of clarity between the Commission and me in relation to this issue .
I would just like to illustrate this chemical to you all .
If I were to open a single one-kilo pot here and now , spread it over the benches and paint it out , we would , in fact , somewhat exceed the safe limit throughout this exceedingly large chamber .
That is how very toxic this particular chemical is .
I can only conclude this debate by appealing to the Commission to ensure , now , that those Member States which apply for a derogation for professional use have that derogation revoked if these new , stricter rules are regularly broken .
We know , everybody knows , and all the studies show that , if dichloromethane is used correctly in such a way that the health of the workers involved is protected , this substance is both uneconomical and unecological .
If DCM is allowed to behave according to proper market conditions , which is to say if the legislation is complied with , its own uncompetitiveness will very quickly mean that DCM will be completely abandoned to be replaced by the alternatives .
I will take this opportunity to appeal to the Commission to ensure that the regulations are complied with .
If this is done , DCM will phase itself out sufficiently quickly .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
With today 's decision , the European Parliament is significantly restricting the use of the paint stripper known as dichloromethane .
As the shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I welcome the decision , into which we have put a lot of work .
In recent years there have been many fatalities as a consequence of dichloromethane use .
This extremely volatile substance is damaging to the nervous system , and for the same reason is also carcinogenic .
The victims were primarily individual users , those decorating their own homes and house decorators , since in industrial use certain safety regulations are observed .
The concentrations measured in certain European industrial plants were so high that - in case of prolonged exposure - they would cause cancer in 10 % of the workers .
According to the compromise text that has now been adopted , dichloromethane can in future be used as a paint stripper only in industry and under strict safety regulations .
Consumers and professionals will have to strip unwanted paint using one of the many equally effective but non-harmful alternative chemicals or , for instance , by pyrolitic / thermal stripping .
The most important point is that this carcinogenic substance should not be permitted to be used in enclosed public areas such as shopping centres and underpasses , since the vapour produced by volatile substances is heavier than air , and therefore measurements have shown that it sinks downwards and endangers children in particular .
In making its decision , our political group took ample account of the opinion of the trade unions concerned , since in the case of industrial use , our main concern is the health of the workers .
Madam President , as we know , many dangerous chemical substances are authorised for general use , in spite of the dangerous ingredients they contain .
One of these substances is dichloromethane ( DCM ) , which is generally used for manufacturing pharmaceuticals , solvents and other products .
It is a substance that is particularly harmful to human health , as it is classified as a carcinogen .
It damages the nervous system and causes serious damage to internal organs , which can directly lead to death .
In view of their higher respiratory rate , children are more susceptible to dichloromethane poisoning , as are people with cardiovascular diseases .
It also alarming that there have been deaths linked to dichloromethane poisoning .
In view of the fact that we know that there are products on the market which could provide an alternative to products containing dichloromethane , as well as the fact that certain Member States have banned the use of this substance , introducing a total ban on its usage seems essential .
A further argument in favour of banning DCM should be the fact that , as experts have pointed out , we cannot ensure that consumers will use DCM safely .
The Commission 's proposal to introduce training on the use of products containing DCM for professional purposes will cost approximately EUR 1.9 billion in its first year of implementation .
Withdrawing DCM from general circulation therefore seems to be the most sensible and responsible solution .
Authorisation to ratify the Work in Fishing Convention , 2007 , of the International Labour Organisation ( Convention 188 ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Ilda Figueiredo , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision authorising Member States to ratify , in the interests of the European Community , the Work in Fishing Convention , 2007 , of the International Labour Organisation ( Convention 188 ) - C6-0218 / 2008 - .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with this report we wish to adopt the proposal for a Council decision on Convention 188 of the International Labour Organization ( ILO ) on work in the fishing sector , establishing minimum international standards that must be respected , and fairer conditions around the globe .
In this way we will remedy the low rate of ratification of many conventions in the field of maritime labour .
This Convention , adopted in June 2007 by the 96th session of the International Labour Conference , is aimed at establishing minimum international working standards for the fishing sector and promoting decent living and working conditions for fishers .
It covers , amongst other things , conditions relating to such important issues as health and safety at work , manning and hours of rest , crew list , repatriation in case of problems , recruitment , placement of workers and social security .
The professionals in this sector have been waiting a long time for the adoption of this ILO Convention on work in the fishing sector because they believe that it represents a step forward in dignifying this important strategic sector , in which some 30 million men and women work worldwide .
In 2003 , the ILO Office and its tripartite constituents began working on drawing up updated and comprehensive international labour standards for the fishing sector , aiming to provide appropriate protection for fishers around the globe , in view of the special nature of the sector and its specific living and working conditions .
Taking into account that it is a sector with a high rate of fatal accidents - to which serious levels of exploitation and a lack of protection contribute - it requires special protection .
This Convention also reviews other existing conventions on the sector , specifically on the minimum age , on the medical examination of fishermen , on their articles of agreement and on the accommodation of crews .
It is accompanied by a Recommendation ( No 199 ) .
It should be noted that this Convention became necessary after the adoption of the ILO consolidated Maritime Labour Convention in February 2006 , which excluded the fishing sector from its scope .
Therefore , we are calling for every effort to be made to ensure that the various Member States swiftly ratify the Convention , preferably before 2012 , as it will enter into force once it has been ratified by 10 of the 180 ILO member countries , eight of which must be coastal states .
However , it is equally important that its provisions be applied in places where they are not yet in effect .
Finally , I would like to thank all those who helped to draw up this report , including my colleague Willy Meyer , draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries .
I hope that all my fellow Members inform their national parliaments and governments so that this Convention can be ratified as quickly as possible .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , fishing is by nature the most globalised of professions and one that confronts globalisation in all its might .
An estimated 30 million people work in this field and these people are exposed to significant hardships and dangers quite apart from the effects of globalisation .
According to statistics from the International Labour Organization , a comparison of the number of fatal accidents in the fishing industry with the number of fatal accidents at work generally shows that fishing is one of the most dangerous jobs in the world .
All European institutions support the generally recognised Programme for Decent Work .
The Commission recently reinforced its commitment through the renewed social agenda and a report linked to the Communication on decent work of 2006 .
An important part of the Commission 's approach is its support for international work standards .
A general improvement in safety conditions , medical care and legal protection in the area of fishing together with levels of social protection closer to those enjoyed by other workers can be achieved only if efforts are made to establish minimum standards on a global level .
As members of the International Labour Organization and with the support of the Commission , the EU Member States have contributed as much as possible to creating an updated and purposeful Convention through which these international minimum standards will be established .
These can be supplemented with mechanisms for ensuring harmony and mechanisms for enforcement such as inspections in foreign ports subject to certain conditions .
In June 2007 the Convention and the non-legally binding recommendation were adopted by the governing body of the International Labour Organization .
Convention 188 revises several older standards of the International Labour Organization relating to fishermen and , when it comes into force , it can create equal and improved conditions for all .
The Convention regulates matters such as minimum age , medical examinations , the location of the crew , rest periods , employment contracts , repatriation , the recruitment and location of workers , pay , food and accommodation , medical care and social security .
Some parts of the new Convention relate to coordinating social security and this is an area exclusively under the Community 's competence .
The Council must therefore permit the Member States to ratify these parts of the Convention .
The areas of shared competence also cover several other themes .
As the new standards of the International Labour Organization must take effect as soon as possible , the Commission is proposing that the Convention include a challenge to Member States to try and speed up submission of their ratification documents and to submit them if possible no later than 21 December 2012 .
This challenge will be supported by a review of the ratification situation performed by the Council before January 2012 .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we know and as someone has said this evening , the International Labour Organization considers the fisheries sector to be one of the most dangerous working environments .
The number of fatalities each year amounts to approximately 24 000 , and this gives an idea of the size of the problem .
This sector therefore requires wide-ranging regulations and far-reaching international laws , able to ensure the appropriate safeguarding of the living and working conditions of fishermen throughout the world , who are often exposed to situations of harsh exploitation .
Convention 188 on work in the fishing sector is therefore a law of fundamental importance , aiming to establish a level playing field in the sector and fairer conditions of competition .
As already mentioned , the Convention promotes dignified living and working conditions for fishermen , health and safety in the workplace , adequate rest periods , crew list , repatriation , recruitment , pay , and social security .
This initial debate has actually made us realise how much common ground there is on the importance of this provision .
We would therefore simply like to emphasise the urgent need for the Member States to ratify it so that it can enter into force as soon as possible .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I am very happy to speak on this issue here tonight .
I believe that the job of a fisherman , or indeed a fisherwoman insofar as there are some , is one of the most dangerous jobs in the world .
Certainly , in Ireland alone , rarely does a year pass without some fishing boat being lost at sea , and many fishers are injured in their work .
As a former Minister for Social Welfare in Ireland it was my task to try and find a way in which the rights of people working on fishing boats could be respected .
It is an extremely complex area , where the issue is whether one is working under a ' contract of work ' or a ' contract for work ' - the difference being between those who are working as a normal employee for tax purposes and thus pay their social contributions to the skipper who is an employer , and those who share the proceeds of the catch , who are not treated as normal employees .
The difficulties in reconciling those positions are extremely complex .
As a Minister I managed to find a piece of European legislation which resolved the problem for a short period , but unfortunately it was subsequently challenged and found not to apply precisely to the issues at stake .
The importance of having common minimum standards which are globally applied really goes without saying .
These include standards of health and safety on board , accommodation , the provision of food , and indeed the guarantee that minimum rates of pay are also applied to those who are employees , and that there is an obligation on boat owners and skippers to ensure that people 's contributions are fully paid up .
It is important that these are global minimum standards , because unfortunately the tendency has been for a race to the bottom in this area , as indeed in other areas too , so having this convention approved as soon as possible would certainly be something that I would urge at a very early stage .
I think 2012 is a long way away and we should try to shorten this deadline if at all possible .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , it is vitally important that fishermen have work conditions that are reasonable , as safe as a high-risk occupation like fishing can be and that offer a decent return that allows fishermen and women to support themselves and their families .
The financial return also needs to be a stable and reliable base for maintaining our coastal communities .
As it happens , the coastal communities in my constituency are finding it very difficult to survive .
The question for me in this debate is whether ratification of Convention 188 of the International Labour Organisation , thereby extending the regulation and policy to those who work in fishing , will be a promotion and a protection to fishermen or an obstacle , and whether or not it can achieve the global level playing field that our fishing industry needs to survive .
A Kenyan delegation told me of a Japanese factory ship that harvests their waters and those of their neighbours .
What conditions do those working in that factory ship experience ?
From what I was told I suspect they were not good .
What I do know is that the fish caught do not benefit the people of Africa , even though they are from their territorial waters .
When that fish is sold on the international market they are not sold at prices that Europe , especially Ireland , can match .
Fishermen out of work in Ireland are denied social welfare payments and this creates great hardship .
Therefore , if ratification will achieve a significant decrease in fishing fatalities , ensure social security benefits for fishermen and social benefits , like medical care and the dole , then I welcome it and encourage its ratification .
If it further promotes fishing as a viable industry for the small and medium operator , especially family-owned fishing boats , then I certainly can support it , because , as it is , fishing is dangerous and in many parts of the world exploitive - not just of fish , but also of people .
Can it , and will it ?
I hope so .
( FR ) Madam President , the sustainable management of fishing means regulating fishing efforts , of course , but it should also take account of fishermen 's efforts .
Fishing , as everyone agrees , and above all offshore fishing and deep-sea fishing , is the hardest job in the world , even if we are no longer in the era of the fishing conditions of the Basques and Icelanders of the 19th century , who embarked on long campaigns .
It remains a very tough profession and worthy of respect , with 24 000 deaths every year .
Fishing is the perfect example of global activity due to the globalisation of the resource , namely the fish , which have no regard for national borders ; therefore international laws are the only appropriate response .
Since fishermen 's work must be regulated internationally , the legislator is , of course , the International Labour Organization ( ILO ) and we are currently celebrating the 50th anniversary of the first ILO fishing conventions , on the minimum age , employment controls , medical examinations and accommodation .
Today 's convention , Convention 188 , will thus amend , supplement and revise the previous conventions .
This must all be ratified as soon as possible , before 2012 .
It is a fine example of joint management of jointly owned global resources by joint parties , and it is urgent , since the sea professions - dockers , fishermen , sailors - in today 's globalised economic competition , are exposed to all manner of abuse , exploitation and trafficking , even cases of slavery , in the name of cutting costs , obviously .
Legal protection is therefore vital in terms of health , accommodation , safety , working time , living conditions , salaries , medical care , and thus employment contracts and social security .
Hence we are now establishing a minimum legal status for fishermen and in so doing we are creating a level playing field for global competition .
This may not necessarily mean much to European fishermen who already have this , but for the fishermen of the world , of Peru , Asia or Africa , it is a great step forward .
( EL ) Madam President , I think that this evening 's debate is very important because , with the consent of the European Parliament , with the resolution that I imagine we are going to unanimously support tomorrow , we shall again give momentum to the implementation of the decent work agenda which we all supported last year .
Convention 188 is nothing more than a part of the application of this agenda to the fisheries sector , which was not covered by the standard contract on seafaring work and , as previous speakers said , it is very important that we also have a minimum coverage at global level in this sector too .
The countries of the European Union will , I imagine , all ratify this Convention by 2012 , as provided for .
Eight Member States have already ratified it , meaning that the Convention will start to apply and all of us living on the coast will therefore be able to take pride in the fact that our fishermen have coverage and will not have competition from third countries which may have social support for their fishermen .
I would reiterate that Parliament has already voted in favour of protection for women working in or connected with fisheries .
Female employment in fisheries , both direct and indirect , is very important , because if women in coastal areas did not stand by fishermen , these areas would be much poorer and much more sparsely inhabited , because needs are met by people , not just legislative texts .
We are therefore contributing to a culture of coastal areas , a social culture which will make use of the cultural elements of Europe linked to the sea and coastal areas .
From south to north , every area has its peculiarities ; however , the Convention which we adopt for ratification by the Member States provides cover in every instance and for fishermen 's every need .
In particular , we must support measures for their education and care in old age .
( CS ) Commissioner , like my fellow MEPs I consider it necessary to adopt standards that will ensure decent working conditions for employees in the fishing industry .
It is not possible for the European Union in the 21st century to allow conditions similar to slave labour in any branch of work .
I appreciate the fact that the proposed amendments were adopted in a tripartite format where governments , employers and employees drew up a comprehensive international work standard which takes account of the specific nature of this industry .
It is on the plus side that the new arrangement determines a minimum age , medical examinations , rest periods and social security and that it is also concerned with living quarters , food , safety and health protection at work .
All of these elements will undoubtedly lead to decent working conditions for fishermen while reducing injuries and deaths .
Even though I represent a country that has no sea I welcome this standard , I support the fishermen and I wish them the quickest possible ratification of this Convention and not just because I enjoy fish .
( PT ) I too would like to add my voice to those of the rapporteur , the Commissioner and all of our fellow Members who rejoiced at this initiative of the International Labour Organization and who are calling on all Member States to ratify Convention 188 .
The issue is that the victims of deregulation of the fishing sector - that wild market without frontiers , principles or limits - are not only the sustainability of the resource that is fish , but also fishers themselves .
The protection of fishers must become a fundamental part , if not the very heart , of the common fisheries policy .
That is my basic demand : that we do not stop at ratifying this international convention , but put the protection of fishers at the heart of the common fisheries policy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope you will allow me the pleasure of noting down the arguments expressed in the debate as they emphasised , from a very wide range of viewpoints , the importance of the debated Convention .
They also emphasise , from a similarly wide range of viewpoints and through profound arguments , its importance to the everyday lives of fishermen , who number almost 30 million , as I mentioned in my introduction .
Ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion the formal process for this proposal is clear .
Our subsequent political efforts must be directed towards achieving ratification as quickly as possible because the deadline set out in the Commission 's proposal is the latest possible deadline and any reduction in the time taken would , in my view , be a good thing .
I would like once again to thank the rapporteur Ilda Figueiredo for the work she has done and to thank all MEPs for the support they have shown for this proposal .
I wish to thank the President and the Commissioner , as well as all the Members who have spoken and supported the ratification of this Convention .
I am sure that the report will be adopted tomorrow by the European Parliament , thus contributing to the swift ratification by the Member States of Convention 188 , accompanied by Recommendation 199 , on work in the fishing sector .
As has been said here , our goal is for it to enter into force soon , preferably before 2012 , which is why we are calling for its ratification by all Member States .
It will contribute significantly to achieving minimum international standards that guarantee better working conditions , more safety and fewer fatal accidents around the globe for this very dangerous , but also strategic sector .
It will also contribute to recognising the dignity of fishers , whose work is so hard and must be central to our concerns .
The debate closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting closed at 22.45 . )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Presentation of the Czech Presidency 's programme ( debate )
The next item is a statement by the Council on the presentation of the Czech Presidency 's programme .
I should like to welcome most warmly the President of the Council , the Prime Minister of the Czech Republic , Mirek Topolánek , to the European Parliament .
A very warm welcome to you , Mr Topolánek .
( Applause )
I should also like to welcome most warmly the President of the European Commission , José Manuel Durão Barroso .
Ladies and gentlemen , we all know that holding the Presidency is particularly challenging , and I know that Prime Minister Topolánek finds it not only intellectually but also emotionally very touching , with his political experience in the years of communism , to now be delivering his report for the European Union as its representative .
This is the second Presidency , the first being Slovenia , to hail from a country that joined the European Union on 1 May 2004 .
I am sure that I speak for all of you , ladies and gentlemen , when I say that the Czech Presidency has our full support and that we intend to do our utmost to ensure it is a successful Presidency for the European Union at this difficult time .
On this basis , President-in-Office of the Council , Prime Minister Topolánek , I should like to invite you to address this House .
Once again , a very warm welcome to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Mr President of the European Parliament , Mr President of the European Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I come before you today for the first time as President of the European Council .
The Czech Republic has assumed leadership of the EU after France , which I consider to be more than symbolic .
France played an important role in the birth of the modern Czech state .
The French court is where our greatest king , Charles IV , Holy Roman Emperor , grew up , and , following the model of the Sorbonne in Paris , he founded the university in Prague , one of the outstanding institutions of European learning .
We are linked to France , then , both through the fulfilment of our national aspirations and in the promotion of universal European values .
Just as it was not easy to found a university in Bohemia to compare with the Sorbonne , it is not easy to take over the EU presidency from France .
I see only one way of fulfilling this task honourably .
It is no accident that I have chosen a medieval monarch as an example of our links with France and with European values .
Charles IV , in his policies , could not uphold a narrowly Czech stance ; on the contrary , he had to integrate and represent a whole diverse empire .
In a sense , the European Union follows on from this medieval universalism - if nothing else , in the fact that it prefers a common moral code and common legal basis over local power interests .
There is also talk of a second European Union , bureaucratic , technocratic and soulless , but I believe in that first Europe : the Europe of freedom , justice , ideas and rules .
In that universe of values where the law is promoted above the individual , the size of the country does not matter .
What matters is the ability to serve a common idea .
The role of the country holding the presidency is neither to promote its interests nor to make decisions .
Its role is to moderate and inspire debate .
Today I do not stand before you as the Prime Minister of the Czech Republic , but as the President of the European Council .
The views which I shall be representing here , over the next six months , will not be my personal views or those of the Czech government .
They will be the consensus of 27 countries , embodied in the conclusions of the European Council .
I cannot imagine coming before you in any other way .
You , of course , as the directly elected Members of the European Parliament , have the right to ask me about anything , and , if you are interested , I shall always be happy to give you my opinion or to explain the Czech position ; but I myself do not consider this to be essential .
The arena for national interests is the European Council , which was conceived as such within the necessarily complex system of checks and balances of European democracy .
However , the Council 's primary mission is to seek a meeting-point , a compromise acceptable to all .
I shall always rigorously , decisively and correctly uphold that here .
In the EU , they say the Czechs are always dissatisfied with something . That we are among the grumblers that others should be afraid of , that we are a nation of Hussites and hotheaded chauvinists .
I fundamentally disagree with this type of criticism .
Like our first president , T.G. Masaryk , I am convinced that the ' Czech question ' is in fact a European question , and that it has always developed within a pan-European context , in accordance with common European values and in conjunction with developments in other countries .
As Masaryk wrote a hundred years ago in the second edition of his ' Czech Question ' : ' Our national literary and language revival took place at the same time as revivals and new developments in all European nations .
This means that our revival was not as isolated and miraculous as it is usually said to have been , but was fully part of the Europe-wide trend . '
I believe these words are still relevant now , when the European Union as a whole , and its individual states , are seeking out a new face for Europe .
A face in which traditional European values will be reflected , and which will also look boldly ahead into the third millennium .
A face in keeping with the Union motto , ' In varietate concordia ' , an expression of unity and at the same time diversity .
Just as in the 19th century , the Czechs are entering this debate as a young and small Member .
Just as then , however , we consider ourselves a long-standing part of the great family of proud European nations .
Over the next six months we shall have the opportunity to demonstrate fully our attitude towards European integration .
The Czech presidency comes in a year significant for a number of reasons .
This year is the fifth anniversary of the historically largest EU expansion , in 2004 , which was the symbolic and practical culmination of the successful process of reunifying a previously divided continent ; and this year Europe celebrates 20 years since the fall of the Iron Curtain , which enabled the countries of the former Soviet bloc to return to freedom and democracy .
2009 will also be the 30th anniversary of the first direct elections to the European Parliament which you represent .
Of the triangle of EU institutions , it is Parliament that we consider to be the source of direct political legitimacy .
The European Parliament is the only directly elected body of the EU , and with repeated calls for a reduction of the so-called ' democratic deficit ' , its authority has increased over the decades .
Finally , this year marks 60 years since the founding of NATO , which is the most important Transatlantic defence alliance .
NATO is the manifestation , at security level , of the Euro-Atlantic ties that confirm the validity of our European civilisation 's values on both sides of the ocean .
2009 will not only be a year of significant anniversaries , but also a year of important and difficult challenges .
We must continue to resolve institutional issues .
The international role of the EU will be tested not only by the still-unresolved conflict in Georgia , but also by the new escalation of tensions in the Middle East .
Finally , the issue of energy security once again demands our urgent attention .
In addition to our scheduled tasks we shall , like the French presidency , have to face new events .
Further surprises can never be ruled out .
The country holding the presidency cannot influence the EU 's long-term agenda or the emergence of new problems .
What it can and must influence is the selection of presidential priorities ; and , as is customary , I intend to set out these priorities here .
Our primary effort has been to ensure that these priorities not only represent the Czech point of view , but also reflect the continuity of developments in the EU , and the positions and ideas of individual Member States and political tendencies .
This has been a broad and consensual task , not a confrontational and one-sided one .
Even though it is of course impossible for everyone to be 100 % satisfied with these priorities , I believe that all of you can find something in our programme that you can identify with .
At the same time , I am certainly not hiding the fact that for the Czech Republic , just like every other Member State , the presidency provides an opportunity to draw attention to areas where our specific know-how enables us to contribute something to Europe .
What are those areas ?
As a country dependent on oil and gas imports and as a former Eastern Bloc country , we are well aware of the importance of energy security as a requirement not only for economic wellbeing , but also for a free and independent foreign policy .
As a new Member State with experience of totalitarianism , our membership of the Community means a great deal to us , and we consider it our moral duty to strengthen cooperation with those who are left outside .
Just as France put its know-how to use in relation to the Mediterranean , we want to convince the EU of the importance of the Eastern Partnership .
The third contribution that I want to mention here is our experience with the crisis in the banking sector which we went through at the end of the 1990s .
We can contribute to the current debate with our recommendations and our experts .
Due to the stabilisation of financial institutions we are one of the very few countries today that have not had to pump taxpayers ' money into rescuing banks affected by the financial crisis .
Our priorities for the presidency reflect Czech know-how , respect the continuity of EU development and are in fact well-matched to the existing problems .
As you probably know , the motto of our presidency is ' Europe without barriers ' .
I would add to that the subtitle ' a Europe of rules ' .
This vision gains new importance in today 's troubled political and economic situation .
We believe that only a Europe that makes full use of its economic , human and cultural potential can hold its own , economically and politically , in global competition .
This is doubly true in times of crisis .
The full development of Europe 's potential is hindered by a number of internal barriers that we should try to remove .
I am thinking , for example , of the last remaining obstacles to the full exercise of the four basic EU freedoms by all Member States - the unnecessary administrative burden for entrepreneurs , or the lack of connections between energy networks , which is an obstacle to increased energy security and the development of the internal energy market .
On the other hand , a Europe without barriers cannot be a Europe without rules and borders .
The removal of internal barriers must go hand in hand with protection against illegal activities that threaten the safety and interests of Europeans , especially in the areas of protection of intellectual property , and illegal immigration .
Only clearly set boundaries will enable us to play a more active role in breaking down external barriers , for example in international trade , so that we can make better use of the potential , and the comparative advantages , of European countries .
During the six months of its presidency , the Czech Republic will aim for these overarching objectives through the implementation of three main programme areas , the ' Three Czech E 's ' : 1 . Economy , 2 .
Energy , 3 . The European Union in the World .
With slight exaggeration , it could be said that these 3 E 's have been transformed , at the beginning of the year , into 2 G 's : Gas and Gaza . In physics , E means energy and G is the symbol of gravitational acceleration .
For anyone in need of exercise , 2 Gs is plenty of exertion .
I shall say straight away that I could speak for hours about individual priorities and tasks ; but more important than any words are the results of the Czech presidency so far .
Today is the 14th of January , which means we have held the presidency for two weeks .
Within this time , we have managed to find a political solution to the complicated problem of Russian gas , and to negotiate an agreement between the two sides in the dispute .
We have also led a European delegation to the area of the Middle East conflict .
The delegation completed a difficult round of talks with all the parties involved , and achieved the first successes in opening a humanitarian corridor to Gaza .
All this has come at a time when we have faced a difficult situation at home , with a government reshuffle , and have been subjected to attacks from the opposition , which has been irresponsibly torpedoing the Czech presidency of the EU and holding the country 's foreign commitments to ransom in a domestic political dispute .
I think the results we have achieved in spite of this are a more than adequate response to the doubting voices that said that the Czech Republic , for objective and subjective reasons , was not up to the task of leading the EU .
Turning , now , to individual areas in more detail :
The first E : Economics
The Czech presidency will press mainly for the full implementation of the conclusions of the G20 Summit Declaration of November 2008 and the European Council conclusions of December 2008 .
In accordance with these conclusions the key requirement for success is to prevent excessive regulation and to avoid protectionism - or in other words , to abide by primary EU law , to abide by established rules .
The EU must not close itself off from the world ; on the contrary , it must strive for the greatest possible openness in world trade and draw the maximum benefit from it .
Here , the words of my friend Joseph Daul of the PPE-DE Group are very much to the point : ' The current economic crisis is not a defeat for capitalism , but rather the result of political mistakes and a lack of rules for the oversight of financial markets . '
The priority tasks will be a review of the directive on capital adequacy of investment companies and lending institutions , the completion of talks on the directive regulating insurance , a regulation on the activities of ratings agencies , and a directive on electronic money institutions .
The presidency will also press for a review of the regulation on payments in euros , and , last but not least , for prompt and thorough implementation of the roadmap of the Economic and Financial Affairs Council , which was adopted in response to the crisis on the financial markets .
At the same time , it is essential to thoroughly analyse the possibilities offered by the legislation currently in force , and to make full use of these .
Only an economically strong and influential EU can manage to resolve the important questions of global policy , security , trade and the environment .
The presidency must therefore devote itself to the realisation of the European Economic Recovery Plan , with emphasis on its incorporation into the Lisbon Strategy framework : after short-term tools for strengthening our economies , the tools for medium- and long-term structural reforms will come into play .
An example of these important structural reforms is the common agricultural policy .
The key lies in setting equal terms for all EU Member States in the making of direct payments - both in terms of the amounts paid , and in terms of the payment system ( removing historical disparities , making allowance for the diversity of individual Member States ' agriculture ) .
The Czech Republic wants to incorporate this dimension into the debate on the future of the common agricultural policy after 2013 .
In the long term , the best protection against the devastating impact of future crises is to strengthen the EU 's competitiveness .
As I have said before , this is about the full assertion and exercise of the four basic freedoms on which the EU is founded .
To these , I would add a ' fifth freedom ' - the free movement of knowledge , which is something of a return to the medieval universalism I have mentioned .
An important factor for improving competitiveness is an improvement in the quality of regulation , including a decrease in the regulatory burden , to make doing business easier , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises .
The Czech Republic is taking a very high profile in this area .
In the area of foreign trade , the presidency is focusing on a revival of discussions at the WTO .
Here , we attach great importance to successful completion of the Doha Development Agenda ( DDA ) .
The DDA represents an effort to achieve a transparent liberalisation of trade at multilateral level , which will bring long-term benefits .
If the talks on the DDA are suspended , the presidency will attempt to set in motion some thinking on multilateral trade tools and will support a step-up of discussions within the framework of the other WTO agendas .
We must not forget investments in education , research , development and innovation , alongside the need to improve the regulatory environment and reduce the administrative burden .
Here I shall quote the Chairman of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Martin Schulz : ' Europe cannot successfully compete with other regions of the world on low wages and social standards , but on technological innovations , higher quality of work and the competence and knowledge of its people . '
I fully endorse this view .
The second E : Energy
The second priority , like the first , fits into the context of current developments .
Even more urgently and compellingly , I would say .
The global crisis may weaken Europe in the short term ; but the energy shortage that threatens us would immediately , and in the long term , destroy not only the European economy , but also our freedom and security .
The Czech presidency will definitely continue its efforts to provide secure , competitive and sustainable energy for Europe .
In the area of energy security , we would like to focus on three aspects : firstly , completing the Second Strategic Energy Review , including an analysis of medium-term energy demand and supply in the EU and , based on this , the identification of appropriate infrastructure projects .
Secondly , completing the directive on the maintenance of minimum stocks of crude oil and petroleum products , where we support an increase in the mandatory minimum stocks from 90 to 120 days .
Thirdly , reforming the Trans-European Energy Networks ( TENs-E ) ; here , the energy security legislation package approved by the Commission in November 2008 also includes the Green Paper on European energy networks .
No less important is the strengthening of infrastructure on the Member States ' territory , including the existing trans-border connections , and implementation of new energy network connections .
In all related legislative acts , we hope to have the European Parliament 's support .
Naturally , we are also interested in diversifying the supply and transport routes .
It is clear that the construction of the Nabucco gas pipeline , for example , is an issue of the highest priority , and support for construction of new oil pipelines is equally important .
Further , we must make efforts to diversify the energy mix , including the rehabilitation of nuclear energy and investment in new technologies .
As an example of our ability to achieve energy security in practice , we would point to the agreement we have brokered on the creation of a monitoring mechanism for the transit of Russian gas .
The goal was to restore basic trust between the Russian Federation and Ukraine , and to introduce elementary transparency to the issue .
We have managed to get Russia and Ukraine to sign a single document , so that renewal of supplies to the EU becomes possible .
Now the EU must take decisions and measures to ensure that in future there is no repeat of this crisis with its impact on the Member States .
Transparency in the gas business must be increased , and the supply routes and suppliers must be diversified .
The EU countries ' energy mix must be diversified .
We need to think seriously about developing safe nuclear energy .
The building of infrastructure in the EU must be implemented rapidly , in order to provide effective connections between Member States as a prerequisite for building an effective gas market .
In the area of the internal market and infrastructure , we must make efforts to achieve effective coordination of transmission system operators , to complete the building of a unified internal market for electricity and gas , and to ensure that the gaps in the transmission and transport system are eliminated .
On the question of legislative priorities in this area , we want to conclude the third package on the internal energy market , which means completing the review of two directives and two regulations on electricity and gas whose goal is to complete the liberalisation of the electricity and gas market .
We also aim to bring the regulations properly into operation , and to establish an agency for cooperation between energy regulators .
Another area is the increase in energy efficiency , which the Swedish presidency wants to take on in greater detail ; this means that the France - Czech Republic - Sweden trio of presidency countries will have tackled the energy issue truly comprehensively and from all sides .
While this priority is called Energy , it is inseparably linked with climate protection policy .
In this area , the presidency will try to achieve a globally acceptable agreement on the setting of reduction commitments after 2012 .
This especially means getting the USA , India and China on board , and it will prepare the way for achieving a broad international consensus at the end of 2009 in Copenhagen .
Such a consensus should also reflect current trends in the world economy .
In the context of the coming economic recession and the supply crisis , it will be particularly important to harmonise the requirements of the environment , competitiveness and security .
The beginning of the year reminded us that as part of the priority of ' the EU in the World ' , we must also allow for unforeseen urgent tasks .
The new escalation of tension between Israel and Hamas requires not only an active approach from the EU itself , but also coordination with important global and regional players .
Again it is confirmed that peace cannot be achieved until Palestine begins to function as a fully-fledged state which is able to guarantee law and order in its territory and safety for its neighbours .
For this reason , in addition to current diplomatic activities , the European Union must continue its efforts to build the Palestinian infrastructure , with the training of security forces and reinforcement of the authority of the Palestinian administration .
In the process of resolving the conflict , the Czech presidency will want to make use of its good relations with both Palestine and Israel ; but it is obvious that without mutual trust , long-term peace in the Middle East is not possible .
I have already mentioned the Eastern Partnership .
The Georgian crisis showed how important it is for the EU to have a strategy for that region .
The deepening of the eastern dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy , through a strengthening of cooperation with the countries of the region ( above all , with Ukraine ) , and likewise with the countries of the Transcaucasian and Caspian region , is of great importance , not only morally but also practically .
This cooperation will enable us to diversify our foreign trade and supplies of energy raw materials .
As far as Transatlantic relations are concerned , it is obvious that unless they are strengthened and developed , the EU cannot effectively perform its role as a strong global player , just as the United States is now unable to perform this role independently .
In the long term , we can only succeed if we work together .
The Czech presidency will therefore place emphasis on intensive dialogue with the representatives of the new US administration in the key areas of economy , climate and energy , and cooperation with third countries ( Pakistan , Afghanistan , Russia , Middle East ) .
Also of fundamental importance for the EU 's standing in the world is the position taken by the Member States when negotiating a new agreement on partnership with Russia .
Events of recent years , and especially recent months , raise a number of questions and underline the necessity of a unified approach from the EU as a whole .
Prerequisites for this are an understanding of Russia and a common analysis , and we therefore support the cooperation of experts on Russia across the European Union .
Under the Czech presidency , talks will also continue on enlargement covering the countries of the Western Balkans and Turkey .
The Western Balkans must not be forgotten because of our economic problems and current international crises .
In the case of Croatia , the presidency will do all it can to ensure that this country joins the EU as soon as possible .
The positive example of Croatia is a necessary condition for maintaining the European prospects of other Western Balkan countries .
We shall certainly do everything possible to support their progress within the Stabilisation and Association Process .
As part of this project , the Czech presidency is also prepared to continue developing a southern dimension to the European Neighbourhood Policy and improving relations with partner countries .
This includes strengthening EU-Israel relations and the Middle East peace process in general - the current dramatic events in that region must not deter us .
On the contrary , they underline the necessity of finding a peaceful solution .
Last but not least , the priority of Europe in the World includes the area of internal security .
This is because current security threats , by their nature , increasingly intrude into internal security .
The building of a space of freedom , security and law is a common interest of the EU that touches the lives of all its citizens .
In this context , the presidency will make efforts towards further progress in Schengen cooperation , in police and customs cooperation , and in cooperation between Member States in civil and criminal matters .
We are aware that the end of our presidency will be marked by elections to the European Parliament , a more intense political atmosphere , and the need to complete the legislative process for selected legislative acts , so that they do not fall by the wayside .
Also on our agenda is the start of discussions about the new form of the European Commission .
It is also up to the Czech presidency to continue the debate with Ireland on the fate of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I am convinced that it is necessary to conduct these talks sensitively and with respect for the sovereignty of Irish citizens .
Besides , if a referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon were to take place in the Czech Republic , all the signs are that it would not pass there either .
It is necessary to find a solution that a majority of the Irish will be able to accept .
This will undoubtedly help us in our internal political debate as well .
I began by saying that the Czech question is also a European question .
Probably no other nation has devoted so much space , effort and time to a debate on its own identity as the Czechs have .
What the European Union is going through now , a search for its form and the purpose of its existence , is something we know very well from our own history .
In our role as the country holding the presidency , we therefore offer the Community our two hundred years of experience in seeking our own historical role , our own place in the family of European nations .
The Czech relationship to Europe was well described more than seventy years ago by the critic and philosopher František Václav Krejčí : ' We do not see the Czech lands as ' the heart of Europe ' in a geographical sense so much as in a cultural and intellectual sense .
We are in the deepest heartland of the continent , where influences from all its parts converge ; we feel surrounded by all European nations , if not directly , then through the imaginative power of cultural works .
We say this because we are at the crossroads of intellectual currents , and it follows that it is our mission to mediate , and especially to mediate between east and west . '
I think these words are an inspiration at the beginning of 2009 , when the task facing the Czech Republic over the next six months is to be the moderator of debate in the European Union .
Thank you for your attention .
President-in-Office of the Council , we wish to thank you for your most constructive , extensive report , and to wish you all the best for your Presidency !
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the European Commission , ladies and gentlemen , having only just taken office , the Czech Presidency finds itself faced with considerable difficulties and entrusted with the onerous task of managing three major crises : the continuation of the economic and social crisis , the gas crisis bringing Russia and Ukraine into conflict and seriously affecting the Union and its neighbourhood , and the outbreak of another war in the Middle East .
In the face of these challenges , the only stance that our countries can take is to join forces , show solidarity and take both coordinated and determined action .
I am pleased to note that the Czech Presidency , in close cooperation with the European Commission , has acted swiftly and as one in the energy crisis bringing Kiev and Moscow into conflict with one another .
Although a solution is not yet in place , we cannot accept being held hostage ; we need to act forcefully .
You are right , Mr Topolánek and Mr Barroso .
By including energy among its three major priorities , the Czech Presidency fully grasped what will be one of Europe 's major challenges in the years to come , namely our energy independence and the necessary diversification of our energy resources .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is , like all European citizens , extremely concerned about this conflict and about the threat that it poses to European countries as a whole .
We cannot tolerate EU Member States being held hostage in this conflict , and this demonstrates , once again , the urgent need for agreement on a European energy policy .
We must therefore give serious thought to ways of reducing our dependence and must take action to implement energy mixes .
Ladies and gentlemen , the situation prevailing in the Middle East also takes us back to the need to accept our responsibilities at international level .
Yes , Europe is the world 's biggest donor of humanitarian aid - we can be proud of that , and it must continue - but it is not humanitarian aid on its own that is going to resolve the conflict between the Israelis and the Palestinians .
What Europe needs is a strong , articulate political will , one with enough human , military and financial resources to make it a credible actor on the world stage .
Why does the world have its eyes glued to Barack Obama ?
Because Europe is not yet capable of putting forward his vision , ideals and knowledge .
Europe has criticised , and rightly so , the unilateralism of the current US administration , and if , as I hope , things change with the new occupant of the White House , are we ready to guarantee our share of multilateralism ?
Are we ready to release the military resources , not to go to war , but to guarantee peace ?
Are we ready to release the budgetary resources needed to give us the means to conduct our policy ?
Mr Topolánek , you have rightly made the Union 's external relations one of your priorities .
Current events provide many examples of the urgency with which this subject should be treated , be it in relations with Russia , the United States or the Middle East , not to mention with the Mediterranean , the Balkans , Africa or the emerging countries .
Europeans expect Europe to exert its influence on the international stage ; all the opinion polls have shown this for years .
Why wait ?
Lastly , the Presidency-in-Office will have to cope with the economic and social crisis by overseeing the implementation of the national recovery plans , by leading the European Union at the G20 summit to be held in London in April .
We call on the Czech Presidency to work hand in hand with the European Commission to define and implement , together with our international partners , rules to be imposed on economic operators .
The European Union must protect its social model , the social market economy , and must promote the implementation on the world financial markets of a market supervision system similar to that which prevails in our countries .
Europe must be united and determined in the management of the financial crisis and of the economic crisis also .
We are counting on you , Mr Topolánek , on your Presidency , to show drive and to guide Europe during this difficult period .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President .
Prime Minister Topolánek , you are heading the last Council Presidency of the current term of the European Parliament .
This parliamentary term started with the Dutch Presidency , headed by Mr Balkenende , and no one remembers what he said here and what we replied .
Therefore , what we discuss and achieve together now , in the next five or six months , will be the fundamental precondition for a high turnout in the European elections .
If people see that we - the Presidency , Parliament and the Commission - have come together and successfully met the challenges facing us in a crisis situation , I am sure that this will create a fundamentally positive and constructive mood in the run-up to the European elections .
That is why we , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , have an interest in the success of your Presidency .
I had some doubts in the first few days of the Presidency , when Mr Schwarzenberg said that Israel was exercising its right of self-defence and aligned himself with one party in a period when the European Union was needed as a mediator .
He put that right , which is a good thing .
Mr Topolánek , you yourself said , ' we shall not mediate in the gas conflict ' .
You have now put that right .
There were some initial problems , but they have now been overcome , which is a good thing .
If the initial uncertainties - and I should like to emphasise that Mr Barroso was right about this - now in fact lead to your activities producing positive results , you will have the full support of our group .
That also goes for the speech you held here this morning , which we all listened to and noted with great goodwill and also with a feeling of confidence for the next few months .
I should like to take up one of the points you raised .
You quoted my friend Mr Daul - a clever man , but in this case he was wrong - who said here that the financial crisis did not represent the defeat of capitalism .
It is true that it has not defeated capitalism - unfortunately that still exists - but it has defeated the capitalists who told us for years that we had no need of rules , as the market would regulate itself , would regulate things itself .
These capitalists have suffered a defeat , and when you - having up to now indulged in policies similar to those of the people who said we had no need of rules - tell the House this morning that we need a Europe of rules , I can only agree : we do indeed need more rules to manage , to overcome the financial crisis .
Mr Topolánek , I should like to wish you a warm welcome to the club of regulators in Europe - it seems that you , too , have learned your lesson .
( Applause )
Prime Minister , this is a decisive period in international politics .
If the European Union wishes to assume the global role described by the Commission President , among others , in the matters of energy security or the Gaza conflict , it cannot allow itself to disintegrate ; we need the Union of 27 as a strong economic and political bloc .
Only if we do not allow ourselves to be divided will we be strong .
After all , the strength of others is that they can always hope for Europeans to speak with different voices .
Karel Schwarzenberg says Israel is acting in self-defence , whilst Louis Michel says the country is violating international law .
If that is what the European Union is like , there is no need to negotiate with it .
If Russia or Ukraine believes that one half of Europe is on their side and the other half on the other , we are not strong .
Yet we are strong if we have a strong treaty basis ; which is provided by the Treaty of Lisbon .
If this Treaty is ratified under your Presidency by your government - which , of course , has been punished enough given your country 's president - that would send out a strong signal that Europe is strong .
( Applause )
Prague Castle is the seat of Václav Klaus , who will be speaking to us in February , when he comes to Brussels .
Prague Castle was also the seat of Charles IV , as the Prime Minister mentioned .
Charles IV built the Golden Road from Prague to Nuremberg , which , in his day , was a tremendous feat , and was intended to connect peoples and nations .
Before he became German emperor , with his seat in Prague , Charles IV was Duke of Luxembourg .
Therefore , this period in Prague Castle was truly European .
Let us hope that Prague Castle is soon occupied once more by someone as European as this .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , on behalf of my group I welcome the President-in-Office .
We wish you success , President-in-Office .
A great Czech once said : ' I am no longer a rookie : goals are expected of me ; scoring is my job . '
Well , what was true for Milan Baroš is also true for you and your ministers .
Your work programme outlines those goals .
On the economy , you have said that barriers to the market - internal and external - must come down , and that Europe 's answer to recession must not be Keynesian spending alone , but that we must strive for fairer competition , trade liberalisation , and freer movement of people and goods across national boundaries .
These are hard times for Europe 's citizens .
Your recipe will be contested , but not by Liberals and Democrats .
For the experience of the Czech Republic - and so many others - proves the power of markets in lifting people out of poverty .
On energy , you are right to pursue the aims of the Strategic Energy Review , but the Review and our climate change targets should not be a ceiling to our ambitions , rather a springboard to greater and greener heights , to force the pace on Europe 's switch from fossil fuels to renewables and put an end to our umbilical energy dependence .
Currently , our monitors are blocked from Ukrainian dispatch centres .
Russia claims it cannot export gas because Ukraine will not transport it , and Ukraine claims it has no gas to export because the Russians have switched the transit route .
Meanwhile , industry across eastern and central Europe is suffering , some people are freezing in their homes , and there are moves to reopen nuclear reactors condemned as unsafe by our Union .
That is not a functioning energy market .
It is the plot of a Marx Brothers ' film : A Night in the Cold - or , rather , twelve nights and counting .
So stop talking about the internal market in energy and the development of renewals : use your presidency 's powers to mobilise the necessary investment .
On the EU in the world , we welcome your presidency 's ambitions .
Europe should play a leading role in resolving conflicts , supporting development and promoting human rights .
But , if you truly seek to widen the EU 's capacity to act , why have you delayed yet again ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon ?
If you want to prevent weapons proliferation , why are you building a ballistic missile defence system on European soil ?
( Applause )
And if you want peace in the Middle East , why allow Europe to be ridiculed by so many different peace missions ?
As events unfold in Gaza , it becomes harder for many of us to remain detached .
This House will never unite around a common position if we seek to apportion blame precisely , but fault can be found on both sides , violence denounced , and an immediate ceasefire sought .
There is no excuse for Hamas rocket attacks , but nor for the use of dense inert metal explosives to maim civilians .
The tag line for your Presidency is ' Europe without Borders ' .
Perhaps its author had in mind that old Czech proverb : ' Protect yourself not by fences but by your friends ' .
President-in-Office , we , your fellow Europeans , are your friends .
Your country 's President compared the European Union to the Soviet Union .
Well , we do not bug private discussions , as he did to Members of this House .
He who wishes to remain on the margin is free to do so .
But this is a Union of friends - friends , equals and partners .
Your presidency 's aims are bold .
We support them .
Stick to them , and we will stick by you .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , a better political and economic relationship must be promoted between the European Union and America .
I hope that the Czech Republic Presidency will address this in the coming months .
America will have a new president next week ; and we all have major challenges ahead of us .
Certainly we must regulate the financial markets soon .
President-in-Office , we welcome you to this House today , in particular we welcome the presidency of the Czech Republic to take over the leadership of the European Union at a very crucial time .
On behalf of my group , the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , we also offer our support towards your programme to guarantee that there is a clear and stronger voice for the European Union , as well as the Member States within the European Union .
Many colleagues have spoken already with regard to the current series of crises , and , at the outset , I want to pay tribute to both your presidency and to President Barroso for the decisive action that was taken when the issue with regard to the cutting-off of the gas supply to the European Union was brought about , and not just because we apportioned blame but because we immediately intervened on a social level , an economic level and on a political level to bring both sides to sit down to talk each other where they had failed before .
That is why it is important under the presidency now to expand this idea of partnership with the East , that we look to the East and to the Balkans because they are the fault lines within the European Union at the present time , not only because of political instability but also because of our interdependence on energy and economic activity .
Finally , because time is so short , you spoke about the fifth freedom - the freedom of the movement of knowledge .
That knowledge can give us the tools that we now require to move up the chain of the innovation , research and abilities that can be made towards us .
Through your own history - individually , as well as a country - of totalitarianism , freedom , and greatness in education and innovation , we now look to you to give us the next step to where the European Union must move .
Let me finish with a short quote from John F. Kennedy who said in his inauguration speech : ' We stand today on the edge of a new frontier .
But the new frontier of which I speak is not a set of promises - it is a set of challenges ' .
I know you have the capacity to meet those challenges .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the very moment that we are having this debate , bombs are falling on the people of Gaza .
I think that our greatest priority as MEPs , and the greatest priority of the Council and the Commission , should be to stop the bombing of the people of Gaza .
I think that is our duty at the moment , above and beyond deciding who is responsible and above and beyond the differences among us on that point .
I must say that our group , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , has rather a clear idea on this , as we will say this afternoon .
Mr President , you began your observations by speaking of medieval times , an age that was violent , remote , dark with a few lights , but certainly violent and dark .
In fact , regardless of the efforts of your coalition partners , the programme for these six months seems to us to bear the strong stamp of a slightly passé vision , let us say ; the strong mark of a conformist , ultra laissez-faire approach , dominated by business and the market , which is now , Mr President , out of fashion .
I think that it is also a little indifferent with regard to the need for policies , laws and instruments on social issues that meet the real needs of citizens , and a little off-track in its view of environmental policy on the fight against climate change as a cost or an obstacle , instead of a major opportunity for innovation and sustainable growth .
It even , if you will permit me , leans a little towards machismo , in saying that there is a need to review the Barcelona objectives on support structures for children , naturally with the aim of sending women back to the home .
This then , is a programme that sees migrants solely as a security issue , that looks to NATO rather than to multilateralism , that is still toying with the missiles issue , and does not really place the emphasis on what for us is truly important in foreign policy , namely cohesion : the cohesion of our Union .
Nor are we pleased with the fact that no mention is made of such an important sector as that of combating discrimination , and on this point I would like to know what priority you place on adopting the directive on discrimination .
To sum up , this is a programme that reveals a world with many dangers and few opportunities .
You spoke of your mediation work in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine over gas , but it can be seen very clearly from your programme that it will not be during your Presidency that clear action is taken against those countries , such as Slovakia and Bulgaria , that are taking the opportunity presented by the gas crisis to reopen dangerous , obsolete nuclear plants .
Additionally , Mr President , please remember that there is no safe nuclear power ; perhaps there will be in 30 , 40 , 50 or 60 years - I do not know - but right now it does not exist .
It is therefore not worth discussing it , because it is a very expensive mirage , and certainly distracts us from our real priorities .
Energy security and solidarity can be achieved through strong action , with no distractions , to promote energy efficiency and energy saving , which is an enormous sphere for innovation , employment and reduction of consumption .
This is the roadmap that we should use to respond to the gas war , among other things .
We are making a specific request to you , Mr President ; we are asking you to persuade your colleagues to place at the heart of the spring European Council the aim of making a binding commitment to the target of 20 % energy cuts by 2020 , the Cinderella of the energy package last year , and to review your priorities by assessing in a less superficial manner the decisions taken in December regarding renewable energy .
Mr President , one last word on the future of Europe : the Treaty of Lisbon is not perfect , but it is really strange that you have not yet ratified it .
Therefore , please , take this opportunity to explain to us why , and to tell us when you will do so .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) The President-in-Office of the Council has talked about our complex historical experiences .
I take the view that the Czech Presidency is an opportunity for us to help overcome the existing division of Europe into West and East .
In his novel Schweik , Jaroslav Hašek once made a pun , a German-Hungarian pun , kelet oszt , nyugat veszti , which loosely translated means that the East gives and the West takes .
Consequently , that is the way history has progressed .
I believe that we have an opportunity to bring an end to this .
I think that the Czech Presidency is also an opportunity for us to liberate ourselves from our own dogmas and prejudices .
I offer , as an example of such dogmas , the recent article by Václav Klaus advising us how to overcome this financial crisis by temporarily softening social , environmental and health standards because , he says , these standards obstruct rational human behaviour .
I would say that the opposite is true , that the Czech Presidency should help to ensure that we have a socially and ecologically driven economy , that is , an economy powered by social and environmental factors .
I would like to note here that I agree with Prime Minister Topolánek on one thing : the need to rely on the flow of innovation to bring us out of the crisis and the need to develop - in the words of Richard Florida , if you will - a creative class that will help our economies escape the impasse .
I mean to say that we all need the courage to change .
Stefan George , the great German writer , says that the future belongs to those who are capable of change .
I hope that we will be capable of changing , our enslavement to the past , that we will be capable of closing the divide between Eastern and Western Europe and forming a single unit that is free from complexes about the superiority of the United States or anyone else .
I should like to end my contribution by pointing out that , while Prime Minister Topolánek 's speech was peppered with noble intentions , resolutions and goals , and while it is quite right and proper for the Czech Presidency to set out ambitious projects - I do have one sceptical comment , in the form of an aphorism by the Polish satirist Jerzy Lec , to the effect that going on a holy pilgrimage will not stop your feet from sweating .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( CS ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , no country has commenced its Presidency under such a barrage of negativity or been subjected to so many dire predictions as the Czech Republic .
The French press in particular is falling over itself to depict the storm clouds gathering over the wretched Union because it is no longer presided over by someone as infinitely able as the French President but has instead been taken over by a band of Czechs .
Those Czechs indeed , who have caused such deadly offence by not yet ratifying the Treaty of Lisbon , under which a few large countries will permanently usurp decision-making within the Union .
To make matters worse , those Czechs have a popular president with a disagreeably sharp intellect who not only opposes the Treaty of Lisbon , but can competently call attention to the ever-widening democratic deficit in the Union .
It was because of such a deficit that , twenty years ago , we overthrew socialism in our country .
Yet the Czech Presidency is pursuing restrained objectives and sensible priorities , and will be very successful .
Let us wish it well and give it our support , despite the embarrassing howls from the Czech Socialists who have long since exchanged love of country for proletarian internationalism , and thus today , on the instructions of their socialist masters , venomously seek to destabilise the Czech Presidency .
I could not care less !
The plot is for the Czech Presidency to demonstrate that small countries are inept and that it is time permanently to hand over the reins of the Union , via the Treaty of Lisbon , to the large , capable and experienced countries .
This is what makes this Presidency so important .
It will prove that smaller countries are equally capable of managing the EU .
What sets them apart is that they steer clear of megalomania , self-centredness , public relations hysteria , the self-indulgent hyperactivity of certain presidents and constant bragging about non-existent achievements .
I wholeheartedly wish Prime Minister Topolánek , Deputy Prime Minister Vondra and the rest much success .
This will be more than just the success of my own country ; it will be the success of a small and new country .
That is the important message for the EU .
You see , we have experience in one other area too .
While the largest EU countries have lived as predictable democracies and have learned to deal only with standard situations , we have spent half a century living under a highly non-standard totalitarian regime .
This has taught us to find creative solutions to non-standard situations , which is going to come in useful .
( CS ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union , ladies and gentlemen , I am proud of the dexterity and capacity for action demonstrated by the Czech Presidency over the issue of gas supplies to EU countries .
And I would be delighted if the President-in-Office of the Council , Mirek Topolánek , in the talks on the future of the EU , that is , on the Treaty of Lisbon , could show the same determination as we witnessed in the gas negotiations with Vladimir Putin and Yulia Tymoshenko .
The ambition of the President-in-Office of the Council should be to play the role of a group leader , not just a maintenance man .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you have a unique chance to demonstrate that all states , regardless of size , are equal partners in the European Union .
If you can keep your nerve , Mr Topolánek , you will go down in history .
You have been given the opportunity and the power to declare publicly that the Treaty of Lisbon is dead in the wake of the Irish referendum and that it has led us up a blind alley .
You are in a position to propose the creation of a new visionary document which will constitute a true common denominator of the interests of individual EU members and which will win the support of citizens in referendums .
There is no need to promote blindly the Treaty of Lisbon , which reinforces the undemocratic power of officials while papering over the failure of the European elite to reach agreement and , in particular , their reluctance to be held accountable to citizens .
Mr Topolánek , you represent here a country which , in the last century , succeeded in breaking free from the Austro-Hungarian Empire , which survived the treachery of Munich , and which withstood the horrors of Nazism .
You represent a country where people took a stand against the invasion by Warsaw Pact troops .
You represent a country which spent 40 years under the thumb of the Soviet Union , which spiralled down inevitably into planned poverty under the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance , and which shook off a totalitarian regime without shedding blood .
I refuse to believe that as prime minister of a country with such historical experience , you would want decisions on social policy , energy , taxes , justice and security to be taken anywhere other than in the individual Member States .
I do not believe that you actually want the exclusive powers of the Union to overrule the powers of Member States .
I do not believe that you want the Union to intervene in the protection and improvement of human health , industry , culture , tourism , education or sport .
I do not believe that you welcome the fact that , in more than fifty areas , the Treaty of Lisbon abolishes the right of national veto and lowers the voting weight of smaller countries , including the Czech Republic .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council and Prime Minister of the Czech Republic , have the courage to tell the other 26 Heads of State what you say in private at home .
Say that the Treaty of Lisbon is no good and that you reject it .
Do this in the name of democracy and freedom .
This will not earn you the applause of the so-called ' European elite ' , Commission officials , or even the majority of this Parliament .
But what you will earn is the admiration and respect of citizens , who are easily forgotten here , and you will boost your prestige in your own country .
You are presiding over 450 million citizens , not just a few politicians and officials .
In the Czech Republic , you often refer to the Treaty of Lisbon as a necessary evil .
Yet what makes the evil necessary ?
Stop persuading yourself that the Treaty of Lisbon is a necessary evil .
It is simply evil , and you can change it .
Initiate work on a new document , refer to the Rome Treaties and the Messina Declaration for inspiration , and promote the common interest of the European Union .
That is , freedom , prosperity , competitiveness and security , not euro-health , euro-taxes , euro-parks and euro-beer .
Mr Topolánek , necessary evil is a coward 's alibi .
You are no coward , or at least I hope you are not .
You are backed up by the Irish referendum , you are supported by the 55 % of Czech citizens who are opposed to the Treaty of Lisbon , and you can rely on the powerful voice of the Czech President , Václav Klaus .
I am sure you know that the greatest cowardice is knowing what should be done and not doing it .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Thank you for all your questions and comments on my speech .
In the Czech Republic , too , we have a parliament where we are used to a plurality of views , so some of the views came as no surprise to me , although I could not fully agree with them .
However , I would like to repeat at the outset - and I say this in reply to a whole range of questions - that I feel my role here to be that of President of the European Council , and during these six months I do not intend to push my personal or party-political views ; but I feel I must respond on one issue , because it concerns me personally , and that is the very harsh assessments of the Czech president Václav Klaus , a president who has made a name for himself with European citizens , which I think is a good thing , and I am proud of it .
Václav Klaus is the icon of the Czech transformation in the 1990s , and it is , I might add , thanks to him that we are successful today and that we have emerged safely from those first ten years .
I am proud of the fact that we came safely through the Velvet Revolution , proud of the fact that we drove the Russian troops out of our country in 1991 , that we joined NATO in 1999 , joined the European Union in 2004 , and that last year we eliminated the barriers between EU countries and can now travel from Lisbon to Vilnius without passports or any restrictions .
I am proud to have been part of that , and to be standing here today , and it seems incredible to me that the Czech Republic now holds the presidency of a community which has a population of nearly half a billion and comprises as many as 27 countries .
If the European Union loses the capability - leaving aside the question of rules and unification - for free public discussion , and seeks to unify this discussion too , then it will not be my European Union .
If we lose the capability , the possibility of freely expressing our views , it is the road to disaster , and I strongly object to the attacks on Václav Klaus .
He has a unique ability to insert his views into this unified and , I would say , over-correct discussion , and thereby set the parameters for fresh discussion .
Free discussion should be a matter of pride for the European Union in future , and should never be stifled .
As for the Treaty of Lisbon - which deserves a mention - I would say it is essentially a ' middling ' treaty .
A little worse than the Treaty of Nice and a little better than the one that followed .
That happens to be my personal view of it .
I negotiated this treaty on behalf of the Czech Republic ; we approved this treaty in parliament , I signed this treaty and I shall vote for it in parliament - but once again the idea that we should dictate in advance to individual Member States that they have to ratify a document , that they do not have a national right to follow their own procedure and decide for themselves whether to accept it , seems to me absurd .
We need to change the institutions , we need to improve the functioning of the European mechanisms , we need to simplify the rules ; whether all this is in the Treaty of Lisbon , I am not entirely sure .
Each of us had a slightly different view of how it should look , and for me , Mrs Bobošíková , it is a compromise , perhaps a very complex compromise , and I shall support its ratification .
At least a few words should be said about the situation in the Middle East and Europe 's position on that conflict .
For a long time the European Union has been seen as ' a very big payer but not a player ' .
This means it has made a big contribution to investments , including humanitarian and development investments in that region , but has not pulled its weight within the ' quartet ' , and has not shown the responsibility which participation in the quartet entails .
I think the existing situation , with the arrival of the new American administration , gives the European Union an opportunity to invest not only money in that region , but also its problem-solving initiatives and a higher level of activity .
I do not wish to be the judge of one side or the other , because the fact is that the Israelis have a right to live safely without rocket attacks , and I have been in Sderot and Ashkelon and other parts of Israel .
Likewise , the people of Palestine have the right , at this moment , to create their own state and a functioning administration , and to live a safe and decent life .
This 60-year conflict has solved nothing .
I have no illusions that we will solve it now ; our short-term aim is to achieve a truce and a cessation of hostilities .
I would like to assess not only the role of the European negotiators , and the mission led by Karel Schwarzenberg which has departed for the region , but also , of course , the role of the Arab states in the region , which has been positive .
This can be said of Egypt 's role or , for example , the role of Turkey and other countries .
I think that after certain conditions have been met , such as a clampdown on arms smuggling from Sinai to Gaza , we could jointly achieve a situation - within the global security architecture , or through the European Union alone or only a part of that global architecture - where conflict could be ended , although I am not convinced that it would happen quickly .
On the questions of energy , energy security , climate change , and the European Union 's role in the process : it should be obvious to everyone that if the European Union 's leadership on the issue of climate change - whatever my own views on the subject - does not gain support from economies and major players such as the USA , the Russian Federation , Brazil , India and China , then this initiative by the European Union is isolated , a voice in the wilderness and , on a global scale , worthless .
Our role is to persuade the other world powers and the biggest producers of emissions to follow our example , and this is where I see our role in the first half of this year , because in my view the climate and energy package is now signed and sealed , and is simply awaiting implementation , after it has been approved in the European Parliament , of course - as I hope it will be .
The whole question of the energy mix is sometimes over-ideologised , over-politicised , and in my view the European Union should take a very practical and pragmatic approach to it , and should be looking at the short-term , mid-term and long-term targets , and the short-term , mid-term and long-term means of achieving those targets .
I cannot imagine that countries which are 90 % dependent on coal-based manufacture , such as Poland , are capable of radically , in some very ruthless manner , changing that dependence within the space of fifteen or twenty years .
We must of course invest in new coal technologies , ' clean coal technologies ' , and in improvements to plant efficiency , because we cannot unilaterally and very rapidly change this dependence .
We must discuss this , and must invest in innovation , and of course gradually adjust the energy mix in the directions we are talking about - in other words , in the direction of greater environmental protection , less dependence on fossil fuels and , of course , secure and relatively cheap supplies of energy so that Europe can remain competitive , able to compete on a global scale .
The whole Russian-Ukrainian crisis is not only a crisis of confidence , but one where commercial , economic , political , geopolitical and strategic interests are involved .
It is a multi-layered problem , and I certainly do not wish to be the judge of who at this moment is the short-term culprit , because for us , for the European Union and for European countries , both Russia and Ukraine are currently to blame .
Russia is not supplying the gas , and Ukraine is blocking the transit of gas ; in this matter , we must exert our influence in the region and must seek ways of ending this problem in the short term and - in the medium- to long-term - diversifying the sources and the transit routes , and ensuring the interconnection of electricity and gas systems in the European Union , so that we can achieve what has not yet been achieved : solidarity and the implementation of emergency crisis plans , because , although I do not want to be a prophet of doom , the crisis is not over yet , and the situation in Slovakia , Bulgaria and the Balkans is very grave and critical .
Based on my notes on what has been said by representatives of individual Parliamentary groups , it is not at all my view that our agenda is too liberal or too conservative ; our agenda arises from the long-term aims and long-term agenda of the European Union , and the Czech contribution to it , the Czech imprint , showed itself in the very first days of the New Year as being well-conceived , because our emphasis on energy security may lead us , unexpectedly and none too soon , into some very thorough , in-depth discussion on how to ensure the independence and freedom of the European Union , which presupposes independence or less dependence on energy imports and sources outside the European Union .
Questions have been raised here regarding the anti-discrimination directive , the Barcelona Targets , and the low emphasis placed on social questions .
I do not see it this way - though of course we have tried to reduce these basic targets to a rather symbolic form - because we certainly do not underestimate either the anti-discrimination question , or the question of protection for women .
I assure you that we do indeed have very extensive experience of children having to stay in various institutions , and for us it is crucial that women and families should have a choice : that they should be able to choose whether they will , at a certain time , devote themselves to childcare , and we want to create the most varied mechanisms to make this possible , so that the family is not forced into a position of social need ; and it is equally important that there should be an adequate range of options from child institutions , and believe me , a country such as the Czech Republic has a wealth of experience of this from totalitarian times , when this principle was rather forcibly imposed .
I think this is probably all I need to say by way of introduction .
If there is anything Czechs do not lack , it is self-confidence , so I would like end by saying that we do not suffer from the slightest feeling of inferiority because the Czech Republic is the smallest of the big countries or the biggest of the small countries ; we are the twelfth largest country in the European Union .
I would simply like to remind you that when the Swedish presidency took over in 2001 , the articles in the press were just the same as they were in November and December in the European media , doubting whether the Euro-sceptic Swedes , who do not have the euro and do not want it , were capable of tackling the issue of the single currency , whether they were capable of leading discussions on ratification of the Treaty of Nice , and indeed , whether they were capable , as a new country , of leading the European Union at all .
If we now exchange the Treaty of Nice for the Treaty of Lisbon , and replace Sweden with the Czech Republic , those articles look exactly the same .
We have no inferiority complex about that .
( CS ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I will continue with the Czech theme that has been set in motion here .
What we are seeing is something you spotted and acknowledged yourself and which you stressed in your speech , namely that the elections to the European Parliament are fast approaching and you are very likely to hear a number of contributions both from Czechs and from other MEPs that are influenced more by the mounting pre-election atmosphere than by any attempt to evaluate the Presidency programme you have presented .
I believe that in the first days of the Czech Presidency , the Czech government has been confronted with a test of unprecedented magnitude and that it has passed this test with flying colours .
I am very glad that a number of my fellow Members have emphasised this here .
It has also become apparent that the 3E , the three priorities of the economy , energy and external relations , have been identified quite correctly as Czech priorities , because the events with which the year began - the conflict in Gaza and the crisis over gas supplies to Europe - can be grouped under at least two of these priorities .
A fact we failed to acknowledge openly before has also emerged clearly , namely that energy security is an absolutely key issue for the future of the European Union and is more important than anything else , including I dare say the Treaty of Lisbon , since the Treaty will provide us neither with light nor with heat .
Energy security is an issue not just for one Presidency , but for many years ; it is a great challenge and a great honour for the Czech Republic to be able to make progress on this issue .
At the same time , it shows how all of the 3E are interlinked , because energy security has implications for the economy , which will always feel the initial impact of restrictions , as well as for external relations , since we cannot safeguard Europe 's energy security and diversity of supply without an Eastern Partnership , a neighbourhood policy or further enlargement of the European Union to include , for example , Turkey .
I believe that the Czech Republic will address itself to this task , that it will move this debate forward , and that it will leave its indelible mark on the Czech Presidency and the EU leadership .
I wish all of us every success in this respect .
( CS ) Prime Minister Topolánek , President Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , I do not know anyone in this Parliament , any Member , who does not want the Czech Presidency to be a success .
Europeans in the east , west , north and south , in Old Europe and in New Europe , wish for the success of the European Union and the success of the Czech Presidency .
It goes without saying that Members of this Parliament , irrespective of whether they come from the social democratic , populist , liberal or green camp , also have the same hope .
Regrettably , however , I repeat regrettably , there are certain fears and certain doubts prevailing among the European public and even in this Parliament as to whether the Czech Republic will manage the Presidency successfully .
There are several reasons for this .
The first reason is the instability within the ruling coalition in the Czech Republic .
My fellow Members , for example , find it incomprehensible that , at the very beginning of the Presidency , ministers have been replaced and the government has been reorganised .
How can new ministers , such as the ministers for transport and for regional development , who have no European experience , cope successfully with the European agenda and preside over the European Council ?
Nor can my fellow Members understand why , for example , the Christian Democrats who are currently in office in the Czech Republic and who are fighting for survival , should have chosen to hold their electoral congress during the Czech Presidency .
The relationship between the government and the Czech President has also provoked a number of questions , as we have already heard .
I would like a clear answer as to whether the Czech Presidency , or the Czech government , agrees with the views of President Václav Klaus , who rejects the Treaty of Lisbon , denies global warming and argues that the current financial and economic crisis was caused by over-regulation and the existence of social and environmental policies .
There are also serious grounds for doubt concerning the failure to do your homework and honour the pledge made to Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy that the Czech government , as the country holding the Presidency , would ratify the Treaty of Lisbon by the end of last year .
Prime Minister , I would like you to make a clear statement as to when the Treaty will be ratified in the Czech Parliament .
I would also like a clear statement as to why ratification of the Treaty has been made contingent on the ratification of bilateral agreements with the United States over the radar issue and on a law dealing with the relationship between the two chambers of the Czech Parliament .
The Treaty of Lisbon , as we have heard here , is a necessity .
We need it , among other things , in order to fulfil the Czech priorities .
These priorities , I think , are correct , but in order to be in a position to continue pursuing them in the future , for example in terms of energy security and a greater role for Europe in external relations , we need closer cooperation and , to that end , we need the Treaty of Lisbon .
In conclusion , I wish the Czech Presidency the best of luck and much success .
This is in the interests of both the Czech Republic and the European Union .
( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , the European Union has had six months of drama , dynamism and declarations under President Sarkozy , and now you have taken over , Mr President , with a sense of humour that may take some getting used to .
I hope that yours will be a constructive , productive Council Presidency , as the EU faces immense challenges .
You yourself mentioned the war between Israel and Hamas and the economic crisis , and of course there are also internal issues such as the Treaty of Lisbon .
Allow me to take up one aspect of your speech : energy security .
You stressed its fundamental importance , and I agree with you that energy is the basic raw material of modern society .
Our lifestyle , our economy , our further development - all of this depends upon it .
We cannot be dependent on energy supplies .
Independence requires that we have a good mix of various energy sources .
Therefore , I hope that with your open , direct manner , you will be able to persuade your European partners to engage in a new discussion on nuclear power and , in particular , to encourage the German Government to end its anti-nuclear policy .
This is a requirement of security for our continent .
There is a great deal to be done , and this is your opportunity to take Europe forward .
I should like to express my thanks and my confidence in successful cooperation to come .
( PL ) Madam President , President-in-Office , there is only one yardstick against which to measure the Czech presidency appointed by your Government , and the dramatic events of recent weeks , and that is the energy policy of the European Union .
Today we are coming to the end of yet another round of energy disputes between Russia and Europe , but we still have no systemic guarantee or political framework to avoid similar problems in future .
After the energy crises of 2004 , 2006 and 2008 it is high time for the European Union to get on with diversification , not just of energy supplies , but of the very sources of energy we so urgently need .
For this reason I expect the Czech presidency to take fresh steps towards securing financial support for the Nabucco gas pipeline and a more vigorous energy policy in Central Asia .
I therefore expect the Northern Gas Pipeline to be struck off the list of the European Commission 's priority , for failure to take these measures will mean waking up next winter to the same problems as we have now .
- ( FR ) Madam President , Europe 's credibility is at stake with regard to the energy issue .
Thank you , Mr Barroso , for your very clear words this morning .
These Gazprom and Naftogaz companies , this performance that we have been seeing for two , three , four , five days now , it is unbelievable !
From now on , we have to say : ' Gentlemen , enough is enough ! '
To do that , we have to act together .
Thank you for the good coordination !
Can someone here explain to me what these visits to Moscow by the Slovakian and the Bulgarian Prime Ministers are all about ?
This already shows Gazprom that we are not united .
Explain these two visits to me .
Moving on , I believe that the Commission has a major role to play : we need to establish emergency gas plans .
The first thing to do is to recast the Gas Security Directive , otherwise the European Commission will not have enough political power to act .
European coordination is required .
Secondly , we need an emergency ' Central and Eastern Europe gas infrastructure ' plan , with the money that is available .
Thirdly , we need to combine Europe 's economic recovery with a major energy investment plan .
The main priority is the buildings in Eastern Europe .
It is scandalous to see such a small proportion of the Structural Funds being invested in something useful !
Rather than having stadiums built for European championships , I would prefer money to be invested for our citizens - in buildings , heating networks and renewable energies .
My final remark is that we are more dependent when it comes to nuclear energy than we are with respect to gas .
We import 99 % of our nuclear fuels !
Stop linking nuclear energy to independence !
Mrs Koch-Mehrin , you sound ridiculous when you mention that .
( CS ) Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I am quite sure there is no one in this hall who envies the Czech Presidency the circumstances in which it has assumed the leadership of the European Community .
Prime Minister , one of the main slogans you have proclaimed for your Presidency is a Europe without Barriers .
This slogan can be interpreted in different ways , depending on one 's political and personal experience .
Personally , I believe that it cannot be understood as nothing more than a further relaxation of financial and market mechanisms ; rather , I see it as a challenge to refine what Europe can rightly be proud of , namely the European social model .
I am not thinking here simply of the chance to remove meaningless constraints , or of the prospects for employment .
I view this opportunity as a chance to give the mobile workforce credible guarantees of equal treatment .
This may include , for example , positive developments over the unresolved issue of cross-border health care during the Czech Presidency .
If Europe is to be without barriers , it might be good to start by not creating any new ones .
Europe is not only the European Community ; Europe also encompasses our neighbours , who belong not only geographically but also historically to Europe .
I would like to know your opinion on this topic , as well as the strategy the Presidency will apply to our neighbours along the borders of the European Union .
I am thinking mainly of Serbia and the sensitive issue of Kosovo , and I am also thinking particularly of Moldova , which has taken many positive steps towards closer relations with the European Community .
In my view , not creating barriers also entails a principled but European policy towards Russia and China .
It is necessary to seek a balanced relationship with these countries too , especially where European interests are involved .
Europe without Barriers also means paying serious attention to the fact that numerous minorities are to be found within the territory of the EU .
This includes one minority we are reluctant to discuss in this Parliament , namely the non-citizens in some states of the European Union .
The key to addressing these issues hinges , inter alia , on the introduction of a new policy , in other words in eliminating the policy of double standards .
You have said that freedom and decision-making are of fundamental importance .
Give the citizens of your own country a chance to decide in a referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon and the siting of the US radar installation .
This will confirm the sincerity of your words .
- ( FR ) Madam President , on behalf of my Independence and Democracy Group , I should like respectfully to welcome the Czech Presidency , and to do so by expressing the high regard in which we hold it , for the Czech people have experienced some great hardships and are better equipped than many of us to understand the value and the meaning of the word freedom .
I should also like to welcome it by expressing our hopes .
Mr Topolánek , Mr Klaus , you represent two hopes for us : listening to the voice of the people , that is , ensuring that the referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon is respected throughout Europe , and giving the people back their freedom in order to free them from the Brussels bureaucracy that is swamping us .
Today more and more of us , the peoples of Europe , are Brussels dissidents .
( NL ) Madam President , with only one minute speaking time , all I can do is plead with the Czech Presidency to help us ensure the European institutions respect democracy .
In a democracy , it is the people who decide .
As it happens , in the countries where the people were allowed to speak their minds - in France , the Netherlands and Ireland - the Treaty of Lisbon , otherwise known as the European Constitution , was consigned to the wastepaper basket .
I hope that the new presidency will actually side even more with the citizens and freedom and not , as we have grown accustomed from most presidencies , with the arrogant European mandarins .
There is also the Turkish issue .
The large majority of Europeans are opposed to the accession of a non-European country to our Union .
In this dossier too , though , the eurocrats are imposing their own will , and we need the help of the Czech Presidency .
Given that the Czech Republic shook off a dictatorship not so long ago , your presidency could prove to be a beacon of democracy and freedom in the next six months , if you dare to go against the wishes of this EU elite , that is .
Madam President , I welcome Prime Minister Topolánek to the European Parliament and I know from past discussions that Europe is in very good hands for the next six months .
It is a historic moment for the Czech Republic and one to which you bring your customary political skill .
The Czech presidency programme has set some important priorities : the three ' E 's of energy , economic improvement , and Europe 's role in the world .
In the early days of your presidency you have indeed been faced with substantial challenges .
You have been to Moscow and Kiev and you are working hard to get a deal to restore the flow of natural gas to European countries .
You have displayed great diplomatic skills so far working with Russia and Ukraine , but it is vital that the Russian Government understands that holding nations to ransom is no way to conduct business in the modern world .
You have led the way for the EU so far , and I congratulate you , and also in your work to resolve the current crisis in the Middle East to bring about a credible ceasefire that will enable peace talks to resume .
The economic crisis remains high on your agenda .
You are supporting sensible measures to ensure the economic slowdown is tackled .
You have been clear about the importance of Europe and the Member States not imposing new and heavy-handed regulation at European or national level .
You have spoken of mobilising those countries which share your liberal economic outlook to oppose protectionism at this time .
What we must do is ensure that any regulatory changes are proportionate and sensible .
Finally , in a week 's time there will be a new US President in the White House .
I know we can rely on you , Prime Minister , to establish a good working relationship with President-elect Obama .
I know you share my view that the future of the transatlantic alliance is vital to our security and our prosperity .
I wish you every success .
To quote Winston Churchill in his last great speech in the House of Commons : ' Never flinch ; never weary ; never despair ' .
Good luck .
Madam President , we have to admit that the Czech presidency faced a very difficult beginning .
The worsening economic crisis , the brutal military operation by Israel and the biggest crisis so far in European gas supplies .
Your activity will become even more difficult with the rising political tensions related to the European election campaign .
The end of your presidency will be marked by the election of 532 new MEPs .
I underline this figure because it is not the one foreseen in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I think that the ratification of the Treaty and its entry into force should be higher on your agenda both nationally and at European level .
It may look as though you are unlucky to be leading the EU in such a situation , but every crisis is also an opportunity .
Use these opportunities .
Make the EU more active , visible and credible in the Middle East .
Try to develop a more responsible EU policy on energy and energy supplies .
Do more to put the European economy back on track while preserving people 's jobs .
Mr Topolánek , I would like to see another presidency by a new Member State succeed .
This is your special responsibility .
This will prove that the newcomers are able not only to follow , but also to lead .
The main prerequisite for success is to bring together all 27 Member States and to make them unite around policies and actions .
This will not be possible if there is no unity within your own country .
The contradictory messages coming from different Czech institutions harm your prospects of success , so please do your best to put an embargo on all internal political games .
It is not easy in a pre-election situation , but Slovenia is an example that you can follow .
The second prerequisite is to unite behind you the main political parties in this Parliament .
For six months , you must forget your own political membership and hold a broad dialogue .
This is something to be learned from the French presidency .
Finally , I would like to draw attention to the rise of extremism , anti-Semitism and xenophobia in Europe .
The Czech Republic is also affected by this trend .
I ask you to include this issue high on your agenda , particularly in view of the upcoming European elections .
I wish you every success .
Madam President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for coming here today to outline the Czech presidency 's programme .
However , I will draw attention to some issues that I hope your presidency can address .
Firstly , the motto you have chosen is ' Europe without barriers ' .
I agree with the premise of this motto .
It should especially hold true for European citizens who have the right to move and reside freely within the EU .
I am the rapporteur on the application of the Free Movement Directive .
Unfortunately , it seems that your motto is under threat from national authorities .
The Commission has recently released a very disappointing report on the implementation of this directive .
Given the directive 's improper transposition by Member States , I would hope that you will give this issue much more weight than is indicated by your programme in the area of freedom and security .
Secondly , in addition to some daunting issues that you will have to confront during your presidency - such as the continuing global financial crisis and energy security concerns - you will also have a large legislative burden .
Therefore , I trust that you will employ all the necessary means to properly conclude the numerous outstanding reports before the end of the parliamentary mandate .
In particular , expectations have been created for European citizens on price reduction for voice , SMS and data roaming .
I hope that you will honour your commitment to reach a first reading agreement with my Roaming II report .
Thank you , and I wish you the best of luck during your presidency .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I offer a warm welcome to the Czech Presidency and I hope that it will succeed in moving Europe on from the useless persiflage of Brussels to action on combating the disgraceful human trafficking of illegal migrants taking place in the Mediterranean .
Minister Maroni , at a recent meeting of the ministers of home affairs of Cyprus , Greece , Italy and Malta , finally gave a wake-up call to Europe .
It is time for Europe to realise the gravity of the situation in the Mediterranean : trafficking is taking place in illegal immigrants and drugs from Africa and Asia .
The Czech Presidency must consider the urgent need for specific measures mandating the ministers of home affairs to conclude readmission agreements with the non-EU countries from which these illegal immigrants come .
We need to strengthen the action taken by Frontex , which ought , however , to be coordinated with the appropriate instruments and resources , and Europe must realise that such action will be effective only if it is accompanied by policies for the readmission of illegal immigrants and funds for countries , such as mine , that have to receive illegal immigrants .
President-in-Office , go to Lampedusa and see how serious the problem is .
We are becoming the centre for combating drug trafficking in the Mediterranean - a disgrace that we must root out .
Go to Lampedusa as a politician and then return as a tourist , to the most beautiful island in the Mediterranean !
( Applause )
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , Mr Topolanek , I welcome the Czech presidency !

As a Prague citizen elected to the European Parliament as a German member of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I am particularly pleased that the Czech Republic is to hold the Council Presidency for the next six months .
More than 40 years ago , following the occupation of Czechoslovakia , I went into political exile in Germany , and I still marvel that we are now free to drive forward the development of democracy and the respect for human rights in the Czech Republic and Central Europe .
The current political , economic and environmental developments would represent a great challenge for any Council Presidency - but this one , I believe , will overcome it .
I should like to wish us all , not just the Czech Republic , all the best for this Presidency .
( Applause )
( EL ) Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the priorities of your Presidency include the following : in order for the European Union to take international action , it needs to tie its security in with strategic cooperation with ΝΑΤΟ and to develop its own defence capability to complement ΝΑΤΟ .
The citizens are wondering who is threatening the European Union to the extent that it needs to tie its security in with ΝΑΤΟ ?
On the contrary , a visible threat to the European Union is the strategy being applied by Israel , the strategy of war , which the European Union has not roundly condemned and for which it has not imposed sanctions , as it has done in other cases .
You further state that you want an economy without borders and that excessive regulation should be avoided , that an increase in the level of protectionism should be avoided .
Are these the lessons that we , as the European Union , have learned from the economic crisis ?
No protection for the weak and market speculation ?
It is hardly surprising , therefore , that the citizens are losing patience with the policies of the European Union .
The Euro-barometer , which we always ignore , tells us as much .
What is topical today and what the mass demonstrations are highlighting is the need for a policy of peace , not complicit neutrality .
The reactions and the grassroots protest are blatant proof of the need for justice and for political control of the market and of the price of commodities which will allow each state to perform the social role which its citizens allocate to it without the dogmatic limitations of the Stability Pact .
Mrs. President , I should like to welcome the President-in-Office and to wish him well in his presidency and also to wish his people well .
As an Irish Member , I should like to thank the Czech Government and people .
When my people voted in a referendum to reject the Treaty of Lisbon , the Czech representation alone said it respected the Irish vote .
In an environment of disrespect for the French , Dutch and Irish votes - and of people not allowed to vote - this respect was very welcome .
Respect is a valuable and necessary attitude .
In Europe we are faced with many crises .
You have spelled out an ambitious programme to deal with these .
Such a programme requires respect between Member States .
It also requires respect for the peoples of those Member States to have any hope of success .
I am impressed at the respect you have shown your people in acknowledging that they , like the Irish , would , if given a chance , probably reject the Treaty of Lisbon as well .
Such respect bodes well for your presidency and for Europe .

( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it could be that you were not expecting such a friendly , benevolent reception in the European Parliament , Mr Topolánek - but the Czech Council Presidency is an event tinged with history .
I have seen two landmark events in my political career , the first being German reunification and the second Europe 's reunification following two bloody European civil wars in the last century .
The fact that the Czech Republic is representing the Presidency in the European Parliament today is a reflection of the incredible historic changes to which we have been witness and for which we can be grateful .
I assure you of the support of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , without reservation and without scepticism .
You rightly set the ball rolling with Charles IV , who was not only one of the first architects of a trans-European transport network but also the founder of one of the oldest and most prestigious universities in Europe , and thus an exponent of a European universality that has possibly left at least as great a mark on us Europeans as the treaties we have concluded .
The occasional Eurosceptic remark aside - which we are familiar with from your own country - you meet with our support .
We in the PPE-DE Group are very staunch Europeans - there is no doubt about that - but precisely because of this we are able to recognise wrong turns taken by Europe and to help put them right .
The Treaty of Lisbon is an excellent instrument for correcting any wrong turns taken by Europe .
For this reason , I wish to express here the expectation that you , as President of the Council , will contribute to the entry into force of this Treaty and that your country will ratify the Treaty as soon as possible .
( ES ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I offer the Czech Presidency the same friendly welcome that I gave in 1991 when , as President of the European Parliament , I addressed the Senate of the then Czechoslovakia to invite them to join us .
In my opinion , that great generation of Czech and Slovak citizens is embodied in someone who is well-respected in Europe and throughout the world . I am of course talking about President Václav Havel .
I have two comments and questions for the President-in-Office .
You have taken a decision - and I am glad that you are talking about a Europe of rules - to subordinate ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon to ratification of the missile defence shield .
Many of us believe that this is not the way forward , but you have taken the decision to subordinate your own country to something that must be considered jointly .
There is one fact that cannot be ignored , however , which is that the gas dispute is a political dispute .
In my view , it will be very difficult for you to have a policy towards the East in this situation .
I also cannot understand why , when the Czechs are a people proud of their sovereignty and independence , you can subordinate what the Czechs have to decide to what the Irish do .
Secondly , President-in-Office of the Council , you have not mentioned the euro .
Yesterday in this House we celebrated the 10th anniversary of the euro and the entry of your sister republic , Slovakia , into the euro .
What are you going to do in order to defend the euro during the Czech Presidency ?


( SV ) Madam President , Mr Topolánek , Mr Barroso , it is absolutely correct that we are in the midst of two crises : a climate crisis and a financial crisis .
To these , we can add an energy crisis .
It is therefore important not to lose focus .
My question to Prime Minister Topolánek is therefore the following : will the Czech Republic ensure that the emergency economic crisis programmes also work to solve the climate crisis ?
After all , we have , here , the opportunity to help our citizens to both a better environment and new jobs and to help our small businesses .
History has shown that every financial crisis is followed by a technological shift .
With investments in new green technology , such as district heating , biofuels , combined heat and power , energy-efficient houses , solar panels , smart grids and so on we can benefit from the adaptations that are necessary in order to deal with the climate threat and create the economic upswing that Europe and the world needs .
A simultaneous investment in climate-smart technology and employment will also stabilise the security policy situation with regard to Russia .
Those who opposed the energy package and a comprehensive common European energy policy will perhaps now understand why we put so much work into enabling the EU to speak with one voice on these issues .
In any case , Europe 's freezing citizens understand what needs to be done .
We cannot have a situation like we had in the Middle East crisis , with three or four European delegations running around each other .
I therefore welcome the Czech Presidency and the well-established cooperation with the next country to hold the presidency , Sweden , and I wish you good luck .


( LV ) Fellow Members , Mr Barroso , Mr Topolánek , I should like to express my appreciation of the Czech government for its resolve to continue the evaluation of the political , moral and legal aspects of the crimes of the Communist regime that was begun under the Slovenian Presidency .
The consequences of the Communist regime 's crimes are a repulsive scar on the face of Europe .
However , under the influence of realpolitik , European politicians still pretend not to notice it .
That shows that Europe still lacks self-respect in the face of Russia 's authoritarian ideology .
Unfortunately , for as long as the acts of Nazism are recognised as a crime against humanity but the crimes of the Communist regime of the USSR are excused , we have to face the fact that Europe and its historical truth is split between its eastern and western halves .
Ukraine 's gas supply is cut off and Russian tanks enter Georgia .
For so long , Europe 's common values remain nothing but a dream .
I call on the Czech Presidency to carry out the resolve expressed in the Prague declaration .
Madam President , this is the first presidency of a former Soviet bloc country , and we are keeping our fingers crossed for you , Prime Minister , that it will be a first-class presidency .
You have inaugurated your presidency in a hot political temperature and the freezing wind of the energy crisis .
I should like to congratulate you , Prime Minister Topolánek , for your quick action and commitment to finding a solution to the gas crisis and the mediation you have undertaken between Russia and Ukraine .
Two of the three main priorities of the Czech presidency - energy and the Eastern Partnership - need gas .
This is the crossroads of both your presidency priorities .
You have to find an emergency solidarity solution right now .
You have to work on unblocking gas deliveries to 18 Member States whose citizens and industries are suffering .
Then you have to find a lasting , sustainable and systemic solution for the longer term .
We need you to design a comprehensive and decisive strategy .
I also welcome your priority on the Eastern Partnership , which would give us an appropriate framework for better cooperation with our eastern partners , who are so close to our borders .
The European Parliament will complement it with its own dimension by building an interparliamentary assembly , which we call EURONEST .
This partnership would contribute to preventing another crisis like the present one .
I am confident that the Czech presidency , which is confronted with such challenging times and crisis management , will be able to fulfil our expectations and that in six months we will have fewer barriers and a strong and safer Europe , also a sweeter Europe , as your slogan says :
( CS ) Making Europe sweeter !
I wish you much success .
( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , ' Europe without Barriers ' is a good motto , as it goes to the heart of the European idea - bringing people together .
I also hope , however , that it proves possible to break down the barriers in the minds of some people , who still have political , if not ideological reservations about the European Union , and therefore close their minds to its further development as envisaged in the Treaty of Lisbon .
There is a good deal more work to do on this in your country , too .
The Reform Treaty is essential .
How are you going to make energy policy without the basis laid down for this in the Treaty of Lisbon ?
It cannot be done .
Many other policy areas can be looked at in the same way .
It is completely unacceptable to link ratification to other domestic problems , as this is a common Treaty and has nothing to do with domestic political disputes - the opposition against the government or vice versa .
Europe is a community of values .
Human rights and the rule of law - where your country also shows deficits - take centre stage .
I should like to take this opportunity to mention the case of Dr Yekta Uzunoglu , who has spent 14 years fighting for justice and compensation .
I appeal to you to ensure that this unfortunate case , for which Václav Havel has already gone on hunger strike , is resolved under your Presidency .
At the end of the French Council Presidency , President Sarkozy said that the previous six months had changed him .
I hope that this experience will also change you and several others in the Czech Republic .
Madam President , I should like to ask the President-in-Office four questions .
Mr President-in-Office , if , as you said , you find the Treaty of Lisbon worse than the Treaty of Nice , why did you sign it ?
Secondly , will you please confirm that the Czech Republic will not be tempted to follow the Irish example and seek to pull apart the Lisbon package ?
Thirdly , do you not see a contradiction in coming here and praising the legitimacy of the Parliament but declining to support the Treaty which so greatly increases its powers ?
Fourthly , can the Czech presidency really have authority unless and until the Czech Republic ratifies the Treaty ?

( PL ) Madam President , President-in-Office , it is paradoxical that this multiple crisis that has afflicted the world , including Europe , can also be a great ally , as those who have got used to telling everyone how to run their business bear the brunt of the responsibility for this crisis .
It was they who presided over it and got us into it .
Today we can see a wind of change in your statement and therefore wish the Czech presidency all the best .
I would like to remind you of a fact from history that should be useful to you .
In 1618 , an unpleasant Habsburg diplomatic mission came to Hradčany whose behaviour was unprecedentedly arrogant .
The Czechs rightly threw them out of the window in an act known as " defenestration " .
I look forward to such a political defenestration now .
I hope you throw all dishonest advisers out of the window of decency and reason , and that you succeed in pushing European affairs forward .
That is what Europe 's citizens are expecting , and you will not succeed by listening to these charlatans .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as always in Europe we are living through important historic events , and the six months of the Czech Presidency is certain to number among these .
There are many major problems outstanding , to which this Presidency will have to find solutions : for the Treaty of Lisbon , which requires final adoption , the path has already been outlined , but what is needed is a further impetus to ensure that the process is not drawn out beyond the current year .
The serious world economic crisis will continue to produce effects , and there is no doubt that these will be significant over the course of this year .
It is to be hoped that the Presidency will continue along the road already embarked upon by the French Presidency so that the next G8 meetings , with Italy presiding , can produce results that meet Europe 's needs .
Europe is facing a serious problem in terms of energy supply : this is a crucial fact , and it seems a complex problem to resolve .
A solution may , however , be on the point of being found ; in any case the future ought to be guaranteed , in view of the dependence of many states , including my own , on such supplies .
The situation in the Gaza Strip can no longer be tolerated .
One should not negotiate with terrorists but the attacks on the Israeli people must stop once and for all , and we should no longer tolerate the death of innocent civilians on the front line of an absurd and , unfortunately , permanent war .
Immigration ought to be resolved at a European level and therefore considerable attention should be paid to the situation of certain states , including Italy and Malta , which have significant problems relating to this issue .
The Cyprus issue should be tackled swiftly , in order to resolve once and for all relations between Greece and Turkey , and between Europe and Turkey , which , moreover , is still permanently awaiting accession .
Finally , Mr Topolánek , I hope to see you always present in this Chamber ; I wish you all the best for your work , and I congratulate you on still being here with us after your first reply .
With previous Presidencies , we have not been very used to that .
Thank you ; it is a good sign .
- ( FR ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I have discovered from your Czech historians the reason why you have not ratified the Treaty of Lisbon : they talk in fact of the magic of the figure 8 , as in 2008 .
This figure punctuates your history , they say : in 1918 Czechoslovakia was created and , in 1348 , Prague .
They cite forty-odd examples and , in particular , three recent painful ones : 1938 , when France and the United Kingdom abandoned you ; 1948 , when you were set aside by a coup d 'état ; and 1968 , when the Soviet tanks rolled in .
So 2008 , I can understand - you put it to one side because you thought ratifying the treaty that year was suspect , all the more so since some people were comparing the limited sovereignty of Brezhnev with the treaty .
In spite of all his faults and his past , comrade Barroso , who is here , is not Brezhnev !
( Laughter )
We are part of a project that is characterised by its shared and voluntary sovereignty .
The Treaty of Lisbon is just one moment in this history ; it is just one stage in this history .
I beg you : 2008 is over , ratify in 2009 !
( Applause )
( LT ) The Czech Republic is taking over the European Union Presidency at a time when we are debating how to transform the economy and whether the future model of the European Union will be more socially-oriented or more liberal .
Sometimes this is even presented as a row between Old and New Europe , but I think the Czechs will be able to find consensus , as there really is not a great difference between these two conceptions .
Their coming together is determined by globalisation and the multicultural economic environment which is still developing .
The concept of a ' market economy ' is understood very differently by various people and this is a behavioural factor .
The countries in the post-Soviet bloc understand perfectly that the existence of market institutions and laws does not necessarily mean that the market will flourish successfully .
They must match people 's mentality and expectations .
Although we sometimes try to underline those differences between the economic models for political gain , in the long-term political perspective delaying the reform of economic policy , if we take into account the changing multilingual and multicultural economic environment , will help radical populist groups come to power and will cause long-term political instability and economic backwardness .
( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate the Czech Council Presidency on its assumption of office .
This is the first Council Presidency from a former Warsaw Pact country and therefore of symbolic importance , as Mr Nassauer rightly said .
The matters of the gas negotiations and the activities of President-in-Office Schwarzenberg in the Middle East and many other examples show that the Czech Council Presidency is well prepared for the work that awaits it .
Therefore , I attach particular importance to the fact that great store has been set by what has been called a strategic energy security concept .
This example , in particular , makes it clear that there are many areas in which nation-states alone are no longer able to look after the interests of their citizens , and only a common European approach will do .
However , President-in-Office , only the Treaty of Lisbon confers on us this competence in matters of energy and energy security .
Our current activities are as coordinators and are non-binding .
In the case of many of the challenges we need to take up , we shall not be able to do so without the scope for action offered by the Treaty of Lisbon - the scope for greater democratisation , namely the reinforcement of the rights of the European Parliament and those of the national parliaments .
I am assuming , therefore , that there was a mistake in the German interpretation when it interpreted you as saying that the Treaty of Nice may be better than the Treaty of Lisbon .
You should still be able to correct the German version .
For this reason , we should seek an opportunity to make clear that we can improve the way we overcome our shared challenges in all the major areas only with the help of the Treaty of Lisbon . Thank you very much .
( PT ) Mr President-in-Office , you spoke of a Europe of rules .
You spoke a lot about rules , in fact .
Now , one of the rules of democracy is the fulfilment of undertakings .
You made an undertaking to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon by the end of 2008 .
You did not and that was wrong .
For that reason I ask : ' When will the Czech Republic ratify the Treaty of Lisbon ? '
You also spoke about self-confidence .
It sounded like arrogance to me .
The Czech Government , including its President , has every right to say and do what it likes , but it cannot forget that it belongs to the European Union and now speaks on behalf of nearly 500 million citizens and 27 Member States .
That is why you cannot ignore the fact that 25 Member States have already ratified the Treaty of Lisbon and that Ireland has already planned a second referendum .
Happily , the polls indicate a ' yes ' majority .
The Irish have realised that , in this particularly difficult international environment , the fact that they belong to the European Union and to the euro area has protected them from greater trouble .
What remains now is for the Czech Republic to state when it is going to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon .
As my group chairman , Martin Schulz , has stated , at a moment when Europe is confronting unprecedented challenges , it is necessary for Europe to speak with a single voice .
Now , this will only be possible with the Treaty of Lisbon .

( IT ) Madam President , Mr Topolánek , ladies and gentlemen , you spoke of the eastern partnership , Mr Topolánek .
Partnership is a fairly recent invention by the European Union , which did not exist in the Europe which the founding fathers of the Ventotene Manifesto wished to see , or in the Europe of the initial periods after the Second World War .
That Europe gave its neighbours , including those in Central and Eastern Europe , the prospect of accession .
Europe has been a factor for peace not because it offered the prospect of partnership to its neighbours , but because it offered the prospect of membership , of becoming a part of the EU .
The French Presidency which preceded you , however , was very clear , if we are talking about barriers , in wanting to define the borders of Europe , by slamming the door in the face of Turkey , most of all , and making it clear that the European Union wants to close its borders .
The result of that is that surrounding the European Union , where in past decades there was hope for countries such as yours , today , instead , there are wars and tensions in the Middle East , the Balkans , the Caucasus , the Urals and the Maghreb .
The call that we , the non-violent Radical Party , would like to make to you is to take into consideration the urgent need , once again , for the United States of Europe , opening up to membership , to members , and not to confused relations of partnership .
That partnership rules out the inclusion of the most important thing : civil and political rights for citizens in Europe and at the borders of Europe .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the President-in-Office on the ability which his presidency has already demonstrated to deal with a number of issues .
Many Swedes still have the feeling that Prague is to the east of Stockholm , due to the heritage of the political geography of the last century .
That is wrong , and your presidency , Mr President-in-Office , will restore the Czech Republic to its proper place in our mental maps - at the heart of Europe in history , as well as in the future .
May I also express the hope that you will pave the way well for the Swedish presidency : as regards climate issues and competitiveness , where it is so important for you to demonstrate that we will tackle the economic problems with openness , without protectionism and with the dynamics of an open economy ; and regarding energy issues , where you will play a crucial role , since you are clearly very well-placed .
The times we are living in underline the need for reforms and change .
I think it is fair to say that solidarity and security as regards energy means that we need to reform and deepen the European internal energy market .
Without that , we will be exposed to different threats and attempts to divide us , to fragment us .
One aim should be to ensure that no one can control the supply and production of gas and electricity at the same time as distribution ; to ensure that we will have one common market .
If that can be achieved during your presidency , it will be a strategic step forward that I hope we can all congratulate you on in six months ' time .
( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , I and some fellow Members present here today belonged to the group of MEPs from the Joint Parliamentary Committee who particularly promoted the cause of Czech membership in the period up to 2004 .
Therefore , being able to welcome a Czech Presidency for the first time makes today a special day for non-Czech MEPs , too .
I might add from the point of view of an Austrian MEP that it was not always very popular to campaign in Austria for the accession of the Czech Republic .
Thus , we are certainly among those who offer the Czech Presidency particular support and do not intend to attach too much importance to teething problems - the rather one-sided initial position on the Gaza conflict and the Czech President 's view that social and environmental standards are too high have already been mentioned .
From an Austrian point of view , we are particularly hurt by the sympathetic reaction to Slovakia 's plans to restart Bohunice , which would be a clear infringement of existing EU law .
The excellent philosopher and writer Jiří Gruša has written a ' User manual for the Czech Republic and Prague ' , which I can only recommend to all my fellow Members as an enjoyable and extremely humorous read .
As yet , there is no user manual for Europe in written form but , if one should ever be issued , all new Presidencies would be well advised not to turn down the support offered to them in Parliament or by the governments of neighbouring States .
( DE ) Madam President .
President-in-Office , you have a particular responsibility .
The Czech Council Presidency has got off to a bumpy start - its art installation has been provocative and given rise to indignation - but its serious efforts to find its feet and assume responsibility for the whole Union have been perceptible even before today .
It seems to be well prepared .
Its programme contains the right priorities .
It will subsequently be judged , however , on the determination , personal commitment and European-mindedness with which these are implemented , and on the success rate .
Commission President Barroso said that the EU is being put to the test in these six months .
The Czech Council Presidency and the Czech Government are being put to the European-policy test .
These tests can be passed only if we all give of our best .
For that reason , I would ask you to stop playing domestic policy off against European policy and burdening your Council Presidency with domestic issues .
You should make clear to citizens that you already feel that , in the matters of the gas dispute , Gaza , Slovakia 's actions with regard to Bohunice and the financial crisis , the Treaty of Lisbon would strengthen your role and enable you to carry it out in better harmony with the other European institutions .
The European Union is a community of values and a common system of law .
Yes , we do have rules , and anyone breaking them , anyone not keeping to their promises , shows a lack of solidarity .
We are united despite all our differences by our community of values , our common system of law , our political objectives .
Therefore , I would make the following appeal : do not hide behind Ireland , take a step forward , ratify the Treaty of Lisbon before Europe Day 2009 , before the end of your Council Presidency .
We shall judge you by your deeds and not by the comments by your President in the Czech Republic .
Madam President , I was interested that the Czech President-in-Office said that the opposition is trying to torpedo the Czech presidency because , from where I sit , the Czech President is doing a very good job all on his own of torpedoing the Czech presidency .
I notice the Czech presidency states that it is doing all it can to enlarge the European Union and to admit Croatia .
If it is doing all it can , why can it not ratify the Treaty of Lisbon ?
After all , the Czech presidency agreed to it and , therefore , should fulfil its obligations .
We must be honest : it is not a great start to a presidency .
The Czech President describes the climate change package as a silly luxury .
The Czech Finance Minister describes the economic recovery plan as being reminiscent of the Communist era .
We have a so-called work of art - which has given offence to everybody , but particularly the Bulgarians - and the first statement on the Gaza crisis had to be withdrawn several hours later .
What we need at the moment is leadership , and what I have seen so far has taught me that the sooner we get a full-time president of the Council the better , because it is only coherent European action that will deliver security to Europe , will deliver world influence and deliver economic recovery .
So let us have some leadership .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( CS ) Madam President , the Czech Presidency deserves recognition for its active role in settling the dispute over the renewal of Czech gas supplies .
However , it would be a big mistake to turn away before addressing the long-term causes of this problem .
The origin clearly lies in Russia 's ambitions to extend its sphere of influence into Ukraine and on into Central Europe .
The aim of the EU must therefore be to keep Ukraine on the Union 's radar screen .
However , this will not be possible if Ukraine continues to sponsor opaque transactions and to cling to ' neighbourly prices ' which fail to reflect the true market situation and which keep Ukraine politically dependent on Russia .
The Czech Presidency 's priorities include energy security and reinforcement of the Eastern Partnership .
A fundamental aspect of this partnership must be to help Ukraine set market energy prices , negotiated in the context of long-term contracts , as quickly as possible .
The Presidency should also exert effective pressure on Kiev to dismantle opaque economic structures which undermine efforts to reform and develop a legal state .
Only strong external pressure on Ukraine and active cooperation can help it to abandon short-term and often personal interests in favour of genuine independence from Russia , and a legal state that is free of ubiquitous corruption .
Unless a clean-up is achieved in Ukraine , we cannot expect the EU to respond effectively to Russia 's increasingly assertive policy towards Central and Eastern Europe .
The right time to establish close cooperation between the EU and Ukraine will be immediately after the gas crisis has been defused .
Unless the Czech Presidency , on behalf of the EU , succeeds in placing effective pressure on Ukrainian leaders , we will soon witness not only further days of freezing weather and no gas , with major consequences for the economies of Member States , but above all a dangerous shift in geopolitical relations in Central and Eastern Europe .
Madam President , like everyone in this Parliament I wish the Czech Presidency-in-Office well .
However , I am appalled , President-in-Office , by your disgraceful comment here this morning that Lisbon is worse than Nice .
That is not only untrue , it is divisive and it is a breach of trust .
Now you have to seriously consider withdrawing your comments here this morning in relation to Lisbon .
We need the more united democratic effective Union offered by Lisbon to face the many problems , any one of which can plunge our world into conflict : energy security , climate change , the economic and financial crisis , and the many wars in many regions .
As President-in-Office , your task is to mediate for , and lead , Europe based on our common values of solidarity - internally and externally - a social market economy , multilateralism and equality between men and women - and that includes the right of both men and women to share the task of parenting .
President-in-Office , you must park your conservative and neo-liberal views for six months , otherwise you are going to be in conflict constantly with this Parliament for those six months .
Ireland will probably have a referendum on a clarified Treaty of Lisbon in the autumn of this year .
I will work hard to ensure a positive outcome for Ireland and Europe .
Your comments here today have made that task much harder .
If the referendum fails , Sir , you will not be thanked by the vast majority of Europeans .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( PL ) Madam President , President-in-Office , President of the Commission , I would like in particular to thank the President-in-Office for taking on the presidency and congratulate you on a difficult , but successful first two weeks in the presidency .
I perfectly understand your words on national identity , an identity which we , the countries between the east and the west of Europe , have built up successfully .
I would like to draw your attention to a matter that I believe will be crucial in these six months : the third energy package .
This package deals firstly with the common energy market , a common European agency for cooperation between national regulators , cross-border connections and joint investments , and therefore with integration - in other words , with energy solidarity and secure energy supplies .
Secondly , the third energy package also means liberalisation , the fair regulation of access to networks , that is , competition on the market , which means lower costs and damage to the environment and cheaper energy for consumers , and hence for the economy , which will help to deal with the crisis .
And thirdly , the third energy package fair rules for the operation of countries outside our markets , with common policies for supplying the EU countries and the possibility of transportation through third countries .
In the context of the EU 's eastern partnership and eastern dimension , the third package clearly speaks for itself .
The third package can be benefit each of the three main priorities of your presidency - energy , the economy , and Europe 's eastern dimension .
I call upon you to keep this priority and to fully ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SV ) Madam President , I , too , would like to welcome the Czech Presidency .
During this Presidency , we will have low growth and unemployment will rise .
We have a difficult economic situation .
I was reading about President Klaus 's solutions last week in the Financial Times , and I do not agree with them at all .
He says that we must lower our ambitions with regard to environmental policy and climate policy and we must lower our ambitions with regard to social policy .
That is absolutely the wrong way to go .
If Europe is to be able to compete in future , we must invest in modern environmental technology .
We must invest in modern infrastructure in order for us to have a society that is sustainable in the long term , and in an active climate policy .
This will provide a higher rate of growth and increased employment .
It is a similar situation with social policy .
We must invest in a social policy with fair working conditions , equal treatment of workers , a good working environment and so on .
This will not mean lower growth , but growth that is more sustainable in the long term .
Finally , I would like to mention family policy .
The family policy that I read about in your programme is an old-fashioned family policy .
Modern family policy is about the equal responsibility of men and women for children and work .
You point down a completely different path in your programme .
( BG ) Thank you , Madam President .
As an MEP from Bulgaria , I welcome the fact that the Czech presidency is including energy and energy security among its key priorities .
During the last few days , a large number of EU Member States have become hostages in the dispute between Ukraine and Russia .
In Bulgaria alone more than 160 000 households have been left without heating .
Unfortunately , the Bulgarian Government was unable to help its citizens during this crisis .
Bulgaria is the only country in the EU which does not have alternative sources , suppliers and reserves of gas .
We must learn the lesson from this case .
Fellow Members , I think that I am speaking for the whole Parliament when I say that we cannot allow European citizens to pay the price for political games involving countries using their energy resources as political tools .
This is why I believe that we need sustainable solutions in the energy sector .
We need a common European energy policy .
One important element in this is to improve the energy infrastructure .
When we talk about European energy solidarity , we mean joint energy projects in the European Union and avoiding the current practice of bilateral agreements .
I would also like to believe that before long , it will be possible in Europe to build pan-European nuclear power facilities as joint projects involving Member States .
In this context I also welcome the fact that the Czech presidency is making the expansion of forms of cooperation with countries from the southern Caucasus and the Balkans , and with Ukraine another key priority .
It is only by adopting an integrated approach which takes into account the interests and opportunities deriving from these interests of both Member States and the countries from the regions just mentioned that we can guarantee overcoming and averting crises , such as the gas crisis we have just been through .
We need to take action immediately and do what is best for the European Union .
The need for concrete action aimed at establishing a common European energy policy is now greater than ever .
I wish the Czech presidency every success .
( HU ) Madam President , Prime Minister , the Czech presidency has chosen the tagline " Europe Without Borders " as its motto , setting as its foremost priorities the issues of energy policy and economic stability .
In addition , I wish to emphasise the importance of including a further priority , that of the European citizen .
I would urge that more attention be paid to issues that directly affect the daily lives of citizens .
More emphasis should be given to the enhancement of state-of-the-art European social programmes , to guarantees of European solidarity and equality of opportunity , and to the implementation of the minorities policy .
I agree with those who urge the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Citizens must be involved more closely in European politics because I believe that the lack of social packages and effective communication lead to a growing loss of confidence in European institutions .
I believe the role of education is especially important ...
( The President cut off speaker . )
( CS ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the beginning of the Czech Presidency has been marked by the conflict in Gaza and the energy crisis .
After a wave of dismissive and doubting remarks as to the Czech Republic 's ability to lead the Union , Europe and other parts of the globe are watching with surprise how responsibly and effectively the Czech Presidency has acted as it deals with the unexpected crises .
I wonder , however , whether they were so unexpected , and I applaud the fact that the Czech government started dealing with them early on , at Christmas , because the French Presidency had failed to nip them in the bud .
I would like you to engage just as fearlessly in negotiations with China , which is wilfully breaking the rules on world trade , promoting unfair competition and threatening the health of Europeans by churning out counterfeit and dangerous products .
Today , for example , European parents have great difficulty in finding children 's shoes that pose no health risks , yet so far the Council and the Commission have paid little attention to this issue .
I welcome , then , the fact that you have placed ' Europe in the World ' among your priorities .
I assure you that Europe is very open to world trade , but no President of the Council has yet been able to ensure fair reciprocity and to open up China to European producers .
I hope that you and your first-rate team will be more successful .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I congratulate you on presenting a truly high-quality , realistic programme for Europe and also on your personal growth .
Considering that you are the leader of a political party some of whose current ministers voted in 2003 against our accession to the Union , you are doing extremely well on the European scene .
I just hope we will witness a similar mellowing of opinion among your party colleagues in relation to the Treaty of Lisbon too .
The media are reporting that the Irish , under pressure from the financial crisis , now understand better that the Treaty is a decent instrument which was put together for dealing with hard times .
I hope that you too will start to view the Treaty in a positive light , even if it means deleting President Klaus from your mobile phone .
I wish us all a successful Czech Presidency , notwithstanding the pluralism of our views .
( EL ) Madam President , Prime Minister , in addition to the question of foreign policy , action to deal with the economic crisis and the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , one of the basic priorities of the European Union must be young people .
I read about this priority in your programme .
I believe that your programme should be more integrated and more pro-active on the question of young people .
Young people are no longer convinced by pronouncements and promises .
They do not feel secure in the face of a state which is collapsing and which is unable to address the economic crisis .
They do not accept education systems which send them to the market of unemployment and social disdain .
They do not accept euro-scepticism , the fear of Europe .
They have a problem with the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
They clash on a daily basis .
It is the new generation that can understand what is meant by ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Mr President , I should like to say to the President-in-Office that his country is symbolised for me by two men : Franz Kafka and Jan Palach .
Both symbolise the struggle for freedom and for democracy and both showed the frustration , the pain and the sacrifice that can sometimes come in that struggle .
For that reason I think , Mr President-in-Office , you will have a particular insight into the struggle in Gaza and you will understand the pain and the frustration of the people of Gaza and the people of Israel .
I hope you will , therefore , throw everything into stopping the slaughter that is going on there .
You will also be able to reach out to the American President on the issues of climate change and bring him into the equation for Copenhagen .
At home you will have the chance to make your mark in the remaining legislative proposals of this Parliament - and I highlight the new opportunities for citizens that will flow from cross-border health , an item I know is on your agenda .
You mentioned the free movement of knowledge .
Nowhere is that more important than in medical science , and that goes , too , for mental health .
I have had the privilege of supporting some of the work for reform on mental health in the Czech Republic .
I know you will want to further those reforms not just in your country but throughout Europe .
I would like you to cast your mind back to June when we set out the mental health pact for the European Union .
It is not on your list at the moment , but I hope you will ensure that it is on your agenda as an item to be furthered because , above all , our task - your task - is to benefit those people in our community who are vulnerable and need our support .
I know you will do your best in that , and I wish you well in all your endeavours .
( Applause )
( PL ) I would like to start by recalling the Polish-Czech underground opposition meeting organised 21 years ago by Solidarity in the Giant Mountains on the Polish-Czech border .
The Czech Republic is the first country of Central and Eastern Europe to take the EU presidency .
This is a duty , Mr President-in-Office .
The Czechs heading the European Union are heirs to the Central and Eastern European tradition of the struggle to bring down the Iron Curtain and for a democratic community of societies on the continent of Europe .
I stress the special intellectual and political importance of the Czech presidency .
Of its many priorities , the main one is to conclude the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon and to strengthen European common foreign policy .
Another very important outstanding task is to prepare a transatlantic strategy for transatlantic relations following the election of the new American president .
And finally I would like to wish President Vaclav Havel a rapid recovery from his recent operation .
( SL ) The Czech Presidency has expressed its readiness to intervene to break the deadlock in the negotiations regarding Croatia 's accession to the European Union .
Mr President , allow me to remind you in this regard that each candidate country is required to submit credible documents .
If the documents are not credible , that fact should be drawn to the attention of the country concerned .
In the specific case of Croatia , Croatia has marked on its maps a border which is in dispute .
Instead of mentioning that such and such a section of the border is in dispute , it simply marked the border as it sees it .
Naturally , such a document cannot be credible , because it actually concerns a dispute between the two countries which will have to be resolved elsewhere .
This is a bilateral dispute between two countries who are otherwise good neighbours on excellent terms , and yet it is a dispute that will have to be resolved elsewhere .
Therefore , I would like to point out that Slovenia is not being capricious in mentioning that Croatia 's documents are not credible .
Slovenia is in fact making the point that Member States are obliged to draw this candidate country 's attention to the fact that it is required to submit documents which conform to the European Union 's standards .
And what is a possible solution ?
Many proposals have already been put forward and I believe that the Czech Presidency will likewise try to come up with an appropriate proposal .
The solution might be for Croatia to submit a government or parliament decision which clearly states that these borders are orientational , provisional or any other term specifying clearly that the borders are temporary and that they have not yet been determined .
That way , I think , we would make a small step forward and make it possible for Croatia to join the European Union as soon as possible , which would also be in Slovenia 's interest .
In conclusion , allow me to wish you every success in heading the Council of the European Union .
( CS ) Criticism has been heaped on the President-in-Office of the Council ; I intentionally refrain from joining in .
In Czech fairy tales , we usually find the castle occupied by a wise king who provokes no one , causes no offence , and does not claim to be an expert in all matters .
This is not the case at Prague Castle .
Well , nothing is perfect .
Yet I have faith that the President-in-Office of the Council will cope successfully with this handicap and keep the promises he has made to us today .
I have known him for almost 20 years , and I am pleased to see how membership of the European Union has fuelled his political growth .
I am crossing my fingers for him because , as the Spanish say , Con mi patria , con razón o sin ella , as the English say , ' Good or bad , my country ' , and as I say , ' My country , through thick and thin ' .
- ( SK ) I would like to begin by expressing my pleasure that right at the beginning of its presidency our fraternal neighbour the Czech Republic has dispelled any doubts as to the ability of a new Member State to manage and administer the affairs of the European Union .
The Czech presidency has demonstrated that it is capable of responding to and acting in critical situations , such as the war in Gaza and the disruption of gas supplies from Russia to the EU .
As a representative of Slovakia , which receives almost 97 % of its gas from Russia and which , together with Bulgaria , is in the most critical situation , I would like to acknowledge personally Prime Minister Mirek Topolánek 's involvement in the negotiations with the Russian and Ukrainian parties .
Prime Minister , Slovakia still has no gas and therefore still needs your active help .
Europe needs a common energy policy and it needs to improve its negotiating position in the field of energy .
France started its presidency with the Russian-Georgian conflict and the Czech presidency has to handle the commercial and political dispute between Russian and Ukraine .
I firmly believe that the time has come to learn a lesson from these events .
It is important to identify areas where the EU is dependent on Russia , as well as areas where Russia is dependent on the EU .
Relations with Russia are important but it is unacceptable that Russia should use gas as a political weapon .
It is necessary to deal promptly with the issues of diversifying energy sources and constructing the Nabucco pipeline .
Prime Minister , Slovakia is in an extraordinary situation and it sees you as an ally in the matter of a strategic decision on Jaslovské Bohunice .
I would also like to request your help Mr Barroso , as President of the European Commission .
Personally , I think that many shortcomings still exist in the implementation of the free movement of persons and I therefore welcome the motto of the Czech presidency - Europe without barriers .
I wish the Czech presidency success in implementing its 3E programme and in bringing the EU closer to achieving the Lisbon goals .
- ( SK ) Prime Minister , we are former fellow citizens and as such I am delighted to welcome you to the European Parliament and to wish you good luck with implementing the objectives you have presented to us .
Your 3E priorities certainly sum up the current problems facing the European Union , although I trust that in the economy section you will not forget its social aspects which are so important for the majority of EU citizens .
When I saw you at the celebrations for the adoption of the euro in Slovakia , I was delighted to discover that the new President-in-Office of the Council was a supporter of closer integration between the countries of the Union .
Nevertheless , like most Members of this Parliament , I would be even more delighted if you contribute to the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon in the Czech Republic .
Failing this , it will be difficult to achieve the priorities you have set out for yourself .
If we want the EU to become , as you have said , not merely a payer but also a player in world affairs , then we must take this step .
Prime Minister , as has been said many times , the European elections will be a significant moment during your presidency .
Turnout in the elections will influence EU policy for the next five years and material support from the Council can play a major role here .
When Slovakia is eliminated from the ice-hockey world championship and the Czech Republic qualifies for the next round ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Madam President , I would like to extend the warmest Estonian support for the Czech presidency .
Truly increased competitiveness is the best remedy for the economic crisis , with the completion of four basic freedoms .
President-in-Office , I support your idea of developing to the full extent the Eastern Partnership .
We understand now how important it is to engage countries like Ukraine and Georgia to the rule of law and democratic accountability .
Last September the European Parliament suggested marking 23 August as a day of joint commemoration of the victims of Communism and Nazism .
We trust that you will take the lead in convincing all the 27 governments to officially mark this day , beginning from next August .
We also expect you to lead us to a European moral and political assessment of the crimes committed under totalitarian Communism .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( RO ) ' Economy , Energy and European Union in the World ' is the motto of the EU 's Czech Presidency .
Europe 's citizens expect European institutions to protect them against crises and improve their quality of life .
The European Union 's economic recovery plan , increasing energy efficiency and energy supply security are currently the priorities of Europe 's citizens .
I urge the Czech Presidency , in spite of the approaching European elections , or especially for this reason , to demonstrate vision , political will and , above all , commitment to Europe 's citizens .
Together we can reach an agreement at first reading on the directive on energy efficiency in buildings .
I assure you that both the European Parliament and European Commission are ready to support you so that the directive on energy efficiency in buildings features among the achievements of the Czech Presidency .
Madam President , having had the traumatic experience of Russian Communism in the past , the Czech Republic has now gone to the extreme of attaching itself firmly and with obedience to the USA .
This is demonstrated clearly not just by your stance on Gaza and the Treaty of Lisbon , President-in-Office , but also by your Government 's decision to station American missiles on Czech soil .
Your willingness to serve faithfully the Washington administration at the expense of putting Europe 's peace at risk is unacceptable and suspicious .
Your country is today part of the EU , not of the US , and you must make sure your Government acts accordingly .
American satellite states have no place in our Union .
So , you must make up your mind : EU or US ?
You cannot have both !
( PL ) Madam President , President-in-Office , the Czech presidency has been the first in many years to drop that old chestnut , the European Constitution , also known as the Treaty of Lisbon , from the agenda .
This realistic approach inspires optimism , and shows respect for democracy and the principle of unanimity .
The Czech Presidency has decided to focus on the most urgent topical issues , including the Gaza conflict and energy security .
Initially there was no plan to intervene in the gas conflict between Russia and Ukraine , but when it started to affect large numbers of Member States , Mr Topolánek stepped in to mediate .
It is clear that in six months the presidency will not achieve all the aims it has set out to achieve , but the first two weeks already indicate that it can be an effective presidency , despite the Cassandrian prophecies of some politicians sitting in this House .
On behalf of the delegation ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( BG ) Thank you , Madam President .
I have heard the news that with the Czech presidency 's support , something supposed to be a work of art has been put up in Brussels , which depicts my country , Bulgaria , as a toilet .
This is deeply offensive and is contrary to the European Union 's traditions of partnership and mutual respect .
This is why we insist that this image is removed immediately by the Czech presidency and by whoever has actually dared to cause such offence to one of the Member States , which we cannot tolerate .
If this image is not removed immediately , my colleagues and I will go and remove it personally with our own hands .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( CS ) Thank you for giving me the floor .
I would like to start my closing address by thanking you for all your views ; it was a very warm welcome and one that I was not expecting .
I would also like to note that the Czech Presidency and I myself , in my capacity as President of the European Council , will be in close contact and will work in close cooperation with the European Commission over the entire six months .
The first fortnight has shown how continuous , daily and very active contact , not only with José Manuel Barroso , but also with the entire Commission , has secured joint action over the issues that descended upon us at the beginning of the year .
I am referring here not only to our cooperation with the European Parliament , but in particular to our communication with the European Commission as we sought to handle these ad hoc issues .
I would like to extend my gratitude to President Barroso .
Before I came here , I swore I would tell no jokes .
The one joke I did tell , which everyone at home would laugh at , fell flat .
Never mind , I will keep on trying and perhaps eventually even the German translation will get it right and we will understand one another .
The Treaty of Lisbon cannot be a mantra .
It must be a means , not an end .
It is a means to improve the working of the European Union .
It must never be a matter of compulsion .
Each country has its own tools and rules of the game for achieving ratification .
The fact that I signed the Treaty does not mean that I will influence the decisions of the two chambers of the Czech Parliament , which are autonomous and free and will decide for themselves .
Likewise , we have no intention of exerting advance pressure on the decision of the Irish people .
It is impossible to impose the validity of the Treaty in any way , although I do think that the Treaty is needed at this time and will facilitate the working of the European Union .
That is my final observation on the matter and I will not return to it because I have explained my personal position .
I liked the quote delivered by the honourable Member Mr Kirkhope , and I will paraphrase another of Churchill 's quotes to demonstrate what I think of the current time : ' No more crises tomorrow , my diary is already full . '
I think what we have been through in the first few weeks shows that we chose our priorities correctly and that we were well prepared .
Besides , we began to address the gas issue in mid-December , during the French Presidency .
I apologise to all those honourable Members whose specific questions I do not answer ; I will try to generalise this discussion a little and I will try to shed light rather on the general approach to handling these specific problems .
The question of smuggling people , drugs and children , child trafficking and the like .
Just as this Parliament is holding a debate regarding levels of freedom and security , so is the Czech Republic and we are keen to accelerate the directives and the entire legislative plan within the framework of Council decisions to combat people smuggling .
I just want to say that we are ready for this and want to address the individual elements of these problems .
The large-scale discussion on Nabucco .
We must concede , in all honesty , that Nabucco will be an alternative to other transit routes only if it also provides an alternative source of supply .
As for the debate on Ukraine , my countryman Josef Zieleniec said it quite clearly - this is a political and geopolitical problem , and in my opinion if we do not give Ukraine a chance to resolve its internal problems , if we do not place restrictions on the conduct of the various players , whether they be individuals or firms in the gas market , then we could lose the pro-European orientation of Ukraine , which is , of course , a geopolitical problem .
We can only speculate on the goals of the whole crisis - perhaps only a short-term price increase , maybe much greater pressure to build the Nord Stream , the alternative northern route , or perhaps the aim really is to inhibit Ukraine 's European inclinations .
Whatever the case , these factors are part of the problem , which is not just short-term and is not just about energy .
If I had to respond to the reference as to whether Europe should be more liberal or more socialist , I would attempt one more joke and say that I propose a compromise of a liberal-conservative Europe , but that really is my last joke .
With regard to the path followed by the Czech Republic and the adoption of the euro , on 1 January I declared that the Czech Republic would announce its date of entry on 1 November this year .
My government is the first government that will meet the Maastricht criteria .
I do not look on this as a race .
I congratulate my Slovak counterparts , and we will wait to see how the financial crisis affects compliance with the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact and what sort of effect it has on the de facto fulfilment of all the rules governing the euro area .
I am concerned - and this also applies to the handling of the financial crisis - that the loosening of the EU 's own rules is a destructive step , and therefore when we talk of a Europe of rules , we will naturally insist on compliance with the directives on state aid and competition , and this will be one of the criteria for assessing all proposals on how to address the financial crisis .
Rules apply in good times and in bad , and they apply to everyone .
Equality here must be absolute .
I will actually comment on ' A Europe without Barriers ' .
Yes , it is meant to have at least three senses .
There is the economic sense , which involves the removal of barriers to the internal market , the mental or psychological sense , in other words the removal of barriers in the minds of Europeans , which is of course an objective of the recently acceding countries , and finally there is the removal of external barriers , the avoidance of protectionism , a genuine liberalisation of world trade as one of the tools for managing the crisis , boosting demand , and bringing about an effective realisation of the conclusions of the Washington G20 .
I would like to say perhaps one thing here which affects me personally and which has already found its way into the media .
Václav Havel is gravely ill and has been hospitalised .
He is a man who symbolises both our pre-November and our post-November direction , and not just for the Czech Republic - he essentially symbolises the fall of the Iron Curtain .
He was the first Czech to address this European Parliament , and on behalf of us all I would like to wish him a speedy recovery .
I have a few very specific responses for one honourable Member of this assembly .
I was touched by Mr Rouček 's concern for the Czech government , and I could list at least six examples from the last ten to fifteen years where countries holding the Presidency of the European Union had many internal problems yet enjoyed a successful Presidency .
There was Belgium at the time the Maastricht Treaty entered into force , where constitutional changes took place without affecting the Presidency , there was the time of the French Presidency , when the European Union was enlarged to include Sweden , Finland and Austria while France was suffering an internal political crisis , there was the time of the Amsterdam Treaty in 1999 , during the German Presidency , when Gerhard Schröder was facing major problems and Lafontaine quit his party , there was the time the euro was introduced during the Spanish Presidency headed by José María Aznar , there was the time of the Irish Presidency , and I could mention many more .
Do not worry about the internal problems of Czech politics ; they will not affect the Czech Presidency .
On the Nuclear Forum : we cannot have a nuclear debate in which the dispute between the greens , liberals , conservatives , and so on ends up in a forced result .
The Nuclear Forum , organised in cooperation with the European Commission and taking place in Bratislava and Prague , should launch a new debate on security , on opportunities , on risks and needs , and on all of those things that have actually become a little taboo in recent years .
Breaking down this taboo is actually the objective of the Slovak-Czech Nuclear Forum .
It is obvious why Prime Minister Fico is in Ukraine and Moscow ; the problems of Bulgaria and Slovakia are critical because they are countries wholly dependent on gas supplies from Ukraine .
Bulgaria is capable of storing only a third of the capacity it requires , Slovakia has already reduced production at thousands of businesses , its thermal power plant in Nováky has burned out and it is suffering a major crisis .
I am in daily contact with Robert Fico and I support his mission , even though I do not think it will be successful at this time .
We must be much tougher towards the two players , Ukraine and Russia , Naftohaz and Gazprom .
Furthermore , I believe that the next steps must be far more effective and tougher on the part of both the European Commission and the Czech Presidency .
We must look for the tools to overcome a number of technical problems .
It is not possible for these supplies not to be resumed for a wholly irrelevant reason ( that is , the use of technical gas ) , and we will be taking further action in this respect .
We talked a lot about the Balkans and related problems , and many questions were raised in this respect .
Mr Peterle knows full well that , if the chapters in Croatia 's accession process are to be unblocked , a bilateral solution must be found to the Slovenian-Croatian dispute .
This is not a European dispute , although it is in fact starting to interfere with the accession talks .
In this sense , my contacts with the two prime ministers and the two presidents , together with my personal input into this problem , will perhaps help to resolve the Slovenian-Croatian border problems .
There is much that I would still like to say , but I will try not to keep you much longer .
I will attempt to make way for your next proceedings . I would like to end by saying that we greatly appreciate the opportunity to belong to a community of states built on values and on foundations that we , after November 1989 , have been able to adopt once more as our own values and our own goals .
We also value the opportunity to preside over this entire community .
It is something so unique , something my generation , which was 33 years old in 1989 , never thought it would live to see .
We also appreciate the fact that we can tackle many problems .
What we value most of all is the internal liberal debate .
This is the freedom which allows us to articulate these problems within a spectrum of views which is relevant to their solution .
I can unequivocally declare here that Tomas Garrigue Masaryk has said that ' democracy is discussion ' .
I am keen to follow in the footsteps of the first Czechoslovak president ; I remain absolutely open to this discussion .
I thank you for your attention today and look forward to meeting you again .
President of the Commission . - Madam President , this has been a very interesting discussion , and I am encouraged by the common understanding of the challenges and generally speaking by the support given to the Czech presidency .
Once again I reiterate my wish to work loyally , constructively and in the best spirit , with our Czech friends .
Their success is also Europe 's success .
As some of you have underlined , this is the last presidency before the European Parliament elections .
I think it is very important that during these months we all show how relevant all our institutions are to the wellbeing , prosperity and solidarity of our citizens .
It is very important to communicate , and that cannot be done only by the European institutions or only by Member States .
We have to do it together in a true spirit of partnership , so a lot of what will happen during these months will be very important for the future of Europe , and also for the respect accorded to our institutions all over Europe .
I would like to use this time to answer some concrete questions put to me , specifically on energy .
Yes , we need an urgent revision of the Gas Security Directive .
The Commission said so when it presented its strategic energy review last November , and we are working flat-out to put the legislative proposal before the European Parliament and the Council as soon as possible .
Yes , we need more solidarity and more progress in terms of energy security in Europe .
That was the substance of our strategic energy review presented very recently .
I would like to use this time once again to ask all Member States and European institutions to work more actively on the mechanisms of European energy solidarity .
Yes , we also need to accelerate investment in energy infrastructure , interconnectors and energy efficiency .
That is why it is so crucial to get the EUR 5 billion of the Community budget allocated for these purposes .
I appeal to you , both Parliament and the Czech presidency , to translate this into practice as soon as possible .
Yes , economic recovery needs to be coupled with smart green growth if we want to come out of this crisis stronger .
Our proposals are on the table to accelerate the use of Structural Funds for these purposes .
Funds are needed for energy efficiency and for energy interconnections , and by the coordination of national stimulus programmes we will align national efforts in this direction as well , in line with European Council conclusions .
Let me also say that getting through this economic crisis and putting Europe back on the path towards sustainable growth will also require respect for Community rules on equal opportunities .
Europe needs to continue facilitating the participation of both men and women in the economy , as well as helping combine family and professional life .
A word also on the Treaty of Lisbon , which many of you mentioned : we need this Treaty more than ever , ratified by all Member States .
Yes , we need to respect all national ratification processes , but when a government , on behalf of a state , signs a treaty it takes a solemn commitment to put it into force .
( Applause )
Many of you spoke about the Czech presidency and how important it is .
As some of you said - Mr Nassauer , Mr Brok and others - the very fact that we have a Czech presidency is in itself an event of great importance .
It is the first time a former Warsaw Pact country has assumed the responsibility of chairing the European Council .
When you think about it , what a great achievement it is , 20 years after the fall of the Iron Curtain , to have the Czech Republic at the head of the European Council , and to have Prime Minister Topolánek and Vice-Prime Minister Vondra cooperating in this responsibility .
I have full confidence in what you are going to do .
Let me share with you an experience I had last year during the Portuguese presidency .
Prime Minister Socrates of Portugal and I were in Zittau , on the border between the Czech Republic , Poland and Germany , and I saw the emotion Prime Minister Topolánek was feeling at that moment .
That border , which once separated us in Europe , between the two sides of Europe , is now a free point of circulation among Europeans from all those countries .
It was a great moment and a great achievement , of which we should be proud .
That is why I really believe that it is important to defend our values to make a success of this presidency .
Some of you said it is important that the Czech Republic be successful , because it is a small country .
I am sorry but the Czech Republic is not a small country , even in European terms .
In fact , it is sometimes a sign of an inferiority complex to consider some of our Member States as small countries .
Let me tell you that - as Paul-Henri Spaak , one of the founders of our European project , said - in the European Union there are no longer small and big countries ; if you like , none of them is big : the problem is that some of them have not yet noticed it .
In fact , when we look at the rest of the world - when we see the dimension of America 's strength in terms of defence and in technology ; when we see the huge geographical dimension of Russia ; when we see the huge demographic dimension of China and India - can we say that there are any big countries in Europe ?
There are no longer big countries in Europe .
All are great in terms of dignity .
For the European Commission all the Member States have exactly the same dignity , but if we want to be big in the world we need the European Union to be strong .
We need to act together ; we need to use the leverage of all our institutions and , if we act together like that , we will make a difference in the world for good .
That is why we need the Treaty of Lisbon .
That is why we need a common purpose .
That is why we need strong institutions .
I wish the Czech presidency all the best .
( Sustained applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will follow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Some of us are very much looking forward to being addressed by President Klaus in February .
How refreshing it will be to hear someone who has the intelligence and honesty to doubt the ideological orthodoxies of ever-closer European Union and climate change .
President Klaus has been quite right to compare the European Union to the old Soviet Union .
My friend , the heroic Russian dissident , Vladimir Bukovsky says of the European Union , ' I have lived in your future and it doesn 't work . '
Mr Bukovsky is quite right , the EU is a form of soft communism .
We can only hope that the Czech presidency will be a little more sceptical of the great European project than some previous presidencies .
One thing that the Czechs can do is to delay ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon until after the second Irish referendum .
Then when the Irish vote ' no ' again to the failed constitution the Czechs can acknowledge the democratic decision of the only EU nation allowed a referendum and stop the Treaty in its tracks by withholding their ratification .
Let 's hope that President Klaus is the man to do that .
Thank you , Madam President , and I offer my sincere wishes to the Czech Republic for success in its work .
The signs do not augur well at the beginning of its Presidency : its fundamental Euro-scepticism , which has underpinned many Czech acts in the recent past ( such as the failure , to date , to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon ) , offers no comfort even to optimists .
The statement on Gaza made by the President-in-Office of the Council has also demonstrated a lack of institutional feeling : positions ought to be agreed with the other 26 Member States .
Additionally , the failure to meet with the Socialist Group in the European Parliament sends out a very bad signal : it has never before happened that a President-in-Office of the Council has not found the time to hold a dialogue with a large political group in Parliament .
Madam President , we hope that we will be surprised by effective , authoritative action : in that case , at the end of the six months , we will have the intellectual honesty to give credit for it .
The Czech Presidency put forward three priorities : economy , energy and foreign relations .
Thus , the presentation of the programme of the Czech Presidency followed lines that were already known , but it had some peculiarities , specifically with regard to the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Czech Prime Minister affirmed the need to respect the sovereignty of the Irish citizens .
He even considered that , if there had been a referendum in the Czech Republic , perhaps the result would have been identical to what occurred in Ireland , accepting that the draft Treaty might be rejected .
In relation to the gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine , he considered both countries were to blame , underlining economic , strategic and political reasons for their actions , and he supported a greater intervention of the European Union , but he was not very forthcoming with specific proposals .
With regard to socio-economic issues , he did not put forward anything different , which means maintaining the neo-liberal positions , the proposals rejected by the European Parliament on the Working Time Directive , the Stability and Growth Pact and the neo-liberal Lisbon Strategy , and he ignored the economic crisis and its serious consequences in the social dimension .
Moreover , in relation to the war crimes that Israel continues to commit against the Palestinians , he said virtually nothing , which we deplore .
in writing . - ( PL ) The Czech presidency has come at a difficult time for the entire EU .
The financial crisis , the energy crisis and economic recession are more trying than at any time in its fifty-six year history .
And to add to this we have the June elections to the European Parliament and the latest military conflict in the Gaza strip .
I personally regret that the Czechs do not have the proper tools for the job .
I regret that the Treaty of Lisbon reforming the EU is not a reality .
That is the reason for the lack of a common foreign policy : there is no system for making decisions , and the Member States are not bound by a principle of energy solidarity .
And President Vaclav Klaus ' views on climate change , EU reform and the euro , which are bizarre , if not hostile , have a great deal to answer for in this respect .
I therefore appeal to the Czech government and premier Mirek Topolánek , to constrain Klaus ' public declarations on EU affairs as much as possible .
This is for his own good , as well as in our common interest .
The Czech " three E " priorities - economy , energy and external relations - are Europe 's needs in a nutshell .
I therefore believe that Mr Schwarzenberg 's promise that the Czechs will significantly " push European matters forward " , and that they " will not be bottom of the class " will come true .
I wholeheartedly wish our southern neighbour a successful presidency !
in writing . - The Economic Recovery Plan - agreed in December - is a major step in the right direction to cope with the current economic slowdown .
It must now see its concrete aspects implemented rapidly and effectively .
In this respect , the Union ought to maximise its efforts in facilitating access to available resources .
We should , therefore - while restoring confidence in our financial market - particularly improve and simplify measures in order to accelerate implementation of structural and cohesion funds .
Cohesion policy is the greatest instrument of solidarity in the Union , and its role in tackling the negative effects of a global crisis of this scale is , of course , essential .
Moreover , let me welcome among the priorities of the new Czech presidency the will to initiate discussion on the redefinition of the Less Favoured Areas parallel to the Commission communication .
A better delimitation of these areas will indeed help in better targeting their needs and foster their development potentials and thus work in line with the objectives of social , territorial and economic convergence throughout the Union .
We need indeed to further our efforts to avoid the negative consequences of the crisis not only on the economy but on our citizens , mainly the most vulnerable ones .
in writing . - ( PL ) I would like to thank President Mirek Topolánek for setting out the priorities of the Czech Presidency .
The three ' E 's - the Economy , Energy and Europe in the world , which will constitute the framework of the Community presidency , will suffer from additional , unplanned external events : Gaza and gas .
The problem of the Gaza conflict has political dimensions .
However , it has now become so militarised that humanitarian issues have now come to the fore .
People are dying there !
Not just the Hamas militants who triggered the military conflict , but innocent children , women and men .
The EU must in conjunction with the UN do everything possible to find a solution to this bloody conflict .
Jews and Palestinians can live peacefully side by side .
Please be unrelenting in your efforts to achieve this aim .
The gas crisis has hit many European states .
The dispute between two companies , one Russian and the other Ukrainian , has snowballed into a dispute between the two countries .
Now many citizens in many countries are suffering considerably as a result , and their energy supplies have been cut in the middle of a bitter winter .
It has also resulted in significant economic losses , as the gas is also needed in manufacturing .
It is therefore high time to set up an EU-wide oil and gas system benefiting from a variety of sources .
We also have to urgently look for new sources of energy , and use modernised methods of coal gasification .
Poland is taking steps of this kind .
I cordially wish our Czech friends success in bringing the aims of the EU to fruition .
The Czech Presidency finds itself in a difficult situation .
It is hard to take the reins of power for the first time after a Presidency which , well established as one of the engines of Europe , has already steered the ship of the Union several times .
Their situation is difficult since the financial crisis is only now making its effects felt all over Europe .
And it is difficult because they have to contend not only with the extreme Eurosceptics within Parliament but also with high-ranking political representatives of their home country .
Nonetheless , the programme of the Czech Presidency seems to be one that tries to keep the European Union well balanced .
With the lofty aim of the motto ' Europe Without Borders ' , it places at the forefront not only the problem of how to manage the economic crisis but also how to affirm effectively the EU 's longer-term principles .
The Czech Republic is the first country in the Eastern-Central European region incorporating all of the common characteristics of new EU Member States .
Consequently , the programme of the Czech Presidency attempts a proportional representation of the requirements of new Member States .
We are delighted that the Czech Presidency 's response to the economic crisis focuses on developing the internal labour force and promoting vertical mobility .
At the same time I would draw the attention of the Presidency particularly to the need for improving the situation of the most underdeveloped regions and of the Roma minority .
Indeed , these are social and economic problems at a European level that transcend borders .
Besides making use of immigrant workers , the ageing of the EU population and the resulting social tensions can be managed in the long run by developing the internal labour force represented by those with uncompetitive knowledge and skills .
I want to congratulate the Czech Republic on taking over the Presidency of the European Union .
I would also like to express my appreciation of the fact that it has been possible to draw up an 18-month programme as part of a cooperation process together with France , which previously held the Presidency of the European Union , and Sweden , which will take over the EU Presidency in the second half of this year .
The challenges facing this presidency just as it has started , such as the war in Gaza , the disruption to the supply of Russian gas , not to mention the global economic crisis , have confirmed the fact that the priorities identified by the Czech Republic are totally relevant .
Of the three priorities announced by the Czech Presidency , Energy , Economy and Europe in the World , I would like to refer to the energy aspect .
I personally feel that Europe needs a united energy policy so that excessive dependency can be avoided on resources from a single area .
In this respect , I support the need to develop relations with new suppliers , as well as the importance of investing in unconventional technologies for generating energy .
We need to improve the transport infrastructure and devote proper attention to building the route for the Nabucco gas pipeline .
I also believe that it is essential to shorten the procedures for rolling out projects aimed at finding alternative and unconventional sources of energy .
in writing . - The failure of the European Council to date to address the real issues behind the Irish ' no ' to the Treaty of Lisbon make it possible that there will be a second ' no ' vote .
Realising that a second ' no ' vote is a realistic prospect the Czech presidency is looking to prepare for the eventuality that the Treaty of Lisbon will not enter into force .
It is looking to prepare a ' plan B ' for the selection of a new Commission under the rules of the Treaty of Nice .
The reported idea of selecting a Commission of 26 Commissioners plus a High Representative for European Foreign and Security Policy from the 27th Member State is just one possible way in which this issue could be dealt with .
People across the EU recognise that the Treaty of Lisbon is not the panacea that many of its most fervent supporters present it as being .
On the contrary : it could serve to deepen the economic and social problems facing us .
On the crisis in Gaza , the response of the Czech presidency is very far from what is required .
The EU must take concerted action to uphold the rights of beleaguered Palestinians and to try and end the bloodshed .
The Czech Republic , which took over the Presidency of the European Union Council on 1 January 2009 , is facing , along with other states which joined the EU in 2004 and later , problems linked to the precarious state , in terms of thermal insulation , of a large number of residential buildings .
We should bear in mind the following : the significant energy savings and reduction in heating costs paid by citizens which could be achieved by renovating the heating systems in these buildings , as well as the limited opportunities to use structural and cohesions funds to invest in this area .
I think therefore that the Czech Presidency of the Council should include this issue among its priorities .
Secondly , with regard to the European arrest warrant , the Czech Republic has made a statement , based on Article 32 of the Framework Decision , to the effect that it applies the surrender procedure ' only for acts committed after 1 November 2004 ' .
Similar regulations apply in other European states too .
Cases such as this undermine citizens ' belief in the effectiveness of European policies in combating crime .
The Czech Republic holding the Presidency of the Council provides a good opportunity to re-examine these statements .
in writing . - ( EL ) The statements by the Czech Prime Minister and President of the European Commission and the debate in general in the European Parliament on the programme of the Czech Presidency of the EU are the sequel to the single anti-grassroots policy of the EU under previous presidencies .
They have sent a message that the attack by capital on the workers , on the grassroots classes , will continue unabated .
The imperialist role of the EU will be strengthened , as the Czech Presidency took pains to demonstrate the moment it assumed office by supporting the criminal imperialist attack by Israel on the Gaza Strip and legitimising the barbaric slaughter of the Palestinian people , with the full support of the USA and in keeping with the US / NATO / EE plan for the ' New Middle East ' .
The programme of the Czech Presidency signals continued intensification of the anti-grassroots attacks by the ΕU in order to shift the impact of the crisis in the capitalist system on to the working class and poor grassroots classes , an increase in EU aggression against the people and imperialist intervention and improvements to its capability for military intervention around the world .
The people need to respond to EU aggression by counterattacking .
Resistance , disobedience and breaking from the reactionary policy of the EU , from the EU itself , are the way forward for the people .
I would like to begin my speech by raising again the idea which I spoke about on Monday during the opening of the plenary session .
You are holding the presidency during a period which has a special significance for us .
This year marks 20 years since the fall of the Iron Curtain .
I was saying on Monday that for us , but especially for the millions of citizens who have sent us here , these 20 years have marked a period of waiting , to some extent , and acceptance , to another extent .
Perhaps it was normal for us not to be able to escape more quickly from the burden of the 50 years which separated us from the rest of Europe .
I wanted to make an intervention to congratulate you on including the third priority , Europe in the World , but especially for dealing with the Eastern Partnership as a priority .
The histories of our two countries , Romania and the Czech Republic , have two strong features in common : 1968 and then the Prague Spring , which represented for us Romanians , subjected to the most cruel Communist dictatorship , a ray of light which guided us along the path to freedom .
As a Romanian MEP , I would like to ask you to give proper , specific substance to the Eastern Partnership .
There are millions of citizens in this region who need to rekindle this hope by symbolically going through again now , in the forthcoming months , the events of the Prague Spring .
Both you and I have the opportunity to understand perfectly the weight of this expectation .
in writing . - ( PL ) We now have six months of the Czech presidency of the European Union ahead of us , a presidency which , as is now clear , will not be easy .
The two major crises we have had to deal with in recent weeks show us that good leadership of the European Union involves not just carefully prepared programmes , but above all the ability to react quickly and appropriately to difficult problems .
That is something every Member State preparing to take on the EU presidency should remember .
The Czech presidency follows on from a very dynamic and ambitious French presidency .
It is unlikely that no comparisons will be drawn between the two .
However , in my view the Czech authorities are well prepared for the job , and the Czech presidency will be an example of how even a small country that has only recently joined the Community is capable of providing it proper leadership .
And not even political divisions in the national arena should stop them .
I would like to appeal to the presidency to devote some of its attention to everyday problems .
Large-scale , ambitious plans are important and necessary , but very often far off the radar of ordinary citizens .
And it is important that today , on the eve of the Parliamentary elections , the people of the European Union must feel that the Community was created for it , for its citizens , that it is there to improve their daily lives .
So grand visions - yes , but through the prism of everyday life .
I wish you success !
The Czech Republic is taking the helm at the EU at a time when Europe is facing the challenges of the global financial crisis , the disrupted Russian gas supplies and the Gaza conflict .
I believe that the Czech presidency 's ambitious programme will be achieved through close cooperation between the European Parliament and the European Commission .
Europe must continue to take an active stance on all the items on the EU citizens ' agenda .
At the moment , the issue of energy security is particularly topical and the efforts of all the Member States need to be galvanised .
The disruption of Russian gas supplies to European consumers in sub-zero temperatures , which has paralysed Europe , adds a new dimension to the concept of energy independence .
This crisis situation imposes the need to reduce Member States ' dependency on Russian gas supplies and to look for alternatives .
The citizens of a united Europe are expecting the Czech presidency to take an active stance and get involved in resolving this problem , which has long since gone beyond a trade dispute between Russia and Ukraine .
I wish the presidency every success .
I welcome the fact that the Czech Presidency has specified the energy issue as a priority .
The unacceptable events of the last few weeks concerning the security of the supply of natural gas to certain EU Member States have demonstrated yet again the need for a European energy policy , implemented through clearly defined European projects , supported by European funds .
The EU 's internal natural gas market can only function normally by rapidly developing storage facilities for natural gas , including liquefied gas , and by speeding up the implementation of the Nabucco project .
in writing . - ( FR ) I should like to send my best wishes to the Czech Government , which is presiding over the Union in delicate conditions , due to the complexity of its national political situation and to a particularly worrying international context .
The Czech Presidency must be determined and dynamic , just as the presidency embodied by Nicolas Sarkozy was over the last six months , in order to work actively in favour of an immediate ceasefire in Gaza and to maintain a strong political momentum , on the basis of the preparatory work programme drafted jointly with France and Sweden , which will succeed it at the head of the Council .
In the face of the economic crisis , the coordinated recovery plan adopted by the 27 should be applied without delay , to protect industry , competitiveness and European jobs .
Europe holds a vital part of the solution to the crisis , and the Czech Presidency must help to prove this .
I welcome the Czech Prime Minister 's commitment to have the Treaty of Lisbon ratified by his country by the end of this presidency .
Of the economic , diplomatic and institutional crises weakening Europe , the last one is the only one whose outcome depends solely on Europeans .
The Czech Presidency must enable the Union to achieve this success , in order to guarantee future prospects to our fellow citizens .
1 .
Security features and biometrics in passports and travel documents (
After the vote on the report by Carlos Coelho
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make a point of order .
You informed us that , at the request of the journalists , an estimable group , you would announce all the votes , but it seems to me that Parliament 's rules ought to be made by parliamentarians , not journalists .
I would like to know whether this is the association of blind journalists , because the journalists can very well see the outcome of the vote on the screens .
In any case , deaf journalists may have some difficulty if you announce the results .
( Applause )
Mr Speroni , I have some difficulty in expressing my own personal opinion of the difficulties of journalists ' work .
Since this request has been made to the Bureau at this time , I think that a reply - and probably I personally share your views - a reply should be given by the Bureau ; it has already been decided that the issue of the reply to be made will be on the agenda of the next Bureau meeting .
Mr President , I agree with the position that Mr Speroni has put forward .
I recognise the difficulty you are in , but I would suggest that he is right .
The screens do record every vote .
To read out every amendment result would be very time-consuming - especially with a vote like we have today .
I would suggest that you ask the Bureau to remit it to the relevant committee , and we will consider it for a future voting session - if that is acceptable to the House .
( Applause )
As I have already said , the issue will be referred to the Bureau , precisely so that it can give a definitive answer .
We will therefore move on to the vote .
2 .
Public contracts in the fields of defence and security (
3 .
Dangerous substances and preparations ( dichloromethane ) (
4 .
Authorisation to ratify the Work in Fishing Convention , 2007 , of the International Labour Organisation ( Convention 188 ) (
5 .
Situation of fundamental rights in the European Union ( 2004-2008 ) (
Before the vote on the first part of paragraph 32
Mr President , it is to complete the text of this amendment .
After the text which reads ' 12 December 2006 ' , we simply wish to add : ' and on 4 and 17 December 2008 ' .
This is because there were decisions by the Court on these later dates , and it would not be correct to mention the decision in 2006 without mentioning the latest findings of the Court in December 2008 .
Mr President , according to my voting list it appears that paragraph 36 was withdrawn , so I wonder whether we should have voted on that at all .
Amendment 8 has been withdrawn , and as a result you cannot vote on paragraph 36 .
- Before the vote on paragraph 161
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on paragraph 166 I would just like to point out that the original English text is the authentic version , because there are too many translations which completely distort the meaning ; for example , the Italian translation speaks of ' morte decorosa ' [ decent death ] .
I will not go into the details , but the authentic version is the English version .
Thank you for reminding us of this .
I will mention it again at the appropriate moment without giving the floor again to Mr Cappato , because now we must vote on paragraph 161 ; we still have to vote on the original text of the paragraph , having rejected the amendment .
6 .
Maritime Labour Convention (
7 .
Development of the UN Human Rights Council , including the role of the EU (
8 .
Public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
I would like to inform the Chamber that during the vote , at the express request of the association of parliamentary journalists , for each set of results we must also expressly indicate the number of votes for and against and the number of abstentions .
We had wished to simplify things for you , but it is not possible .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report because it calls for a reform in the interests of protecting children , also introducing measures to increase the security of passports .
All in all , therefore , it is a package that takes forward the fight against child trafficking and for greater protection of children .
- ( CS ) I consider it necessary to add biometrics to the security features of travel documents .
However , in addition to improving the security of European citizens , which is our primary objective , we must also consider the reverse side of the coin , which is protecting the privacy of our citizens .
I will strive to ensure that the implementation of this legislation and application at a national level does not lead to bureaucratic difficulties , or even the misuse of data , and that includes misuse by third countries outside the EU .
I would like to point out the need to promote greater involvement from Europol and Frontex in this matter ; only a high degree of cooperation between the law enforcement authorities of the Member States will produce the desired effect of making Europe a safe home for us all .
I am glad that children from the age of 12 years will have their own passport .
This measure will reduce child abuse by organised criminals across borders , which is another reason why I support this apparently controversial topic .
( NL ) Mr President , I was happy to add my emphatic support to the Coelho report on biometrics in EU passports , because , if nothing else , this is a first step in the fight against the very many abuses and forgeries of passports .
This is a form of harmonisation which , to say the least , we can endorse , as it is a useful and even necessary measure , certainly in the Schengen countries .
When a system of open internal borders is put in place , the larger external border should be protected as effectively as possible , of course .
This report is a step in the right direction , because the external border is insufficiently protected at the moment .
I have one reservation , though .
Better passports alone are not enough .
Every year , hundreds of thousands of non-European aliens enter our continent , Europe .
These are legal immigrants , semi-legal immigrants but also illegal immigrants .
My country , Belgium , received more than 70 000 non-European aliens last year , in addition to an unknown number of illegal aliens .
This is a tidal wave that we have to stop , and better passports alone will not solve this matter .
( BG ) Thank you , Mr President .
I voted against the Coelho report for two reasons .
Firstly , I feel extremely concerned about citizens ' rights and about the fact that collecting biometric data will pose a significant threat to citizens ' security , particularly in terms of their freedom , and also the basic human right of freedom of movement will be infringed .
But what concerns me even more is that in my country it will be the second time during the last ten years that new personal identity documents have been introduced .
On a personal note , it will actually be the third time in ten years that I have had personal identity documents issued .
You might find this amusing , but in Bulgaria people are on such low incomes that the additional burden on their resources which they have to spend on buying new personal identity documents is simply unethical and immoral for these people .
When we are talking about pensioners who receive BGN 100 , which is equivalent to a pension of EUR 50 , it is not right to charge them EUR 20 to have new personal identity documents issued to them .
This is why I voted against the Coelho report , because I feel that it is highly inappropriate for my country .
Mr President , I just want to put on the record that I voted against the Cappato report in the end because I believe there is a better report due before Parliament which will deal with these matters .
I also want to say that Parliament does need to do something in relation to our records when there are Members of Parliament who have been here for over four and a half years , who have drawn a salary for all of that time , and who have spoken for less time than Mr Burke , who has been in the Parliament for six months .
I think it is time we drew attention to this .
There are people who do not participate in this Parliament , in its committees or in its plenary .
Some of them are members of small groups .
They come in here and get speaking time before they rush off to the airport and spend their time in our national Member States , instead of being out here , telling people how awful democracy is in the European Union .
Well , democracy is awful in the European Union if Members of this Parliament who do not turn up here can be paid a salary to continue with this sort of flagrant abuse of democracy .
I want to put that on the record , Mr President .
I believe that when we are reforming , when we are making documents available , when we are ensuring that there is greater transparency , we should take steps to show which parliamentarians are participating in the work of Parliament and which are not .
- ( CS ) The European arms market operates inefficiently because it is fragmented .
Today we have created a space for public procurement in this sector while respecting the exemptions for strategic reasons under Article 273 of the Treaty of Establishment .
On the Committee , I have worked to end the waste of public funds brought about by opaque military contracts .
In the past , the national interest clause was also abused in the case of public contracts for the army which clearly had nothing to do with the quality of security provided .
I could name , off the top of my head , works contracts , catering and transport services .
This proposal will save money that can subsequently be invested in research and technology to protect us more effectively against present and future threats .
Mr President , I am opposed to this report because of the threat which I perceive it poses to governments and firms that have invested hugely in defence R & D and which now find themselves robbed of return through the development and production phase .
Under this proposed directive , procurement contracts are now required to be opened up to European competition , leaving a defence company - even a country - with no means of protecting its international property rights and jobs .
Given that several military defence companies in the United Kingdom have leading-edge R & D , the threat of this report is a major concern .
My unease is heightened by the recognition that a driving motivation in this report is to bolster EU integration and the European security and defence policy , rather than prioritising tangible economic benefit .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will try to be briefer than usual ; I voted for the Lambsdorff report , which takes a step forward on common security and defence .
I wonder , however , and I ask you too : when will we finally have a truly European defence , a truly European army , a real opportunity to save money and be able to defend ourselves as a united Europe ?
I hope that it will be very soon indeed , Mr President !
In this case , it is not for me to give an immediate response , which would be complicated .
Let us move on to further explanations of vote , this time on the Schlyter report .
- ( CS ) I supported the report on dangerous substances and chemicals , namely dichloromethane , making it possible to restrict this carcinogenic substance in paint strippers , even though provision has been made for exemptions under strict conditions .
I am satisfied that the exemptions will not be used in practice since there are safe alternatives that not only consumers , but also professional users , will prefer to choose in the future .
Mr President , some substances are so dangerous that they must be completely banned or have their use confined to severely restricted uses , surrounded by the strictest health and safety precautions .
DCM is one of these substances and must be taken out of circulation .
- ( CS ) I applaud the international agreement which will establish new employment conditions for workers in the fisheries sector .
Fishermen face the highest incidence of serious occupational accidents and deaths .
I would just appeal to the Council and the Commission to do their utmost to ratify the Convention much earlier than 2012 .
Please note in the Minutes that my voting equipment failed and that I did , of course , vote for this report .

- ( SK ) The own-initiative report from Mr Catania has prompted a significant exchange of views between political groups and members of Parliament .
The European Union is now facing very serious problems , such as the financial crisis and the energy crisis caused by the Ukrainian-Russian conflict .
This is a period when we should act together and avoid any moves that might undermine our unity .
The consequences of the crises will undoubtedly affect every citizen of the European Union , whether Slovak , Pole , Hungarian or German .
I consider the attempts to provoke quarrels between Member States , which periodically crop up in our sessions , to be a sign of ignorance of the current serious situation where EU unity is under threat .
We should concentrate more on finding solutions and on ratifying the Treaty of Lisbon in order to boost the competitiveness of the European Union .
I have repeatedly expressed the view here in the European Parliament that autonomy has no place within our common space .
The key idea of integrating EU countries must not be forgotten , not to mention ignored or rejected .
We must keep in mind Schuman 's statement that an intelligent European cannot rejoice in his neighbour 's misfortune since we are all bound by a common fate , both in good times and in bad times .
( DE ) Mr President , the Catania report is a real sham .
It contains no review whatsoever of the extent to which fundamental rights were respected in the European Union in the period from 2004 to 2008 ; it is merely a list of demands by the left wing in this House .
Its demands include the recognition of same-sex marriage in all Member States and the legalisation of drugs , euthanasia and illegal immigrants .
The Austrian People 's Party ( ÖVP ) delegation and myself reject out of hand the above demands , which were adopted by a majority , and therefore we - myself included - voted against this report .
- ( SK ) I voted for the report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union 2004-2008 .
I made my support conditional upon the rejection of the original draft wording in Article 49 concerning support for territorial and regional autonomy .
I consider this to be a clear rejection of the attempts by provocateurs and conspirators at speculating about the status quo .
The European Parliament does not , in other words , accept games with territorial and regional autonomy .
This is a very valuable conclusion from today 's plenary of the European Parliament and I think we are all to be congratulated on it .
- ( CS ) Mr President , I also voted against the adoption of this report from a Communist MEP on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union .
Nevertheless , I appreciate the fact that rapporteurs from other factions have managed to edit the text a little and that it contains some good paragraphs on the situation of minorities .
Some passages , however , are not objective .
In addition , the extent to which the report oversteps the bounds for a document mapping a past period is unprecedented .
The report assumes an overly one-sided political view of human rights in the Union .
The report tramples on subsidiarity by dictating rules on family policy and other ethical issues , which is contrary to the founding treaties .
( MT ) I also voted against Catania 's report , because it contains at least three references to abortion as a human right .
This is something that I do not agree with and find unacceptable .
It is a pity that an important report such as this one that covers such a vast range of subjects had to incorporate elements within it that are doubtlessly beyond the competence of the European Union , and that the European Union cannot and should not try to interfere with ; namely due to the subsidiarity principle .
This is why I voted against Catania 's report .
( HU ) Mr President , with regard to the Catania report , I voted affirmatively since it eliminates previous flaws concerning minority rights .
This matter is particularly important for Hungary and for the minorities living inside as well as outside its borders .
The report emphasises the protection of minority languages and declares that the use of one 's mother tongue is one of the most fundamental rights .
Unfortunately , this has not been so in several of the new EU Member States in recent times .
The report further stresses the necessity of defining and determining national minority status .
I believe this is of vital importance for the 150 minorities in Europe .
Finally , I consider paragraph 49 to be especially important , for it affirms that self-governance is the most effective means of handling the problems of national minority communities .
The way to do that is to follow the most exemplary models in the European Union as regards personal , cultural , territorial and regional autonomies .
Mr President , a society consumed by rights is a ' give-me , give-me ' society which has lost its balance .
It is this which drives the report 's demand for equality between regularly married couples and homosexual relationships .
The natural order is man and woman .
We pervert it when we demand equality for its very antithesis .
Unfashionable as it may be , I unashamedly declare that the unnatural partnership between same-sex couples is not something to which I , as a legislator , wish to consent .
Are my rights to espouse that position any less than those of the people who demand the opposite ?
In view of the intolerant climate in which part of this debate was held , it would seem so .
I disagree with this aspect of this report .
If that subjects me to ridicule then so be it .
I would rather stand for what I think is right than to applaud that which is wrong .
( NL ) Mr President , in my career in this Parliament , I have rarely seen such a catalogue of politically correct nonsense and so-called progressive platitudes as in the Catania report .
What takes the biscuit , though , is the fact that a report on so-called fundamental rights is de facto based on the Treaty of Lisbon , a treaty that was rejected in referendums , no less , and has currently no legal basis whatsoever .
What arrogance !
I wonder if fundamental rights might perhaps not apply to the European citizens , but only apply to the eurocracy .
Moreover , there is one fundamental right that is missing from this report , namely the right of people , for example people of one 's own nation , to feel at home and safe in their own country , to defend their hard-earned prosperity , to maintain their language , their culture , their traditions and their laws .
Now that would be a novelty in this temple of political correctness .
Parliament has once again made an utter fool of itself by approving the Catania report by an overwhelming majority .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on fundamental rights , although I voted against in the final vote , I voted for paragraph 81 , which I am in favour of .
In this paragraph , my friend , Mr Catania , who is looking at me at this moment from his seat , states that he calls on the Member States to do all they can to facilitate and improve access by young people , the elderly and the disabled to the labour market .
Giusto Catania - who lives up to his name in being 100 % just - must have thought , even if he did not state it in writing , that access should be improved not only to work , but also to benefits , since the elderly are mentioned .
Therefore benefits for young people , the disabled and the elderly are relevant .
I am sure - I see that he agrees - that young people also receive benefits as young people and then work when they are old .
I see that he is applauding .
I think that you too are in agreement , but since my observations go on the Internet I would like to make it clear that I have said this to gently point out that the elderly too have a right to benefits .
Mr President , in the Catania report many in this House have , once again , tried to use human rights as an excuse to promote abortion , despite the fact that abortion denies millions of babies yearly the most important human right - life , the human right on which all other rights depend .
Further , as an Irish MEP and voter , it is interesting to note that this report and the amendments link the Treaty of Lisbon and the Charter of Fundamental Rights with the legislation of abortion in the EU .
Mr President , at the outset can I ask the services to note that on paragraph 31 the first part of my vote should have been in favour .
I suggest that this report could have done more for areas of disability that need more work .
On that note , however , I am happy that Parliament chose to support my Amendment 42 which urges the Commission to make sure that money goes only to Member States who meet the criteria of the UN Convention when it comes to deinstitutionalisation .
This is a key issue for me and for many people in this House .
There are many issues in this report - as others have said - that are for subsidiarity , and not for the European Union , which does not legislate on abortion and should not and will not be legislating on abortion .
So I could not support the overall report .
Instead , I abstained because I believe the disability amendment is important for those of us who care for those who do not speak , have no voice and are not listened to .
- ( SK ) The Catania report covers many human rights issues .
I agree with some of the previous speakers and like them I want to express my fundamental disagreement with this report because of one key problem : the failure to approve key amendments which would have corrected what was originally a bad report .
The report retains references to ' so-called ' sexual health and sexual rights , which , according to the definition of , for example , the World Health Organization , explicitly include the right to abortion and this is something that cannot be referred to in EU Community Law or forced upon Member States .
As a medical doctor I defend human life and human dignity from conception onward , and therefore I did not vote for this controversial text , which , moreover , fails to respect the principle of subsidiarity .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with what Mr Pirker said , and therefore I do not need to spend any more time on that .

I believe that Mr Catania has written about the wrong subject ; this report should not even have reached the Chamber , because the official services ought to check whether a report addresses the subject and title assigned , or whether it is something else entirely .
This report is something else entirely , and does not , in fact , refer to the title and mandate given to it .
With regard to the specific question , relating to paragraph 49 , I would have preferred the Chamber to have adopted the original text , with no amendment .
I voted against the report in its entirety , for the precise reasons I have mentioned .
( NL ) Mr President , rarely have I voted against a report with so much conviction as today .
If we were to follow the recommendations set out in this report , we would create a dictatorship of political correctness in the European Union tomorrow , whereby , under the guise of so-called anti-racism in pompous declarations of principle , the free expression of opinion involving topics such as asylum and immigration would be curbed even further .
This report sets out to open even wider the floodgates to legal and illegal immigration into the European Union , and fails to place the citizen 's right to safety at the heart of its policy , but considers instead that it is the rights of criminals that should be recognised as so-called fundamental rights .
This is topsy-turvy land .
In a normal society , rights and duties go hand in hand .
In this bulky report , though , I cannot find a trace of duty on the part of aliens to integrate in our European society .
Quite the reverse : only we Europeans are targeted ad nauseam .
Well , our citizens are sick to death of the stigmatising finger-wagging from the European mandarins that is only aimed at them .
Mr President , there is much in the Catania report that I take issue with .
Firstly , I do not accept that it is the business of the European Union to bestow any rights whatsoever on us - in fact , history teaches us that the European Union has done precisely the opposite .
I also do not accept that the Charter of Fundamental Rights - which is a basic political document , concocted as part of the failed European Constitution - should be incorporated into European law , and particularly not incorporated into British law .
I am very much opposed to the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I reject the absolutist approach to human rights .
I would say that I am not opposed in principle to the recognition of same-sex partnerships but , again , this is not a matter for the European Union : this is a matter for the parliaments of individual Member States to determine on their territory .
Given that fundamental list of objections , I voted against this report .
Mr President , the experience of many ages teaches us that paper rights on their own are no adequate guarantors of civic freedoms .
The rights that are spelt out in the European Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms are not so very different from those adumbrated in the constitutions of , say , East Germany or the USSR , but as the citizens of those unhappy polities discovered , paper rights in themselves are worthless in the absence of adequate mechanisms of parliamentary government .
There is no crisis of human rights in the European Union , but there is a crisis of democratic legitimacy .
Allow me to suggest that one way to ameliorate that crisis would be to keep faith with our voters and put the Treaty of Lisbon , as we promised , to a series of referendums .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
( PL ) Mr President , all children have the right to the love of both their parents .
Even if the parents ' marriage falls apart , it is the good of the child , and not the ' discretion ' of civil servants that should decide on the child 's contacts with its parents .
Children have the right to speak with their parents in their mother tongue .
If the parents are of different nationalities , they should have the right to speak in both of them .
However , the Jugendamt is acting against the interests of children from mixed marriages by promptly restricting access to the non-German parent .
The Committee on Petitions has recorded over 200 complaints in this matter .
That is why I supported Amendment 24 .
Its rejection has led to my final vote against a report that negates the right to life through pro-abortion legislation and breaks the principle of subsidiarity .
Mr President , the UK Independence Party is opposed to racism , female genital mutilation , the criminalisation of homosexuality and prejudice against foreigners , wherever in the world that may occur .
However , the British enjoy perfectly good human rights under our own law and we do not need the protection of the European Union .
The EU is undemocratic and anti-democratic and it is not therefore a suitable guardian of anybody 's human rights .
We would also like to remind Parliament that family law is a Member State competence and is not an area of EU jurisdiction .
The issue of whether drug abusers should face criminal charges is a matter for Member State law and the EU should not seek to undermine and replace the judicial systems of Member States .
Therefore the UK Independence Party MEPs voted against this report .
Mr President , when it comes to reports like these , I often talk to different voluntary and community groups from within my constituency , where you can gain a great deal of knowledge from other people 's experiences and contacts .
I also regularly try to gauge the opinion of other MEPs across the political spectrum and from different countries , to try and understand the views and problems experienced by others .
I fully concur with the sentiments expressed by my colleagues , Mr Hannan and Mr Callanan .

However , on issues such as the ones contained in this report , I like to speak to Members like Mr Allister , who , whilst not from my political party , is a hard-working and pragmatic Member in this place ; his counsel is often wise and he is someone with whom I know I can agree to disagree in a civilised way - as I do on what he just said .
With reports like these - where you can cherry-pick the many different issues to determine how you vote on them - it becomes impossible to find a dividing line as to whether you should vote for or against , and so I copped out - I abstained .
I apologise .
( HU ) Mr President , the report we have just adopted , entitled ' On the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union ' , is comprehensive and represents a breakthrough in several aspects .
Its presentation of children 's rights and basic social rights merits special attention .
I deem it exceptionally good that at long last it takes a correct approach to the problems and rights of traditional national minorities , laying down the principles of self-governance and language use , areas in which the Union has been quite late in creating norms .
This is why I supported and fought for the adoption of this report , and this is why the Hungarian delegation of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats also voted for it , in spite of several debatable adopted paragraphs which we cannot agree with , as we consider it unacceptable to regulate certain issues at EU level .
( HU ) Mr President , I apologise that I did not sign up , I did not know .
As a clergyman and member of a Hungarian minority subject to discrimination , willing to compromise if necessary , I voted in good conscience for the Catania report on fundamental rights , as I consider it a significant step forward in many respects , for instance as regards social rights .
I wish to express my special appreciation for the article on minority rights , which could form the basis and starting point for an EU legal framework for the protection of minorities .
I agree with what has been said by Mrs Kinga Gál .
Compromise was needed because I must disagree with certain points , for instance with the paragraph on euthanasia or the questions regarding homosexuality .
I reject the notion that religious leaders should be restricted in their freedom of conscience and religion concerning homosexuality .
I regret that paragraph 49 has failed to include statements on traditional minority and community rights or on territorial and regional autonomy .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
In the final vote , I voted against this report , which was worthy of support in many ways .
I voted against , because the report confuses traditional minorities and their rights with the economic migrants and forcibly relocated migrants who flooded into my country , as a result of the occupation of Latvia after the Second World War .
During the course of 50 years of occupation , the indigenous nation was watered down to 50 % and even to minority status in Latvia 's 13 largest towns and cities , including the capital city , Riga . Thank you .
Mr President , today we have just voted on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union .
It is with great regret that , together with my two Maltese colleagues in the PSE Group , we have had to abstain from voting on the report .
Although the report refers to numerous issues of fundamental human rights which are laudable , it includes other issues , such as abortion , which should never have been included in this report .
As the Maltese social representatives in the European Parliament are against abortion , we have had to vote against these particular parts of the report .
There are , indeed , other issues included in this report , such as living wills and the right to dignity at the end of life , which are sensitive issues , regarding which we have had to abstain .
That is why we abstained at the end of this vote .
I would like to thank you for this opportunity .
We will now move on to the explanations of vote on the Cappato report , having already heard Mr Mitchell .
- ( CS ) Mr President , I did not support this populist text which , in the original version , contained a number of useful provisions on greater transparency in respect of political activities within the European Union .
Unfortunately , it was amended .
I have no intention of promoting nonsense such as the disclosure of the professional and personal documents which fellow Members exchange among themselves or which they receive from nongovernmental organisations and lobby organisations .
While I do not consider such documents to be confidential , no national parliament in a civilised democracy imposes the duty to disclose professional - let alone all - correspondence .
Good .
Last but not least , Syed Kamall !
Mr President , thank you for your very kind words .
I hope to remember them evermore .
When we talk about transparency and access to EU documents , it is something that we can all agree on across the Chamber .
After all , we are only here because of the taxpayers who voted us into office and the taxpayers who fund these institutions and fund our work .
But let us be absolutely clear about this .
When we talk about transparency of documents and access to documents , let us make sure that the taxpayer has access to those documents that they really want to have access to .
Recently , group leaders from Parliament went to visit the Head of State of a democratic country , the Czech Republic .
The group leaders , who were representing Parliament , as far as we understand , insulted the President of that country .
All that a number of citizens have been asking for is for those minutes from that meeting to be published .
So let us be transparent , let us be clear and let us have respect for those who hold a different view to those who sit in this Parliament .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - One of the top security measures that have been agreed to is the issue of biometrics in passport and travel documents .
Of course this means a substantial expense running into millions of euros but one cannot compromise with security measures .
On the other hand one has to take into consideration the earnings of our people , which vary from state to state .
The issuing of an ordinary passport in Malta incurs expenditure .
Who is going to pay for the change to biometric passports : the state , the individual or a shared arrangement ?
In the European Parliament we have agreed today that those Member States in which the inclusion of children on their parents ' documents had been allowed will be obliged to issue individual documents for the children at no additional cost other than material expenses .
It would be pertinent for the Government to take note of this as it has become a policy not to make referrals when irregular tariffs and taxes are collected by Government , as has been the cases relating to the VAT on registration and past payments on satellite dishes .
in writing . - ( NL ) Common sense has prevailed in the Coelho report , and this is why I have emphatically voted in favour of it .
It is to be welcomed that the use of biometric data in passports and travel documents will become subject to stricter rules and harmonisation , especially since the abolition of Europe 's internal borders has demonstrated the need for reinforced safety controls at the external borders .
A uniform and harmonised system of biometric data , amongst other things , will enable us to fight crime more effectively .
This report makes a hesitant step in that direction .
This regulation seeks to amend the standards for security features and biometrics in passports and travel documents issued by Member States .
This is a regulation that we have disagreed with since its creation in 2004 , as it introduces the harmonisation of security mechanisms and the integration of biometric identifiers , in the context of the security policies promoted at European Union level .
This amendment has the essential objective of introducing exemptions for children under 12 years of age , a derogation that is planned to last four years , so that countries with legislation that establishes a lower age limit can keep it , provided that they observe the minimum limit of six years ( in the case of Portugal , France and Estonia ) , apart from other aspects relating to the protection and security of biometric data .
Even though the proposal establishes exemption rules for children under 12 years of age ( a decision based on merely technical issues ) , we consider that it does not deal with the fundamental issue , that is , the use of biometric data , namely of children , and its harmonisation at EU level ( and particularly as the issuing of passports comes within the competence of each Member State ) in the context of its security policy .
For these reasons we abstained .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr Coelho on security features and biometrics in passports and travel documents .
It does not make sense , however , to accept a flawed regulation unquestioningly if there are some ways in which it could be improved .
For example , it is unacceptable for different Member States to apply different rules on the age for fingerprinting children , and therefore it is important to introduce measures , particularly with regard to child trafficking , that , if not always taken jointly , are at least more comprehensive .
Ultimately , it is important to me to emphasise that biometric data may under no circumstances be used for dishonest purposes .
A strict , recurrent review of data security is therefore indispensable .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am voting for the report on the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council ( EC ) No 2252 / 2004 on standards for security features and biometrics in passports and travel documents issued by Member States .
I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal to introduce the principle of ' one person - one passport ' , so that every person has a passport with his or her biometrical data .
The situation in which a single passport can be issued to a holder and his or her children , by including their names and surnames , or containing only the biometrical data of the passport-holding parent , may be conducive to child trafficking .
I also support Mr Coelho 's initiative to allow two exemptions from mandatory fingerprinting in respect of children under the age of six and all persons who for various reasons are physically unable to give fingerprints .
I voted in favour of this report because it clarifies important points regarding the standards required for issuing biometric passports .
Furthermore , I hope that the introduction of biometric passports ( which happened in Romania on 1 January 2009 ) will result in Romania 's inclusion in the US Visa Waiver Programme and accelerate the process for its integration in the Schengen area .
However , we need to focus our attention on the reliability of biometric technologies as they have proved to be ineffective in the case of identifying children under the age of 6 .
Member States should launch shortly a new pilot project to analyse the reliability of this identification system , which will certainly help to pinpoint any errors registered in Member States .
in writing . - ( EL ) Even children must be put on file because they are considered potentially dangerous to the EU .
This is the proposal by the European Commission , the EU Council and the European Parliament .
The only difference between the proposal for a directive and the European Parliament is the age at which a child is considered dangerous .
The Commission considers that children become dangerous at six years old and must therefore give fingerprints which are incorporated in personal passports from that age , while the European Parliament , demonstrating its ' democratic sensibilities ' , considers that children must be put on file when they are slightly older , namely at 12 years of age .
This unacceptable directive , which has been approved by the supporters in the European Parliament of the one-way street in Europe , is the inevitable result of the EU 's frantic ' anti-terrorism ' policy which , in order essentially to safeguard the sovereignty of capital over the labour and grassroots movement , has dangerously christened even children as dangerous .
It would appear that the EU is making appropriate use of the experience of the Israeli army , which over-defends the ' security ' of the Israel state from Palestinian ' terrorists ' by slaughtering countless children in Gaza as we speak .
How old are the murdered Palestinian children ?
Are they six or twelve years old ?
in writing . - ( DE ) I abstained from voting on the ' Report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2252 / 2004 on standards for security features and biometrics in passports and travel documents issued by Member States ' .
This report envisages a limitation on the biometric monitoring of citizens of EU Member States in that children under the age of 12 years are excepted from the requirement to provide biometric data .
Such an exception is to be warmly welcomed .
Nevertheless , I reject biometric authentication systems out of hand .
They lead to increased police-state monitoring of citizens .
This is not the way to improve security .
As the report broadly accepts this monitoring , I could not vote in favour ; whereas rejecting it would have meant rejecting the improvement I mentioned .
That is why I abstained .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the Coelho report on security features and biometrics in passports and travel documents .
I agree with the proposal to use passports for children too , in order to combat child abduction and trafficking .
I support the minimum threshold of six years of age , but the name of the person or persons with parental responsibility for the child should be included in the document , for the reasons given above .

Finally , I agree with Mr Coelho regarding his proposal to introduce a three-year revision clause , with a view to waiting for the results of an in-depth , large-scale study examining the reliability and usefulness of fingerprints taken from children and older people : such a delicate and significant issue requires constant monitoring , so that it can be correctly handled in terms of Community law .
in writing . - ( NL ) This legislation allows fingerprints to be stored in passports / travel documents so as to allow the authenticity of the document and the holder 's identity to be verified .
I voted in favour of the changes proposed by the rapporteur .
What is positive is that the fingerprints of children under 12 can only be taken if the Member States already legislate for this .
Compared to the Commission 's and Council 's option to take the fingerprints of children as young as six , this is a step forward .
Taking fingerprints also comes at a price .
A visa will soon set you back EUR 60 .
Compulsory fingerprinting will increase that price significantly , so that a family of four who want to travel abroad will need to spend quite a bit of money before they leave .
At any rate , I take issue with the excessive use of fingerprinting or the use of biometric data .
Is this not more trouble than it is worth ?
Its efficiency has not been proven , its use is not proportionate to the desired outcome and it is also very expensive .
This is why I endorsed the amendments that improved the text , but ultimately expressed my dissatisfaction by voting against the legislative resolution .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have voted in favour of Mr Lambsdorff 's report on procurement rules in the fields of defence and security .
It is clear in the report that the Member States have sole authority for defence and national security , which we feel it is important to emphasise .
We believe that equipment , civil works and services should normally be procured in this field , too .
However , we believe that it is a natural consequence of the nature of this market that procurement cannot be carried out entirely in accordance with the rules of the directive .
These exceptions , however , should only apply when they can be justified on account of their significance in relation to security policy .
We believe that in this way we can cope with the habitual use of exemptions for protectionist reasons , which is particularly damaging to Swedish industry .
in writing . - Alexander Graf Lambsdorff has presented a proposal concerning the Commission 's ' Defence Package ' , covering procurement for both military and non-military security purposes as well as covering public contracts concluded between EU operators .
This proposal improves upon the 2004 Directive ( 2004 / 18 / EC ) currently in force by increasing flexibility , transparency and , vitally , fair competition .
The defence procurement market is a very specific one , and Mr Lambsdorff has provided a means of addressing its complex nature .
There are express exemptions for certain obligations relating to disclosure when contrary to the security concerns of the Member State .
While defence procurement remains essentially a national competence , this proposal helps create a single European market for defence and security materials through a structured legal framework .
This is a market worth EUR 90 billion annually .
Mr Lambsdorff has proposed a common position that I can support .
in writing . - ( FR ) Strengthening the competitiveness of the European defence industry , which is supposedly damaged by European markets that are too narrow and too closed in on themselves , has served as a pretext for this Directive on the opening up to competition of public contracts in this sector .
True , the text that is today being submitted to us does take account of a number of problems raised by the Commission 's initial text , such as its scope , the non-application of the WTO agreement on public contracts , the financial thresholds and confidentiality .
However , it is in keeping with the logic of Brussels , whereby no sector , not even strategic or vital ones , can be exempt from its supervision , from liberalisation or from privatisation .
It does not guarantee respect for Member States ' sovereignty , even though they alone are legally responsible for their national security .
It does not encourage the existence of far-reaching markets in Europe , where the States ' defence budgets are drastically reduced .
It does not introduce any system of Community preference , which alone would enable a true European market to emerge naturally .
It strengthens the civilian / military dichotomy , which is so specific to Europe and which has already cost us so dearly .
Above all , it puts economic and market considerations above everything else .
These serious flaws on key points are the reason for our opposition .
in writing . - ( PL ) The European defence procurement market is highly fragmented , which has a negative economic impact .
The main aim of the adopted directive is to do away with this fragmentation and to create a common defence market on the territory of the European Union , while taking account of the specific aspects of the defence market and protecting the security interests of the Member States .
The Member States have based their decisions on the premise that the current public procurement directive takes inadequate account of the specifics of public defence procurement .
This has resulted in various instruments adopted in the directive on awarding contracts , selecting bidders or contractual terms imposed by the contracting entities .
The controls built into the directive should also guarantee bidders adequate legal protection , promote transparency and non-discrimination in the award of contracts .
I believe that the regulations adopted will be an important contribution to opening the market , while taking due account of national security .
The Directive should also lead to cost optimisation , both in national budgets and on the part of industry , and ensure that the armed forces will be equipped with the best equipment available on the market .
in writing . - The Conservative Delegation has consistently supported efforts to open markets and encourage cross-border trade between Member States of the EU .
We welcome opportunities for British industry to have access to defence equipment markets that might hitherto have been closed to outside competition .
However , we regret that such positive , practical aspects are secondary to the EU 's political motive to create an integrated European defence industrial base , and to strengthen the European security and defence policy , to which our opposition has been consistent .
We have particular concerns about the negative consequences of insisting that , in spite of investment by national governments and firms in defence R & D , there should then be open competition for subsequent production contracts .
This will remove the ability to recoup R & D investment and offer no means of protecting intellectual property , jobs or export opportunities .
We are also concerned that an inward-looking European approach will be detrimental to our very necessary and fruitful defence industrial relationships with other countries - especially the US , but also Japan , Israel and other countries .
For all these reasons the Conservative Delegation abstained on the report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the report by Mr Lambsdorff on public contracts in the fields of defence and security .
The establishment of a European security and defence policy makes it necessary to build up the necessary capacities , for which purpose a high-performance European industry is needed .
The establishment of a European defence technology and defence industry base and a European market for the procurement of defence material is intended to contribute to this .
These two measures can supply the capabilities required to meet global defence tasks and cope with the new challenges in the area of security . I therefore agree with the rapporteur that the proposal for a directive should aim to establish a uniform European legal framework which enables the Member States to apply Community law without jeopardising their security interests .
Finally , I agree with the introduction into the law of a review procedure .
This achieves the purpose of affording tenderers effective legal protection , promotes transparency and non-discrimination in the award of contracts , and thus contributes to genuine market opening .
I voted in favour of the Schlyter report on restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations ( dichloromethane ) .
I consider that this proposal to amend Directive 76 / 769 / EEC will contribute to an effective reduction in the risk of environmental and human exposure to substances with dangerous properties , such as dichloromethane ( DCM ) , which has a unique profile of adverse effects on human health .
The protection of human health must prevail over industrial interests .
We voted in favour of the compromise text , given that this measure can have positive impacts on workers in various industries , specifically the automobile and naval industries , as it minimises their exposure to quite noxious toxic agents .
It deals with dichloromethane ( DCM ) , which is a colourless chemical compound with a sweet , pleasant and penetrating smell , similar to ether .
Its marketing is intended fundamentally for the production of pharmaceutical products , solvents and auxiliary products , paint strippers and adhesives .
DCM has a unique profile of adverse effects on human health , and is included in the list of 33 priority substances established under the terms of the Water Directive .
This substance is classified as a Category 3 carcinogenic agent .
It has a narcotic effect and , for a high level of exposure , causes depression of the central nervous system , loss of consciousness and cardiotoxic effects , with a direct risk of death as a consequence of inappropriate use .
According to the Scientific Committee on Health and Environmental Risks , one of the main problems related to the toxicity of DCM consists of the risk to especially vulnerable groups .
Various alternatives to DCM-based strippers are already available on the market .
I agree fundamentally with the objective of the proposal : to reduce the risks of the use of dichloromethane ( DCM ) by the general public and by professionals .
DCM has a unique profile of negative effects on human health : it is a carcinogenic agent , has a narcotic effect and , at a high level of exposure , causes depression of the central nervous system , loss of consciousness and cardiotoxic effects , with a direct risk of death as a consequence of inappropriate use .
According to the Commission , between 1989 and 2007 , 18 deaths caused by the use of DCM were recorded in the EU .
I consider it imperative to apply European measures to prohibit or replace this substance .
Following the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I support banning the use of DCM by the general public , but allowing it to be used by professionals , in safe conditions .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the Schlyter report on amending the Council directive as regards restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations .
Dichloromethane , in fact , has many adverse effects on human health : it has a narcotic and depressive effect on the central nervous system , as well as causing cardio-toxicological effects at high exposures .
It is therefore necessary for the current legislation on the health and safety of workers to be enforced , since , the enforcement procedures in this field are inadequate , mainly because of the large number , small size and mobile nature of the enterprises supplied .
Finally , I agree with Mr Schlyter 's statement that we need to take special account of the health of children , who are more susceptible to health risks because of the significant potential for a high level of exposure .
The vote that took place today on this report , which I presented on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the ILO Work in Fishing Convention , 2007 , is an important contribution to creating minimum international standards at global level that guarantee better working conditions , more safety and fewer fatal accidents , in a sector that is very dangerous but also strategic .
It puts defence of the dignity and the hard working life of fishermen at the centre of our concerns , given that it is the area with the highest percentage of fatal accidents .
It should be noted that the report had 671 votes in favour and only 16 against .
Convention 188 shall take effect after it has been ratified by 10 of the 180 Member States of the ILO , 8 of which must be coastal countries .
I would point out that the Convention revises the conventions concerning the minimum age of fishermen , medical examinations , fishermen 's articles of agreement and accommodation of crews , and also covers issues such as health and safety at work , recruitment , placement and social security .
in writing . - ( SV ) The European Parliament is calling on Member States to ratify the ILO Work in Fishing Convention ( Convention 188 ) .
This convention dates from 2007 and deals with important issues such as the fishermen 's working environment , hours of rest and social security .
It should be up to the Member States to decide , in a democratic process , whether or not they wish to ratify the present ILO Convention .
I have therefore voted against the present report , as this is not a matter that the European Parliament should involve itself in .
The Union , through the common fisheries policy , seeks to make fishing activities more effective , so that the sector , including aquaculture , is economically viable and competitive , ensures adequate living standards for the populations who depend on fishing activities and meets the interests of consumers .
ILO Convention 188 , adopted in June 2007 , is a document that seeks to allow fair competition between the owners of fishing boats and to confer dignified working conditions for professionals in the sector .
The convention pursues these objectives by establishing a set of international minimum standards for the fishing sector that , in certain areas , are within the exclusive competence of the Community .
It therefore seems necessary to propose to the Member States that they should ratify this convention , in the interests of the Community and the consistency of the common fisheries policy .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I support the report by Mrs Figueiredo on authorisation to ratify the Work in Fishing Convention ( 2007 ) of the International Labour Organisation ( Convention 188 ) .
One of the objectives of the 2007 document is to achieve and maintain a level playing field in the fishing sector by promoting decent living and working conditions for fishers and fairer conditions of competition in the world , seeking to remedy the low rate of ratification of many conventions in the field of maritime labour .
To that end , the adoption of the Convention represents a step forward in establishing dignified working conditions for professionals in this important strategic sector , in that it covers a variety of aspects of professional activity , namely improved installations and safety conditions at work , pay , medical care at sea and on land , rest periods , work contracts and social security .
Finally , I applaud Mrs Figueiredo 's initiative , because it aims to ensure that minimum standards applicable to all are universally applied , without prejudice to the existence of standards in individual Member States that are more favourable to workers .
I voted in favour of the report .
In tackling the issue of fundamental rights in the EU today we must not , however , omit to refer to the terrible events in Gaza .
What is happening in the Middle East requires the EU to pay constant attention to the issue of respect for fundamental human rights , which are unfortunately in jeopardy at these times .
In fact , I would argue that , in the difficult negotiations which I hope can make progress , the authority and firmness of the Community institutions partly depend on the quality of democracy that we are able to achieve within the EU .
There is , unfortunately , a real danger that even in Europe the fight against terrorism may result in failure to respect fundamental rights and freedoms .
I am hopeful about the statements by the US President-Elect , Barack Obama , regarding the commencement of cooperation on this issue between Europe and the United States .
Thinking about all the aspects that make up the framework of the inviolable rights of man , I consider , finally , that special attention should be paid to the most vulnerable individuals , namely children , the elderly , migrants , and young people looking for work .
in writing . - Conservatives recall their long-held view that the Charter of Fundamental Rights should not be justiciable .
In this context we believe that many of the issues dealt with by this report are properly in the purview of Member States and not matters on which the EU should try to impose a policy .
The report also contains a number of issues which are matters of individual conscience , for example , the implicit recommendation on euthanasia and the decriminalisation of hard drugs .
For these reasons , we are unable to vote in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( IT ) My final vote against the report in question is the result not so much of its content , but of its omissions .
It is not possible to discuss human rights without speaking of the first and most fundamental one : the right to life .
Every year in the 27 Member States approximately 1 200 000 human beings are destroyed in deliberate abortions .
This is a tragic figure , and in addition to this number there are the illegal abortions and the incalculable number of human embryos destroyed through the use of the in vitro fertilisation technique .
We have a duty to note the diversity of opinions on this issue , but it is certain that this is an attack on the very basis of the culture of human rights .
The resolution , however , not only ignores the problem , but seeks to ensure it is forgotten , focusing its attention only on the ' reproductive and sexual health ' of women .
Nobody can be opposed to the health of women , particularly if they are young , pregnant and mothers , but this cannot justify the total omission of the rights of children .
On the other hand , it is well known that the language of ' reproductive and sexual health ' is used to surreptitiously include abortion , understood as a right and as a social service .
I voted against the report presented by Mr Catania because I do not agree with Article 49 , a controversial article which encourages the problems of ' traditional national minority communities ' to be handled through ' self-governance solutions ( personal-cultural , territorial , regional autonomies ) ' .
I support the rights of persons belonging to minorities , but I categorically reject the idea of territorial autonomy based on ethnic criteria and of minorities ' collective rights , an idea which has sparked in practice ethnic separatism and interethnic conflicts .
In addition , vague , controversial concepts like ' self-governance ' and ' cultural autonomy ' also have the potential to cause conflict .
These concepts extend beyond current European standards of international law with regard to the rights of persons belonging to national minorities and lead us into an area of controversy .
I believe that EU Member States have the sovereign right to decide alone to what extent they accept or reject such concepts .
In fact , the EU must respect and guarantee the sovereignty and integrity of its Member States .
in writing . - ( PL ) Although the desire to respect human rights is one of the mainstays of all states and organisations at international level , this report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union 2004-2007 is a scandalous breach of those same rights in Europe .
For this reason I could not support it in today 's vote .
Yet again , we have an attempt to impose a particular view of the world , expressed by the author of the report , on the Member States .
That is something I cannot agree to .
in writing . - UKIP is opposed to female genital mutilation , homophobia , racism and xenophobia .
However we are also against EU control of fundamental rights .
The UK already has perfectly good laws and safeguards on fundamental rights .
The EU is not democratic and is therefore not a suitable guardian of people 's rights .
Moreover , family law is a Member State competence and not an area of EU jurisdiction .
The issue of whether drug abusers should face criminal charges is a matter for Member State law and the EU should not be seeking to pervert the course of justice .
For a number of years the Council has been submitting to the European Parliament an annual report on the situation of fundamental rights in the Union , in relation to which Parliament has responded by drawing up an own-initiative report .
For the first time , this report was drawn up taking into account the results obtained by the Fundamental Rights Agency .
It has special importance given the fact that no report on this subject has been adopted since 2003 .
I consider that the rapporteur developed certain subjects too much , as they have already been discussed in separate reports , and there are various fairly controversial points , some of which I have voted against as they clearly go against my principles .
However , there are many other points with which I fully agree , and for this reason I abstained , not only because I believe that the text was substantially improved by the excellent work carried out by Mrs Gál , but also because I could not under any circumstances , in all conscience , vote against a report in defence of fundamental rights .
I voted against this report because it suggests approaches which encourage multiple abortions , same-sex marriages or autonomy on ethnic criteria .
in writing . - I support this Report which makes recommendations on a broad range of issues including discrimination , immigration , social rights and gender equality .
It notes that the recommendations of this Parliament in its report on CIA Rendition activities in the EU ( Feb 2007 ) have not yet been implemented by Member States and EU institutions .
The fight against terrorism can never be used to diminish the level of protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Indeed , to defend human rights is precisely to fight against terrorism in both its causes and effects .
In that respect , I welcome the statement by US President-Elect Barack Obama on closing the Guantanamo Bay detention facility and to never again practice Rendition .
The Report also suggests raising public awareness about women 's right to fully enjoy their sexual and reproductive rights , including the facilitation of access to contraception to prevent all unwanted pregnancies and illegal high-risk abortions , and , to combat the practice of female genital mutilation .
Moreover , the Report urges Member States to take legislative action to overcome discrimination experienced by same-sex couples by recognising such relationships .
Member States with legislation on same-sex partnerships should move to recognise provisions with similar effects adopted by other states .
in writing . - I supported the Catania report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union ( 2004-2008 ) .
In particular , I voted in favour of paragraph 32 , which calls for the ruling by the European Court on the People 's Mujahedin Organisation of Iran ( PMOI ) to be respected . This ruling demanded that the PMOI should be taken off the EU terror list .
I hold no particular brief for this organisation .
A long time ago , I stopped signing their declarations regarding the situation in Iran , which I had more difficulty finding credible , particularly after participating in a Foreign Affairs Committee Delegation to Teheran when I could see for myself the emerging reformist opposition to the hardline fundamentalist regime in Iran .
Nevertheless , I do not have to support the organisation to deplore the failure to implement the Court 's view that the PMOI 's action gives no reason to include , or continue to include , them on the terror list thus visiting on them all the repressive consequences that follow .
in writing . - ( PL ) The report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union 2004-2008 acknowledges that the effective protection and the promotion of fundamental rights forms the basis of democracy in Europe .
However , the Parliamentary commission notes that Member States have repeatedly refused EU scrutiny of their human rights policies and placed the protection of human rights on a purely national basis , thereby undermining the Community 's credibility in the protection of fundamental rights in the international arena .
The European Commission should therefore concentrate on encouraging Member States to cooperate more closely with it by inviting them to include in future reports on human rights not just analyses of the situation in the world at large , but in individual Member States .
Also deserving attention are a series of proposals aimed at effectively combating discriminatory policies in the EU , underlining that equal opportunities are a fundamental right of every citizen , and not a privilege .
It is very disturbing that around 20 % of children in the European Union live below the poverty threshold , and many of them come from single-parent families or families whose parents come from outside the EU .
In this regard it is necessary to adopt appropriate means of accessing rights , concentrating particularly on the needs of children , and for Member States to take effective measures to tackle poverty .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr Catania 's report is nothing short of alarming .
It is a catalogue of all the rights , privileges and exorbitant rights of ordinary law which , according to him , should necessarily be granted to minorities , especially if they are non-European .
It is a set of instructions with which to destroy national and regional identities , to destroy the values , traditions and cultures of our countries , and to discriminate systematically and institutionally against Europeans in their own countries .
It is an attack on our inalienable right to self-determination - which is granted to all nations except our own .
It is also the height of hypocrisy for an institution that discriminates daily on account of its political ideas and that applies without proper judgment or thought the label ' presumed guilty ' to some of its Members , such as Mr Vanhecke and I , who are victims of a witch-hunt in our respective countries .
We are not here principally to defend these visible and noisy minorities , who are demanding more and more privileges and stigmatising countries and populations who are kind enough or foolish enough to take them in .
We are here to defend our own , the citizens of our nations , this large majority - for now - of Europeans who are in your eyes invisible , inaudible and contemptible .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted against the report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union 2004-2008 authored by the Italian MEP Giusto Catania , as the author has not so much presented a description of the situation over the past four years as expressed his own opinions , suggesting and even attempting to impose upon Member States legislation that is exclusively within their competence .
I do not believe that the countries of the European Union can be forced to issue legislation that their public finds unacceptable .
The very definition of ' marriage ' should be reserved for unions between women and men .
Mr Catania 's proposal will not so much lead to tolerance of homosexual behaviour ( which I support ) , but to discrimination against fundamental biological , that is , heterosexual , relations .
Essentially , we need to ask whether the aim is actually to restrict the rights of the family in its traditional meaning , that is , mother , father and children .
This makes the highly personal issues relating to a person 's sex life into politicised acts , even if it is through public demonstration of one 's homosexuality , for example through so-called ' love parades ' .
In my view , this report , by using formulations such as ' reproductive rights ' , which in the present meaning of international law include abortion on demand , opens the floodgates to practices of this kind .
in writing . - ( HU ) I consider my fellow Member 's report of special significance , since human rights constitute one of the pillars of the values set out in the Treaties of the European Union .
In addition to democracy and the rule of law , respect for human rights is what we require of candidate countries , and we also emphasise the affirmation of universal , inalienable rights in our international relations .
However , the European Union will only be a credible global defender of human rights if in its own territory it uses unfailingly every instrument available to defend the values expressed in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The report devotes a separate section to the Roma , who are the largest minority in the European Union , and who are most heavily burdened by social exclusion .
It is the joint responsibility of European states to design a comprehensive and unified strategy to tackle the problems of the Roma , who for the most part live in deplorable conditions and destitution .
A framework programme with action-oriented and clear objectives and deadlines is needed , one that makes use of effective monitoring and evaluation mechanisms .
A programme must be designed which , independently of parties and government cycles , simultaneously addresses education , housing , health and discrimination and takes on poor practices in the Member States ; such a programme should be capable of serving as the basis for immediate action in regions in crisis .
If we can help the millions of Roma to become full-fledged European citizens and members of the European Community in a spiritual sense , this will represent a giant leap towards the social cohesion of the continent .
in writing . - ( LT ) One of the fundamental freedoms of citizens in the Community is freedom of movement .
I believe that all EU citizens have the same right to participate in the political life of the European Union ( EU ) , to freely express their political opinions and attitudes .
These freedoms became even more important after EU expansion to the countries of Eastern Europe , as once the Eastern European countries had joined the EU , economic migration from the new Member States to Western Europe intensified greatly .
Lithuania for its part leads in terms of the number of people who have emigrated since entry to the Community .
When I met Lithuanian emigrants in London I learnt that many of these people plan to remain in the United Kingdom long-term , especially those who have started families there and are enrolling their children in schools .
To my knowledge , such a tendency is also reflected in statistics .
The situation is also similar in the other EU countries Lithuanians have emigrated to .
I believe that it is particularly important to guarantee the right of these citizens to participate in European Parliament elections in the country where they are currently resident .
I would also like to stress that the participation of citizens in EU matters and elections to the European Parliament is not increasing , but quite the opposite , the EU is becoming increasingly distant from its people .
Bearing this in mind , I think that once EU citizens are given the right to vote in European Parliament elections in their country of residence , this will only strengthen people 's trust in EU institutions .
For these reasons I voted for the 45th amendment .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted against Giusto Catania 's report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union ( 2004-2008 ) .
I voted against the report not because I am against fundamental rights .
On the contrary , I believe they are of exceptional importance to the European Union and the whole world .
The problem is that Mr Catania 's report is harmful to the implementation of fundamental rights .
Why is this ?
It is because the demand for European legislation to fight homophobia or recognise same-sex partnerships are not fundamental rights .
If they are to be legislated on , they should be part of a completely separate report .
The European Parliament cannot effectively extend the definition of fundamental rights because it does not have the authority to establish international law .
In addition , some Member States disagree with such an extended interpretation .
It is therefore nothing more than a political gesture and wishful thinking .
The danger is that this is an area in which the Member States do and should take their own decisions .
Imposing such views is a slap in the face for cohesion in the European Union .
I do not like homophobia , but legislating against it in community law is absurd .
If the EU is to tackle homophobia , one could just as easily say that it should tackle anti-Polonism , Russophobia , Germanophobia , Francophobia , Islamophobia , anti-Papism , anti-clericalism , anti-Catholicism and a variety of other attitudes and modes of behaviour .
And forcing Member States to accept the legality of same-sex marriages could be even more dangerous .
in writing . - I voted against Amendment 103 in the Catania report , which proposed that long-term non-citizens should participate in elections to the European Parliament as well in local elections in order to promote social and political integration .
In fact , elections to the European Parliament are equivalent to elections to the national parliament .
To participate in them is the right of citizens .
Otherwise , citizenship will lose its meaning , and also incentives would be lost for non-citizen residents to apply for citizenship .
Only in this way can we retain the vital balance between rights and responsibilities that only citizens can have .
in writing . - ( FI ) The different policies Member States have when it comes to ethical questions gave rise in the political groups , and especially in our own , to just the kind of wide-ranging debate we might have foreseen .
I can only say that we agree to disagree , and that has to be taken as a sign of just how diverse Europe is : we need to be able to find room for diversity of opinion .
In many respects I admire my own group 's basic positions .
With reference to point 61 , however , I would like to say this .
I would find it problematic if someone were simultaneously opposed to awareness of the right to reproductive and sexual health ( which , generally speaking , is a euphemism for the right to an abortion ) and the mention of facilitating access to contraception in order to prevent unwanted pregnancies and abortions .
Opposing both at the same time I would see as a reality gap that could only result in undesirable consequences .
This I say with all due respect , and I want to thank all parties once again for this rewarding exchange of views .
in writing . - ( EL ) The PASOK parliamentary group in the European Parliament voted in favour of the Catania report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union , but writes to point out that it opposes the wording of paragraph 49 and the related Amendment 35 .
in writing . - ( FR ) Entrusting a report such as this to a communist Member is a provocation for the hundreds of millions of victims of communism .
In this report Mr Catania is inspired , it is true , by an ideology less brutal than communism , but just as totalitarian : euro-internationalism .
His text in fact denies the most fundamental human rights :
the right to life , with the promotion of abortion and euthanasia ;
the right of each child to have a father and a mother , by calling on the States to apply the ' principle of mutual recognition for homosexual couples , whether they are married or living in a registered civil partnership ' ;
the right of European nations to self-determination and to remain as they are , flouted by proposals aimed at opening up Europe even more to global immigration - a development to which the nationals of our countries are meant to adapt ;
and democracy , since the report claims to adhere to the Treaty of Lisbon , which was rejected by the Irish electorate .
Now more than ever , safeguarding our freedoms and the identity of our nations requires a new Europe to be built , the Europe of free and sovereign nations .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List believes that protection of the fundamental freedoms and rights is of utmost importance , both within and outside the EU .
It is extremely important that the Member States of the EU observe the fundamental freedoms and rights , and it is clear that we cannot leave it to the Member States to monitor themselves .
However , the June List is critical of the establishment of a new European agency in this area and of the desire to conduct an ' external policy ' .
We believe that the UN - not the EU - with its global scope , extensive experience and competence , is best placed to monitor and implement the measures that are necessary .
I have therefore chosen to vote against the report as a whole , but I am very positively disposed towards some of the wordings in the proposal , which I have voted in favour of .
I welcome the fact that the report deals with the unfair treatment of prisoners in the American detention facility at Guantánamo .
There is only one way to go : try them or release them .
I am very concerned about the particular vulnerability of individuals from various minority groups and I believe that action needs to be taken , both at national and international level .
I have voted in favour of this in the report , but I am sceptical about whether a judicial framework at European level is a good solution to the problem .
The report referring to the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union includes amendments that I have submitted , which I consider to be important for Romanian citizens ( for example , the amendment on abolishing the labour market restrictions imposed on citizens from the new Member States ) .
In addition , I agree with many of the points put forward by the report , such as the strategy for Roma inclusion , the protection of minorities , the rights of migrant workers or child protection .
However , the report also includes some references which cast doubt on some of the fundamental principles of Romanian society ( such as considering the family to be a basic element in society ) or which contravene Romanian legislation ( such as consumption of drugs ) .
For these reasons , I voted against the report in the final vote .
in writing . - I welcome this resolution , which maps out and summarises the most important concerns on the state of fundamental rights within the Union , and the recommendations it contains on how to improve human rights within Member States .
in writing . - The Catania report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union in the years 2004-2008 stresses the need to protect the rights of minorities , to fight all discrimination against all vulnerable categories .
I welcome this report which includes important elements drawn from Written Declaration 111 on ending street homelessness , which was adopted by the European Parliament in April 2008 .
I particularly welcome the report 's call for the introduction of winter emergency plans for the homeless , for a framework definition of homelessness and for the gathering of reliable statistical data on homelessness across the EU .
Ending street homelessness is a fundamental issue in the European Union .
This report is an additional step towards pushing the European Council , Commission and Member States to act on homelessness .
Finally , the Treaty of Lisbon will not advance the situation concerning fundamental rights in the EU .
Support for this report does not imply support for that Treaty .
In fact , the European Parliament 's refusal to respect the Irish No vote runs contrary to the spirit of the Charter .
in writing . - ( DE ) If the population of individual EU Member States decides to allow homosexual couples to marry , to enter into a civil partnership or to adopt children , other Member States should not be forced to follow suit .
If the convictions of religious leaders or politicians mean that they are not exactly ecstatic about homosexuality - as the politically correct mainstream dictates - they should not be condemned or persecuted for these convictions .
The same goes for the racism cudgel that is readily swung at anyone drawing attention to aberrations connected with asylum and foreign nationals .
Instead , it is being attempted undemocratically , through the back door , to force homosexual partnerships on Member States - which is probably a foretaste of what awaits us if we implement the Treaty of Lisbon .
Anyone daring to criticise homosexuality or point out goings-on in connection with asylum and coexistence with foreign nationals is to be stigmatised as a criminal - in violation of the human right to free expression .
Therefore , the Catania report is to be rejected in the strongest terms .
The report presented by Giusto Catania is full of interpretations and recommendations of a general nature regarding the situation of fundamental rights in European Union Member States .
However , the regulatory base that we need exists : the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
The priority for us at the moment is not to add new regulations , but to make existing ones operational and effective .
One of the issues dealt with in the report is the free movement of labour which , unfortunately , not all European citizens can enjoy at the moment on an equal basis .
Although the two-year period of labour market restrictions imposed on the new Member States expired at the end of 2008 , six of the Member States have extended the restrictions for Romania and Bulgaria for another three years , justifying the decision to extend the restriction period on grounds of the current financial crisis .
The report does not explicitly discuss this problem , even though it involves differentiated treatment among EU citizens , which is not justified on this occasion .
I voted against this report which contains , apart from at least ten points worthy of criticism ( which is a kind way for us to describe them ) , an unacceptable reference to Council of Europe Recommendation 1201 .
This recommendation should not be invoked without explaining very precisely the interpretation which is being given to it as it could be interpreted as granting collective rights to minorities or territorial autonomy based on ethnic criteria .
I welcome the approval of Amendment 35 , which is very reasonable , but in my view , a number of aspects of the report cannot be accepted .
in writing . - ( EL ) The report endeavours to help conceal the so-called ' democratic and social deficit ' of the - by its very nature - deeply reactionary EU , so as to make it more attractive and blunt the dissatisfaction caused by its anti-grassroots policy .
It accepts and welcomes all the reactionary principles and institutions which have been adopted by the EU , such as the four freedoms in the Maastricht Treaty , by trying to ascribe an effective dimension to their application .
It is based mainly on the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights accompanying the anti-grassroots Treaty of Lisbon , which is below the level of rights safeguarded in many Member States .
It largely constitutes a report of ideas and a vague wish list , it addresses fundamental rights , such as labour , education and health rights , simply as ' opportunities ' which need to be give ' equally ' to everyone , something which is physically impossible in practice and , wherever it is more specific , it proposes addressing only certain extreme cases of poverty , discrimination and so forth with measures such as the adoption of a minimum wage and so on .
Finally , the lack of any reference to anti-democratic decisions and the prosecution of citizens , such as the ban on communist parties and other organisations and the imprisonment of communists and other fighters in Member States of the EU in central Europe and the Baltic , is revealing of the nature of the report .
in writing . - ( EL ) I voted for the report on the situation of fundamental rights in Europe , because I believe that it touches on one of the most basic problems of our unifying structure by engaging in constructive criticism .
Discrimination in the enjoyment of fundamental rights derives mainly from the sex , age , origin or sexual orientation of those discriminated against , as the report accurately points out .
The problem is exacerbated when the victims of such violations cannot react , mainly because they are locked up in mental asylums , care homes and so on .
Europe cannot remain indifferent in the face of this situation , especially where tightening human rights will help to consolidate the European area of freedom and security .
Consequently , and given the fact that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is not binding and the very limited facility for private individuals to take recourse to the Community courts , I cannot but welcome the proposals made by Mr Catania on the establishment of a general obligation on the part of the Community institutions to take account of human rights in the performance of their duties and the setting up of a specialist agency for the purpose .
in writing . - ( SK ) The problem with the report is that it deals with many sensitive issues .
Even though the report gives a number of recommendations in a variety of areas , including minority rights , the rapporteur has again included the issue of reproductive health in the report .
The proposed amendments and supplements relating to reproductive health which the EP has voted for deny the right to life and violate the principle of subsidiarity .
Respect for every unborn child and the need to protect human life from conception onward are matters of principle for me .
I do not agree that we should adopt decisions at a European level on issues where Member States have differing attitudes stemming from their Christian traditions .
I do not agree that the EU should force Slovakia , Poland , Ireland and other Member States to agree to abortions or euthanasia , which are not allowed under their national legislations .
At a European level , it is always the case that we talk only about the mother 's right to decide on the life or death of her child , and we forget about the unborn child 's right to life .
For these reasons I voted against the report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union 2004-2008 .
It goes without saying that the PPE and PD-L ( Romanian Liberal Democrat Party ) value and respect fundamental human rights and take a firm stand when they are violated .
I voted against the Catania report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union 2004-2008 because the report has gone beyond its mandate , making recommendations and comments which go beyond the 2004-2008 period , which it had to report on .
Instead of dealing with specific cases of human rights violations , the Catania report makes comments and recommends Member States to apply regulations which contradict national regulations .
For example , in Articles 38 and 76 the notion of same-sex marriage is used , something which violates not only our religious views , but also our legal and rational views .
Article 149 mentions legalising the consumption of drugs , something which violates Romanian criminal law .
While the initiative of producing a report on the situation of human rights in the European Union is commendable and some of the points made by this report are even correct , based on what I have just said above , I voted against it .
To think that fundamental rights are fully guaranteed and protected in the European Union and in the Member States would be an error of analysis and would be detrimental to political action .
Fundamental rights , even in free and democratic societies , need to be protected and promoted .
Separate issues arise , however , in relation to this report and this debate .
Firstly , there is the supervision of the protection of these rights at national level .
In societies such as ours , this function is exercised primarily in the national context but , naturally , without prejudice to the ability to appeal at European level , which we have .
Between the duty of the institutions to guarantee the Treaties and national sovereignty , there is a place for each party to exercise its function without prejudice to the institutional nature of the EU .
On the other hand , in this report in particular there is an undesirable confusion between what are fundamental rights and what are ideological options for the organisation of society .
A debate on these is interesting .
However , the attempt to impose these positions on the Member States , against their democratically expressed desire and against the principle of subsidiarity , proves precisely the risks of bringing national matters into the Community domain .
For this reason , and because I disagree with much of the content , I voted against this report .
If I had been in favour of the ' no ' campaign in the Irish referendum , I would have enthusiastically applauded the Catania report and its supporters .
It represents such a gross disrespect for the principle of subsidiarity and tramples underfoot the institutional rules of the European Union and the powers of the Member States to such an extent that it gives credence to all those who feed distrust of the political voracity of Brussels .
To attack the safeguard clauses , which are a direct expression of the Treaties and a fundamental guarantee of the democracy of the Member States , as serving ' to codify ... discriminatory practices ' is pathetic and grossly undermines the fundamental rights of citizenship .
To assert that the signature of international conventions by a majority of Member States places an obligation on the whole EU to abide by them is a complete legal absurdity , a plunge into darkness that goes beyond the most extreme federalism .
I also reject the absolutely perverse assertion of the ' lack of credibility ' of Europe , which is bound to lead to our ' tactical inferiority ' : whatever specific problems it might have , Europe is not Sudan , nor the People 's Republic of China , nor Cuba , Somalia or North Korea .
In short , the report strays into areas of political struggle that have nothing to do with fundamental rights , thereby stripping it of credibility , consistency and effectiveness .
I voted against it .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against the report by Mr Catania on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union ( 2004-2008 ) .
I do not agree that the Member States damage the active role of defence of human rights carried out by the European Union across the world .
Furthermore , I do not agree that the war on terrorism can be seen as a pretext for a drop in the level of protection of human rights , in particular the right to privacy .
I am therefore opposed to the points relating to the Roma , who do not need any special protection ; otherwise , a major discriminatory situation would be created in relation to the Roma , whom this resolution deems to be an ethnic group different from others .
Finally , I disagree with the paragraph on repatriation : the procedures to be used in repatriating an individual cannot be assessed solely on the basis of these parameters .
in writing . - ( FR ) There can be no European area of freedom , security and justice without the protection of fundamental rights .
Europe has a duty to set an example and to be irreproachable in this matter .
Violations have been identified , revealed , including for example in closed establishments accommodating children and elderly people .
There is also the eternal problem posed by the disastrous situation of some prisons , as the report that we have today voted in favour of highlights .
We must also fight to ensure that social rights are recognised .
Poverty and job insecurity are attacks on human rights .
How can we accept a situation where people have work and yet cannot afford a place to live , in Europe and in the 21st century ?
We must proclaim the fundamental rights of each and every one of us .
The European Union is endowed with a Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Let us make sure that it is respected !
in writing . - Mr President , I voted in favour of the report and I welcome in particular the inclusion of Paragraph 31 in the report according to which the European Parliament deplores the non-implementation by the EU of the judgments of the Court of First Instance on 12 December 2006 and on 4 and 17 December 2008 and the UK Court of Appeal ruling in favour of the People 's Mojahedin Organisation of Iran on 7 May 2008 .
The European Union stands for democracy and the rule of law .
The more appalling is the idea of one of its institutions acting against the Union 's principles .
I hope that the Council takes the position of the Parliament well into account when compiling the new EU ' blacklist ' .
Accusations of terrorist activity should actually be founded as well as the decisions on the inclusion of some organisations in the ' blacklist ' should be more transparent .
Such issues cannot be addressed in an arbitrary manner , but in accordance with the principles of democracy and the rule of law .
The EU cannot allow the global fight against terrorism be turned into a ground of political horse-trading and therefore must respect the aforementioned judgements of courts .
in writing . - ( SV ) I interpret paragraph 149 of Mr Catania 's report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union as urging Member States to ensure that the equal treatment of patients within the health care system also includes addicts .
I have therefore voted in favour of this paragraph .
in writing . - ( HU ) The last two rounds of enlargement of the European Union , in which the Central and Eastern European formerly socialist countries were admitted , opened a new chapter in the Community 's approach to human rights issues as well .
Since then , it has become clear that the protection of fundamental rights - and within these , the rights of national minorities - in the new Member States represents the greatest challenge to the European Community .
Giusto Catania 's own-initiative report emphasises that in addressing the problems of the traditional national minority communities , the principles of subsidiarity and self-governance must serve as the guideposts that could allow the elaboration of policies aimed at resolving the situation of the communities in question in a reassuring manner .
The report encourages the use of cultural , territorial and regional forms of autonomy .
I also welcome the fact that the report of my fellow Member Mr Catania calls for the elaboration of a definition of belonging to a national minority , and proposes the drafting of a minimum set of Community norms for the protection of the rights of such minorities .
in writing . - ( NL ) The protection and promotion of fundamental rights lie at the very heart of our European democracy , and are key conditions if we want to enhance our European area of freedom , security and justice .
It goes without saying , therefore , that , in practice , these rights have been incorporated in the objectives of the EU 's various areas of policy .
Moreover , we would ask the Council to analyse the situation in the world and in every EU Member State in annual human rights reports , in the interest of Europe 's trustworthiness not to use double standards in its internal or external policy .
The amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance concerning anti-discrimination , minority rights and social rights have been adopted either wholly or in part .
We were also successful in our attempt to include a reference to the need to take account of fundamental rights in legislation on criminal law procedures .
The Catania report maps out the problems involving fundamental rights and gives recommendations for resolving them .
It can therefore count on my wholehearted support , because respect for all people and their fundamental rights lies at the heart of the Greens ' policy , irrespective of gender , age , nationality or socio-economic background .
in writing . - I was pleased to see the European Parliament support the removal of the PMOI from the list of terrorist organisations .
Twenty thousand people in Iran who oppose the regime have been killed .
As long as the PMOI remains on the terrorist list , more people will be killed in Iran for simply voicing opposition to the regime .
The EU must follow the UK 's lead and remove the PMOI from the terrorist list .
in writing . - ( PL ) During today 's vote I spoke in favour of adopting Mr Catania 's report on the situation of fundamental rights in the European Union .
Sadly , fundamental rights are often violated in the European Union , with discrimination against minorities and infringement of privacy being most commonly observed .
Equal opportunities , particularly equality for women , is another problem .
The rapporteur asked the Member States to reject arguments justifying violence and discrimination against women based on tradition and religion .
In many EU countries citizens , in particular the weakest ones , children are affected by discrimination and poverty .
The report rightly condemns all forms of violence against children , such as domestic violence , sexual abuse and corporal punishment in schools .
The Member States fail to control practices in respect of human rights , thereby undermining the credibility of EU foreign policy in the world .
In my view , the Community cannot apply ' double standards ' in its internal and foreign policy .
in writing . - For me , the main importance of Mr Catania 's report is to remind us that we inside the EU have our own issues to confront .
We should therefore be very careful about taking a holier-than-thou approach when commenting on human rights outside the EU .
I served on the temporary committee into extraordinary rendition by the CIA .
It was principally a platform for the left to attack their favourite bête noire , the United States .
In my view , we should be grateful to the CIA and the United States for helping to protect Europeans from terrorists bent on killing innocent citizens .
It is an indictment of our own societies that we had to rely on America to do the job for us .
Absolutism over human rights is playing into the hands of those who would destroy us , and putting the human rights of our own citizens at risk .
I therefore voted against the report .
in writing . - ( PL ) The report on fundamental rights in the EU in 2004-2008 adopted in the European Parliament today contains demands for mutual recognition of homosexual couples in all EU countries and the implementation of such relationships in the legislation of the Member States .
Another part of the report defends so-called ' reproductive rights ' , which in the language of international law also includes abortion on demand .
Incorporating religious leaders among the authors of such comments .
The European left has hijacked the report on fundamental rights in the EU to promote pro-abortion and homosexual demands , which have nothing to do with fundamental rights .
There are no documents in international or European law which support the existence of such ' rights ' .
Despite the non-binding nature of the report , it is the most harmful document approved during the term of the present Parliament .
It is the latest attempt to re-define fundamental rights and introduce changes to their meaning without needing to amend any treaties at UN or EU level .
One other aspect of the report is that the EU implement a special directive punishing ' homophobic ' actions .
Due to the broad and vague nature of this formulation , it is an attempt to exclude homosexual circles from the democratic right to free criticism .
Applying this could have consequences in terms of censorship .
The result of the final vote ( 401 in favour ; 220 against ; 67 abstentions ) shows how deeply divided MEPs are on this issue .
That is a defeat for the rapporteur , as fundamental rights are something that should unite , and not divide , Parliament .
in writing . - I would like this report to have looked more closely at the situation of orphans and disabled children in institutional care in Romania and Bulgaria , the newest EU Member States .
There was a great deal of concern before those countries joined the EU about the standards of care for institutionalised orphans and disabled children .
Perhaps the next such report could go into more detail on this matter .
More generally , I made my thoughts on this report known in the debate last month .
I am worried that our culture of human rights has become infected by absolutism and that , in fact , by pandering to the rights of criminals and terrorists we are undermining the rights of everyone else .
Specifically , I believe that matters concerning abortion and contraception are not matters for the European Union , but should be subject to appropriate legislation at the level of the Member States .
Also , I object to the call for the Charter of Fundamental Rights to override the law of the United Kingdom , which has negotiated an exemption from its provisions .
I therefore voted to abstain on this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted against the Catania report .
I am astounded that the House 's services even declared this report admissible in its present form .
It persistently infringes the principle of subsidiarity .
In terms of its content , virtually everything is worthy of criticism .
The nation-states must not let themselves be incapacitated or disempowered when it comes to fundamental rights .
This represents an attempt to push through , to the detriment of the majority , minority rights that cannot be implemented at national level .
A positive attitude to abortion is inconceivable to me .
The actual subject , human rights and their implementation over the last four years , is not mentioned .
in writing . - I abstained on the roll-call vote on paragraph 62 because I believe that every country - which the EU is not - should ensure that legislation on female genital mutilation is locally originated and applied .
An international agreement would be more appropriate and far-sighted .
As it is , the EU has no current competence in health matters , nor should it seek them .
I also abstained on the vote on paragraph 72 because I am concerned about the implications on free speech .
Although to be deplored , discriminatory comments do not necessarily fuel ' hatred and violence ' .
That we are asked to agree to this will mean that those who choose can use this as evidence of such .
My decision to abstain on Amendment 54 is based upon opposing the EU 's Free Movement of People and the principle of mutual recognition , and not in any way a reflection on my views regarding same-sex partnerships , which I agree should enjoy the same rights as others .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Parliament has just voted in favour of the Catania report on the situation of fundamental rights .
At a time when we have just celebrated the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , this report questions what we understand by the meaning of fundamental right .
Admittedly , the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union was the result of a consensus reached after more than a year of negotiations between various pressure groups and lobbies , representatives of civil society and national governments , and so on .
This exercise to which we , as representatives of the countries of the East , were not invited to take part in , is interesting in more ways than one .
The Charter , as the Catania report emphasises , will be a non-legally binding text until the Treaty of Lisbon is ratified by all the Member States .
However , the Agency for Fundamental Rights , set up in Vienna , Austria , is based entirely on this political text , which it uses to justify the positions it adopts .
It is therefore interesting to get a glimpse of how fundamental rights under the Charter are considered , by analysing the subjects dealt with by the Agency for Fundamental Rights .
This exercise is all the more interesting when applied to the network of FRALEX experts recruited in summer 2008 and mainly belonging to the Dutch network ' Human European Consultancy ' .
I voted in favour of this resolution as the ratification of the Convention will make a significant contribution to the promotion of decent labour standards worldwide .
It also supports the agreement concluded by the social partners on certain aspects of the working conditions of workers in the maritime shipping sector as it strikes a fair balance between the need to improve working conditions and to protect the health and safety of seafarers , and also because this professional category exists in Romania .
The resolution tabled by Mary Lou McDonald summarises the main points which the proposal for a Council directive on the Maritime Labour Convention , 2006 and amending Directive 1999 / 63 / EC must take into consideration .
Maritime workers belong to a category which carries out its activities in extremely difficult , often even dangerous conditions .
This is why we need to have standards for working conditions , which enable us to take into account these workers ' health and safety , as well as clear rules on their employment .
The first step in establishing these standards must be to highlight the needs and problems which employees and employers in the maritime sector have identified , while also ensuring a degree of flexibility in their enforcement by Member States .
The documents which we are adopting at a European level must be followed by action by Member States and monitoring by the Commission to assure ourselves that the provisions are being applied .
Furthermore , with regard to maritime labour standards , the European Union has the opportunity to establish itself as the leader in transposing these standards into principles which can be applied anywhere in the world .
in writing . - ( IT ) We voted in favour of this report on the proposal for a Council directive implementing the agreement concluded by the European Community Shipowners ' Associations and the European Transport Workers ' Federation on the Maritime Labour Convention , 2006 , and amending Directive 1999 / 63 / EC , as it consolidates international minimum labour rights .
That is important to ensure better working conditions and greater safety , while respecting the dignity of these professionals .
However , we regret that the proposals that our group presented were not adopted , specifically those that sought to remove any legal uncertainty or prejudice to the work carried out by the social partners to reach agreement .
The convention itself accepts that countries should not use flexibility , and that was what the proposal for a directive set out , with the agreement of the social partners .
We therefore do not agree with the majority of the European Parliament on having included the issue of flexibility in paragraph 6 .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to confirm my vote for the resolution on the Maritime Labour Convention , 2006 ( procedures relating to social dialogue ) .
I fully support the agreement concluded by employers and employees on certain aspects of the working conditions of workers in the maritime shipping sector , as it strikes a fair balance between the need to improve working conditions and to protect the health and safety of seafarers .
Furthermore , I am convinced that it is essential to define and enforce global minimum standards of employment and health and safety conditions for seafarers working at sea or on board seagoing ships .
Finally , I am happy with the role played by employers and employees in improving health and safety conditions for workers .
I voted in favour of the report .
Now , more than ever , we are realising the importance of the role that can be played by a body such as the Human Rights Council ( HRC ) .
The action taken to date should be supported , and we should also appreciate the active role played by the EU within the HRC , despite the undeniable restrictions represented by the absence of the United States ; in fact , this absence often places the EU in an isolated position .
That , however , should not be an excuse for the EU , which ought to be able to make a political effort to build a united , cohesive leadership , overcoming the opposing geographical blocs that are often to be seen within it .
Thus , a very considerable amount still remains to be done to give the HRC greater credibility and authority and to prevent some governments being able to continue to avoid their duties in the international sphere .
I therefore warmly support a new analysis with a view to the review , and I would like to confirm that the strengthening of the HRC is a vital stage along the road of civilisation which the EU has always supported .
I voted in favour of the Andrikienreport on the future of the UN Human Rights Council as I feel that the EU needs a long-term strategy on the activity of this institution , which must become the main global forum for human rights .
I believe that EU Member States must demonstrate greater unity and efficiency in promoting certain EU common positions on human rights .
The EU must become a global leader and initiate strategies for protecting human rights worldwide .
We need to focus greater attention on promoting human economic , social and cultural rights as poverty , backwardness and a low level of education and culture among the population have negative multiplier effects .
In order to obtain much wider support for its positions , the EU must create coalition-building mechanisms and start to organise regular meetings on specific issues with all the democratic states on other continents .
It is also vital for states to send specialists to international forums , with real expertise in the relevant area , a fact which Mrs Andrikienė 's report recommends insistently and with full justification .
in writing . - ( NL ) I have voted against this report , because this UN Human Rights Council cannot by any stretch of the imagination be considered a legitimate institution .
It is unacceptable to me for countries like Cuba , Saudi Arabia , Egypt , Pakistan , Jordan and a number of African regimes to be issuing resolutions which denounce the human rights situation in other countries .
The situation of political or religious dissidents in those countries makes a complete mockery of this institution .
I voted in favour of this motion for a European Parliament resolution because the respect , promotion and guarantee of the universality of human rights are an integral part of the European Union 's legal acquis and it is one of the EU 's fundamental principles .
I also voted for it because the United Nations Organisation and its UNHRC are one of the most suitable organisations for tackling comprehensively issues linked to human rights and the challenges in the humanitarian sector .
I believe that human rights and democracy are key elements in the EU 's external relations and external policy .
in writing . - President , I was very pleased to vote for the Andrikiene report on the United Nations Human Rights Council since I welcome the fact that this agency has far greater credibility than its predecessor , the UN Commission on Human Rights .
The Commission was widely discredited due to several of its member countries having very dubious human rights records .
The regular scrutiny of the rights records of member states is a key component to the Council 's greater standing .
This will be particularly important in the next round of scrutiny , which will involve Russia , Cuba , Saudi Arabia and China .
Welcome , too , are the provisions in the report which aim to assess coordination on these issues between EU member states .
It is vital that the EU , as an organisation that puts human rights at the heart of its mission , works with multinational co-partners such as the UN with similar ideals to realise greater cooperation .
Cooperation is vital to ensure that human rights are no longer sidelined as a foreign policy objective for commercial or strategic reasons .
This report reveals a certain dissatisfaction of the European Parliament with the UN Human Rights Council ( UNHRC ) , since the Member States of the EU represent a ' numerical minority ' , which , in its understanding , ' seriously obstructs the EU 's ability to influence the agenda of the UNHRC ' and to ensure its desired role as a ' leading force ' .
This lofty vision is based on the unacceptable attempt to impose the EU as the model in terms of human rights , particularly when the facts demonstrate its hypocritical human rights policy , as is demonstrated by the complicity of the EU in relation to Israel - see its abstention on the UNHRC resolution on Palestine .
The report is replete with contradictions , namely when it ' regrets the division of the UNHRC into regional blocs ' while , at the same time , it states that it supports the existence of ' a coordinated common position within the UNHRC ' by the EU .
Is this too not a policy of blocs , or is a policy of blocs only bad when it does not work in the EU 's favour ?
Contrary to the EP , we do not consider it ' regrettable ' that the United States is not represented in the UNHRC , firstly because of its constant breaches of human rights and international law and also because they did not present their candidature to avoid the shame of not being elected .
It is understandable why ...
in writing . - ( SV ) This report contains a surprising number of intelligent views considering the fact that it has come from the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
For example , the view is put forward that it is a positive thing that the Member States of the EU are increasingly choosing to speak out and not allow the EU Presidency to speak for all countries .
Statements of this kind are very rare , and I welcome them .
Unfortunately , the positive elements are too few and far between .
One of the most objectionable wordings is found in recital H , where it complains about ' a persistent desire on the part of Member States to act independently at the UN ' .
' One state , one vote ' is , after all , one of the foundation stones of the United Nations .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs also regrets the growing division of the UNHRC into regional blocs .
Paradoxically enough , certain regional blocs - the EU , for example - seem to be desirable .
The European Parliament neither is , can , nor should be a guarantee that human rights are not violated in the world .
This is shown , in particular , by the statements made by Members of this House on homosexuals , for example .
Even though the essence of the report is probably good , I have voted against it in today 's vote .
in writing . - ( DE ) The EU claims to put human rights and democracy at the heart of its external relations .
This House calls on the EU to pay attention to credibility on human rights issues when ratifying agreements .
Yet the EU 's own credibility has already gone west : CIA overflights , its failure to take action on United States torture prisons and its zigzagging on international law - with regard to the Kosovo crisis , for example - have seen to that .
How can a community purporting to set so much store by democracy deny referendum results , repeat votes until they produce the desired result and punish Member States for election results ?
If the EU was really so concerned about respect for its oft-cited community of values , it would have had to break off accession negotiations with Turkey long ago , but at the very latest since its display of warmongering .
Instead of really working to promote human and people 's rights and common values , the EU is at present apparently throwing away approximately EUR 15 million each year on a superfluous European Fundamental Rights Agency ( FRA ) .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the report on the development of the UN Human Rights Council because , while recognising both the unquestionable achievements and efforts which have been made to boost the credibility and level of protection of human rights , I firmly believe that the operation of this body can also be improved in the future .
At the same time , I feel that the European Union must continue to have an active , high-profile role in setting up and operating the UN Council .
I also appreciate the fact that the report is calling on the European Union to reaffirm and defend vigorously the principles of the universality , indivisibility and independence of human rights .
If the United Nations and the various agencies and organisations that are associated with it are supposed to be , by their nature , a mirror of the world , it is natural that the image thus reflected is not one that we would desire or would like to construct .
These considerations are necessary in relation to the debate on the United Nations Human Rights Council .
To debate and decide , by voting , on human rights in a world with countries that do not pay any attention to them can be expected to have a bizarre result .
This is not only a question of legitimacy .
It is , above all , a question of language .
What evaluative standard on human rights can one suppose the Governments of Libya or Zimbabwe share with democratic states that are answerable to their populations ?
None , of course .
However , it is precisely to facilitate dialogue between those who speak different languages that diplomacy exists .
Among equals mediation is not necessary .
Thus , the existence of places of dialogue must be a policy to be stimulated and promoted .
Otherwise , I cannot believe that we can or should have as a standard for our values and our actions something that is decided in such a context .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the Andrikienreport on the development of the UN Human Rights Council , including the role of the EU . The European position within that Council is crucial .
In fact , the EU , which places human rights and democracy at the heart of its own external relations , above all in the action it takes within international human rights organisations , has been committed from the outset to maintaining an active and visible role in the creation and operation of the Human Rights Council , with the aim of upholding the highest standards in terms of human rights , by sponsoring or co-sponsoring texts defining standards .
I therefore welcome the proposal by Mrs Andrikienė , which will examine the measures the EU can adopt to improve its influence in the Human Rights Council and give a new impetus to the Council , so that it becomes a more effective operational body .
in writing . - ( PL ) On 15 March 2006 the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution replacing the UN Commission on Human Rights by the Human Rights Council , an international support body to promote and protect human rights .
The change of name was accompanied by the introduction of new mechanisms and procedures increasing the potential of the Human Rights Council .
The aim of the report is to assess the achievements of the Council , and compare the expectations with the results . It is above all to set out potential improvements in its operations .
Let us not forget that democracy and human rights are the mainstay on which the European Union operates in the international arena .
The European Union has given itself a very prominent role and is active in international human rights organisations , and was also active in appointing the Human Rights Council .
It has co-authored texts such as conventions or resolutions setting out the norms for the protection of human rights .
Unfortunately , the European Union often lacks the capacity to anticipate issues ( due above all to the time-consuming procedures that are sometimes required to draft common positions ) , and to show leadership in human rights initiatives .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues support the work of the UN and the UN Human Rights Council .
We accept that further reform of the Council is required to ensure that human rights around the world are improved .
We agree that EU Member States work towards agreeing positions in the Council but underline the importance of each of them safeguarding their own national interests and positions .
Our support for this report does not imply support for the paragraph in the report ( Paragraph 56 ) which calls for the UN resolution on a death penalty moratorium to be implemented .
The death penalty is a matter of conscience for each Conservative MEP .
I am voting in favour .
The approach of the next appointment with the electorate requires us to supply the voting citizens with all the tools they need to access the European Parliament 's documents .
At a time when the electorate is being asked to place its trust in these institutions , we need at the same time to work to remove all the obstacles that still exist in terms of transparency and accessibility .
To that end , I believe that voting citizens should also be given the possibility of checking on the activity , participation and attendance by MEPs in Parliament 's work , in absolute , relative and percentage terms , and that steps also should be taken to facilitate access to data on Members ' allowances and spending .
Finally , I hope that all this can be achieved by the end of this parliamentary term .
The right to have access to the documents held by Parliament , the Council and Commission is a fundamental right which all citizens and residents of the European Union have ( in accordance with EU Treaty Articles 254 and 255 ) .
However , I would like to highlight one aspect .
I believe that publishing the European institutions ' working documents is only a first step because the majority of Europe 's citizens do not understand the procedures we use and will not know how to find the information they need .
I agree in this respect with my fellow Member , who is proposing the creation of a single European access portal for all documents , with a structure which makes it easy for anyone to understand .
This portal should present information in an accessible , simplified manner so that European citizens can use it without any problem .
Such technical solutions definitely exist and I hope that the financial resources will be found for implementing this portal .
However , I voted against the report because , while the general framework is right , some of the features proposed by my fellow Member are unacceptable .
in writing . - ( NL ) As I am in favour of maximum openness in all EU institutions , I have emphatically voted in favour of this report .
It is a good thing that various European institutions are being given a serious ticking off .
The European Council takes major political decisions and discusses very important and controversial issues .
Also , it is disappointing and unacceptable that the Council should not allow the precise positions of the different national delegations to be known at the time of decision-making .
Parliament should also put its own house in order , though , and should guarantee maximum openness in all its facets .
in writing . - ( NL ) Explanation of vote on behalf of the CDA delegation in the European Parliament concerning the Cappato report on access to documents .
Today , the CDA delegation in the European Parliament abstained from the vote on the report on access to documents .
This was not because we have a problem with transparency .
We are in favour of transparency and democratic control .
Not for nothing did former MEP Mrs Maij-Weggen stand at the cradle of Community legislation in this area .
We have abstained because the Cappato report contains too many inaccuracies , incorrect ways of putting things and over-simplified statements .
For example , in our view , the openness of Council documents should be guaranteed , but there is a clear distinction between documents for legislative and other procedures .
The rapporteur , however , draws no distinction between these procedures .
We are also concerned about the major administrative burden which the recommendations in the Cappato report would entail .
We were unable to endorse the report on account of the inaccuracies and woolly statements .
Since we did want to support the principle of transparency and democratic control , in the end we abstained from the vote .
in writing . - ( NL ) I emphatically voted in favour of this report .
It will not hurt for once .
Whilst we have to applaud the fact that some of the European institutions are coming under heavy criticism , I should like to make an observation .
In the light of the fact that the European Council is at the helm and ultimately takes decisions on very important and controversial issues , it is unacceptable that the Council should not allow the positions of the different national delegations to be made public at the time of decision-making .
It is also true that Parliament should put its own house in order , and should guarantee maximum openness in all its facets , before it hauls others over the coals .
in writing . - The present own-initiative proposal by Marco Cappato requests that Parliament endorse the report on the implementation of Regulation 1049 / 2001 , which deals with public access to documents held by Parliament , the Commission and the Council when used in their legislative capacity .
While the aim to increase transparency in the European institutions has my full support , there are three main points in this Regulation which I feel warrant further examination .
( 1 ) The vital protection of client-lawyer confidentiality is not sufficiently protected as it stands in the Turco judgment referred to in the initial paragraphs , and the call to apply it cannot be supported .
( 2 ) The individual processes whereby national governments reach decisions may also be undermined by removing consent required to release documents transmitted to EU institutions , and
( 3 ) These EU-wide recommendations do not take into account the different approaches relating to freedom of information in Member States .
A certain degree of confidentiality is required to ensure full and frank political discussions among political groups , and the broadcasting of these opinions has the potential to do more harm than good .
The prospect of restrained exchanges replacing vigorous debate does not bode well for our democratic institutions .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated under Rule 163 ( 1 ) )
There is no question for anyone acquainted with the arcane mysteries of the European Commission , the European Parliament and the European Council that seeking access to information on the European Union 's institutions remains a journey full of pitfalls for the average citizen .
There are many reasons for this .
Indeed , it is just as much a question of the huge number of documents issued and the countless forms in which they are published ( reports , opinions , resolutions , directives , regulations , and so on ) , as it is of the lack of simplification and clarity of the institutional registers and of the web pages and the lack of transparency and communication .
This report rightly proposes resolving these kinds of problems by ensuring that the European institutions are more transparent .
Indeed , this forms part of the wider issue of increasing the part played by citizens of the Union in the way in which the latter operates and understands matters .
The peoples of Europe do not want systematically to be excluded from decisions that have a direct bearing on their everyday lives and in relation to which they have no right to inspect or to object .
On the rare occasions when they have had their voices heard by referendum , they have disowned their leaders and Brussels bureaucracy , which is blind , deaf and unresponsive to their needs and wants .
Making the European institutions more transparent is a first step towards a new Europe , a Europe of the peoples and a Europe of the sovereign nations .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the Annual Reports on simplified access to documents of the EU institutions .
There is no question that it should be made easier to access the various European Parliament , Council and Commission documents .
The citizens of the European Union must not be given the feeling that they are excluded from the operations and votes of the EU institutions .
In addition , they have a right to be informed about everything possible .
However , we should look into whether publication should perhaps be limited so as ultimately to prevent people losing the overview .
Firstly , no one wants a data overload and , secondly , staff privacy must continue to be respected , as it is usually the case that , by virtue of data protection , there is no small number of details that are not universally accessible even to other institutions , including national ones .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the proposal submitted by Mr Cappato on public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents .
It is of fundamental importance for the European Union that citizens feel the Community institutions to be close to them .
This can only be achieved through public access to the documents of the three institutions .
I am therefore fully in agreement with the rapporteur when he states that we must call on the EU institutions and the Member States to promote a common administrative culture of transparency , founded on the principles outlined in Article 41 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Communities , the recommendations of the European Ombudsman and the best practices of the Member States .
Finally , I welcome the initiative from Mr Cappato , because I believe that , to improve and speed up integration processes , the provision of information to the public ought to be a very high priority , in view of the problems regarding the absenteeism of Italian MEPs from the Chamber .
in writing . - ( PL ) The Treaty on European Union lays down that priority must be given to transparency and ever-closer links between the peoples of Europe and that decisions must be taken as openly as possible , and as closely to citizens as possible .
Transparency allows citizens to participate more closely in the decision-making process and guarantees that the administration will enjoy greater credibility , be more effective and responsible towards its citizens in a democratic system .
The ECJ judgment in the Turco case will have resounding consequences for transparency and access to the documents of European institutions concerned with legislative issues .
The judgment confirms that the priority should be given to the principle in question , and that it should apply to all community institutions , and ( which is very important ) the possibility to derogate from this should be given a narrow interpretation and assessed on a case-by-case basis from the perspective of the overriding public interest , which is openness .
Openness increases confidence in institutions by allowing open debate .
The ECJ stated that the refusal to grant access to documents in this case cannot be the basis for a general requirement subjecting legal opinions on legislative issues to confidentiality .
in writing . - ( DE ) I rejected this report .
The demands it makes go way beyond what I understand by transparency .
I consider even the publication of MEPs ' attendance registers and voting lists dangerous without extensive additional channels of explanation .
I have a high attendance record and am therefore above suspicion .
It is important to preserve legal protection of personality for MEPs , too .
Europe could increase transparency by publishing public meetings of the Council and the Commission to begin with , before forcing MEPs to lay themselves bare .
In addition , there must be confidentiality among the institutions during difficult negotiation phases .
in writing . - ( SK ) Based on experience in the Member States , the EU has started to recognise a real ' right of access to documents ' and ' right to information ' arising from the principles of democracy , transparency , public interest and openness .
The European Parliament is convinced that the ordinary citizen 's access to information on EU institutions raises problems due to the lack of efficient inter-institutional policies on transparency and citizen-oriented communication .
In the interests of greater transparency , EU institutions should respect the principle of multilingualism .
In 2008 I presented a Written Declaration of the European Parliament on this issue .
The EU operates in all of the national languages and not just in one single language or collection of languages which it may have chosen and which may not be understood by a significant section of its citizens .
The translation of legislative , political and administrative documents allows the EU to fulfil its legal obligations and at the same time the system of multilingualism helps enhance the transparency , legitimacy and effectiveness of the Union .
This assists proper preparation for the elections to the European Parliament that will be held in June 2009 .
I hereby call on the institutions of the EU to ensure that provision is made in the 2009 EU budget for the resources required to cover the shortfall in posts for official translators within EU institutions ; the EP calls on EU institutions to translate all legislative , political and administrative documents for this parliamentary term without delay into all the official languages of the EU in order to allow citizens to follow the political work carried out by all of the institutions .
In doing this we can really contribute towards greater transparency for our citizens .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Situation in the Middle East / Gaza Strip ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in the Middle East / Gaza Strip .
It is a particular pleasure to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council , Czech Minister for Foreign Affairs Mr Karel Schwarzenberg , who has to travel on to South Africa today .
Previous Presidencies have arranged for a representative to take the place of their Minister for Foreign Affairs , and so we particularly appreciate your presence here today , Mr Schwarzenberg .
I wish you a very warm welcome !
We are of course also pleased that the competent Commissioner , Benita Ferrero-Waldner , is present - as she almost always is .
As you know , the Commissioner is also very knowledgeable about the problems of the Middle East conflict and , like Mr Schwarzenberg , she has travelled to the region .
I wish you a very warm welcome too , Commissioner .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , thank you very much for giving me the floor in this timely debate on the dramatic situation in the Middle East .
Since the start of Israel 's military campaign in the Gaza Strip on 27 December , we have witnessed a steep deterioration of the situation on all levels .
The humanitarian consequences of this operation are dramatic for the population in Gaza .
Since the start of the operation , over 900 Palestinians have died , of whom roughly 30 % were women and children .
We are profoundly disturbed by the loss of civilian life , and the matter has been repeatedly declared in our presidential statements .
The European Union deplores the ongoing hostilities which have led to such high numbers of civilian casualties , and we want to express our sincere condolences to the families of the victims .
We are particularly concerned by such incidents as the attack on the United Nations school in Jebaliya and the firing on humanitarian convoys leading to the death of humanitarian staff .
Over 4 200 Palestinians have been injured , according to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs .
According to the United Nations agency , an estimated 28 000 people have been displaced since the beginning of the hostilities .
A large number of them are seeking refuge in the shelters ; the rest of the internally displaced people are staying with relatives .
The greatest humanitarian needs are related to the large number of wounded and the overwhelmed health services , whereas displaced people and host families need specific assistance such as food , shelter , water and non-food items .
Since the water system was badly damaged and needs urgent repair , the Gaza population has hardly any access to safe water .
Therefore , providing drinking water is of the utmost necessity .
There are also extensive food shortages at all levels of the population .
Since 4 November last year , foreign NGOs ' personnel have not been allowed access to Gaza to deliver and monitor humanitarian aid properly .
Also , the number of trucks entering Gaza has increased since military operations started .
The current daily average of 55 trucks remains pitifully insufficient compared to a need for at least 300 trucks daily to cover the needs of the 80 % of the population which has become aid-dependent .
The European Union has been closely following the tragic events from the outset .
Three days after the operation started , foreign ministers met in an extraordinary session in Paris to discuss the situation .
They agreed on the need for an immediate and permanent ceasefire and immediate humanitarian action in stepping up the peace process .
The summit aimed mainly to assist in ending violence and alleviating the humanitarian crisis .
The presidency led a diplomatic mission in the Middle East .
The EU ministerial troika visited the region on 4-6 January for meetings in Egypt , in Israel , with the Palestinian authority , and in Jordan .
The High Representative also visited Syria , Lebanon and Turkey .
The outlines of a solution to the crisis have started to emerge .
First and foremost , there must be an unconditional halt to rocket attacks by Hamas on Israel and an end to Israeli military action , to enable the sustained delivery of humanitarian aid and the restoration of public services and badly-needed medical treatment .
The six-month ceasefire , which expired on 19 December , was far from perfect .
Israel suffered through periodic rocket fire and the knowledge that its foe was amassing greater firepower .
Gaza endured a really punishing economic blockade , totally undermining its economic development .
In order to achieve a sustainable ceasefire , we have to look for a sensible compromise entailing an end to rocket launches and reopening of the crossings .
A viable solution must address the tunnels across the borders , especially along the Philadelphia route , to prevent the smuggling of weapons .
It must also lead to the systematic and controlled opening of all border crossings to enable the Gaza economy to develop .
We believe that the deployment of international missions to monitor implementation of the ceasefire and to act as a liaison between the two sides could be helpful .
In this regard , the European Union is ready to return its observers to the Rafah crossing and to extend the mandate of the European border mission in scope and content .
We acknowledge that Israel has agreed to a daily lull to allow desperately-needed food , fuel and medicine into Gaza .
However , only a full and immediate ceasefire would allow the delivery and distribution of the large quantities of humanitarian aid that Gaza so desperately needs and for the resumption of basic services .
Israel must ensure the unhindered and safe access for humanitarian aid and other essential supplies , including food , medicines and fuel , to the Palestinian civilian population of the Gaza Strip , as well as the safe passage of civilian persons and humanitarian personnel into and from the Gaza Strip .
But even a durable and comprehensive solution in Gaza will not be sufficient to install peace in the region .
We need to address broader and more complicated challenges .
We need a new and inclusive strategy that addresses the internal Palestinian political situation , as well as a resumption of the peace talks which have been suspended due to the Gaza crisis .
Palestinian reconciliation , and a government representative of the aspirations of the Palestinian people , is more necessary than ever .
We therefore support the mediation effort undertaken by Egypt in accordance with the Arab League 's resolutions of 26 November 2008 .
As pointed out in the conclusions of the GAERC in December 2008 , the European Union is prepared to support any stable Palestinian government that pursues policies and measures reflecting the Quartet 's principles .
The European Union stresses the need to achieve a just , lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East and calls for the resumption of Palestinian-Israeli negotiations and the resolving of all outstanding issues in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict , including all core issues .
A durable and comprehensive solution will ultimately depend on real progress in the Middle East peace process .
Urgent and great efforts by the parties will be needed to achieve a comprehensive peace , based on the vision of a region where two democratic states , Israel and Palestine , live side by side in peace , in secure and recognised borders .
The latest outbreak of violence in the Middle East might not only set back prospects of a peaceful settlement in the conflict between Israel and Palestine .
The political damage the fighting is causing , both in terms of regional polarisation and radicalisation , and in the further discrediting of moderate forces , must not be neglected either .
Only a viable Palestinian state will bring security to a region that has suffered for too long .
This is especially in the interests of Israel and its neighbours .
Therefore , urgent measures must immediately be taken to reverse the damage done by the military action in order to restore the possibility of an equitable negotiated outcome .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think we all would have hoped for a better start to 2009 .
Unfortunately , we face a terrible and appalling conflict in Gaza , which is now in its third week .
It gives cause for immense concern .
We discussed it yesterday at a meeting with the Committee on Foreign Affairs , the Committee on Development and those Members of the European Parliament who had been in Gaza at the weekend .
The President-in-Office of the Council has already mentioned the terrible statistics of the dead and injured , which get worse every day .
There is increasing evidence of victims suffering from extreme burns , and aid agencies report that the population is suffering from acute shortages of food , fuel and medicine , not to mention the destruction of houses and infrastructure .
However , Israel has also suffered losses and has faced hundreds of rockets being fired into its territory by Hamas , targeting Israeli civilians .
War , unfortunately , always produces immense human suffering , and this war is no exception .
Therefore , beyond its immediate devastating impact , it pushes the prospect of peace much further away , undermines the Arab Peace Initiative and could potentially have a very negative impact on the stability of the whole region .
I should like to outline quickly the diplomatic activity that we have taken together to bring this conflict to an end , and then to look at the mid- and long-term challenges .
We have been active from day one , which I think was important .
We know that we are not the main player in the Middle East , but we were , and are , an important player .
Therefore , in response to the outbreak of the crisis , the emergency meeting of the EU foreign ministers in Paris on 30 December 2008 was very important in developing proposals from the outset - the Paris Declaration - for bringing this conflict to an end , which we then used in our delegation and visit to the Middle East .
Here there are three elements .
First and foremost , the Paris Declaration called for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire , including both an unconditional halt to rocket attacks by Hamas on Israel , but also an end to the Israeli military action .
We called for a ceasefire to be accompanied by a permanent and normal opening of all border crossings , as provided by the agreement on movement and access in 2005 .
We expressed willingness to re-dispatch the EU Border Assistance Mission ( BAM ) to Rafah to enable its reopening , and we also indicated that we were willing to examine the possibility of extending assistance to other crossing points , provided that our security concerns were met .
Second , we stressed the urgent humanitarian needs , which we said had to be met .
Here we urged the immediate opening of the crossing points to enable pressing medical assistance , fuel and food to be delivered to the Gaza Strip , to enable humanitarian workers to gain access and for the injured to be evacuated .
Third , we reiterated our position that there is no military solution to this Israeli-Palestinian conflict , that the peace process is the only way forward and that efforts have to be stepped up as soon as we find a durable ceasefire .
As you have heard , our mission was carried out in tandem with a visit by President Sarkozy , who had planned to make a trip to Syria and Lebanon and who then decided to visit Egypt and Israel to reinforce these efforts , still on the basis of our declaration of 30 December 2008 .
France is currently chairing the Security Council , so it was an important initiative .
We coordinated closely , including a joint meeting in Ramallah , where President Sarkozy outlined his ceasefire plan , for which we - the troika - had to some extent paved the way through our discussions with key stakeholders , particularly Egypt and Jerusalem .
These efforts reinforced each other , sending a strong , united message from the European Union , and the troika not only conveyed this EU institutional position but also manifested our presence .
I think it was important that President Sarkozy also went to Syria and then Mr Solana accompanied him to Syria and Lebanon and also consulted with Turkey .
I think all of this was needed .
I particularly stressed the humanitarian situation , as has already been said , and I called particularly for the opening of the crossings and also for the possibility of at least some hours of ceasefire to allow the work of the international organisations to be carried out .
Israel accepted some of these points , and , in the negotiations with the Israeli Government , I also secured the co-location of an ECHO official in the Israeli Defence Force premises to coordinate the channelling of humanitarian aid with the Israeli armed forces , as had been done in the war in Lebanon , and that was a powerful tool for better coordination .
I would like to take this opportunity to express my thanks to all the courageous colleagues still working in Gaza , to those from UNWRA and ICRC , with whom we are working and who receive a lot of our funding , but also to many others .
( Applause )
I would also like to offer my sincere condolences to the families of those workers who have already been victims of this tragic episode .
The Commission has been spending quite a lot also on immediate humanitarian funds and we are ready to do more in the future .
What have these negotiations achieved ?
As the President-in-Office has said , they contained the major elements for the latest Security Council resolution , which then , a few days after the negotiations , was adopted with the abstention of the Americans .
An immediate ceasefire , Egyptian guarantees to stop smuggling through the tunnels , opening of the crossings for humanitarian aid , including deployment of a force - possibly with international participation and / or the Palestinian Authority 's security forces - policing the 15-km-long Philadelphia corridor between Gaza and Egypt .
We understand that the Palestinian Authority has accepted this proposal and now Israel and Hamas are studying it .
We think it is very important that very soon something works .
My latest information is that everybody is working very closely on it and maybe in a few days we will really have such a ceasefire .
I hope that this will be the case .
On mid-term perspectives , sadly both Israel and Hamas have initially rejected this UN Security Council resolution , but from these daily contacts I hope that an agreement can be achieved quite soon .
It is important to say and recognise that Egypt has been playing a leading role in direct contacts with Hamas , and also that in this regard President Sarkozy 's visit to Syria , as well as the Turkish efforts , have been very important .
I also understand that the summit of the Arab countries could take place in Qatar at the end of this week .
We aim , as this intense diplomatic activity shows , to support all relevant actors who have the leverage with Hamas to help deliver a sustainable solution as set out in UN Security Council Resolution 1860 .
As soon as this ceasefire is agreed , we will have to think , probably in the form of a conference , how to formulate more concrete measures to alleviate the humanitarian needs of the Palestinian population in Gaza .
However , we have to be clear in saying that whatever we do , it must not contribute to an endless cycle of destruction and reconstruction with no peace .
Under the right conditions I might come back to you and seek your help to contribute in a meaningful way to constructive efforts , as I have done in the past .
You know that Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is touring the region and hopefully he too can contribute to this final success that is absolutely necessary to getting this lasting ceasefire .
As a long-term perspective , we have to say that the current offensive clearly contributes to a weakening of trust between Palestinians and Israelis .
Military operations can never bring a lasting peace ; only a negotiated political agreement can do this .
Dialogue should therefore resume both between Israelis and Palestinians and among Palestinians .
Once hostilities have stopped , I think it will be important to resume talks aimed at a comprehensive peace as soon as possible .
Here we have to work with the new US administration to ensure it is able to support bilateral negotiations from the beginning .
In this regard I welcome Secretary of State-designate Hillary Clinton 's commitments at her Senate hearing yesterday .
We will insist that parties negotiate on substance , and not just on process , and that the Anapolis process comes to a successful conclusion .
This crisis shows that a successful conclusion is more urgent than ever .
The question of Palestinian reconciliation will also be central .
It is unlikely that Hamas will be eradicated by this operation .
Possibly it will come out debilitated militarily , but strengthened politically .
Hamas 's position that President Abbas 's term will end on 9 January is another issue which is closely linked to the reform of the PLO and of Fatah .
To achieve lasting peace it is clear that a strong Palestinian Authority needs to speak for all Palestinians and that it needs to be committed to a two-state solution through peaceful means .
The conflict in Gaza also , unfortunately , has potential negative repercussions in terms of regional support for the peace process .
Israel 's image with several pro-peace Arab regimes has been dented by the excessive suffering of the Gaza civilian population .
Israel 's leaders and the Israeli population should understand how negative this is for their aspirations as a people to live in peace .
We are their friends and must tell them that we are doing this .
Israel therefore cannot afford to waste any time in reaching peace .
This is my first short , or not so short , analysis , and we will have to try to work in order to get this durable ceasefire in order then to be able to go on and get peace negotiations under way with a new American administration .
Mr President , 17 days of fighting in Gaza have quite simply left a heartbreaking situation .
The worst part , because it is irreparable , is the loss of human life , including innocent civilians and children .
However , we can also see destruction , chaos , hatred and revenge ; the Palestinian cause divided ; the radicals being strengthened to the detriment of the moderates ; and a peace process that has been completely derailed .
As pointed out by the President-in-Office , this is because all the battles in a war may be won , but the most important battle can still be lost , which is the battle for peace .
Mr President , rather than trying to apportion responsibility or blame to either or both sides , the most important issue - as the Commissioner has just said - is to bring about an immediate ceasefire , as called for by UN Resolution 1860 .
As the UN Secretary-General has just reminded us , both sides must comply with this resolution .
It is also vital to alleviate the terrible humanitarian and economic situation that exists in the Gaza Strip , which is governed - in inverted commas - by Hamas , an organisation that is on the EU 's list of terrorist organisations .
However , we must remember that not only is Hamas one of the causes of the conflict , it is also a consequence of terrible circumstances .
Mr President , my political group supports and wants to recognise the efforts made by all the political groups in this House to support the motion for a resolution that we will adopt tomorrow .
We also want to pay homage to those Members who have attended the negotiations , particularly the representative of my group , Mr Brok , who had a very difficult task .
Mr President , my group supports the efforts of the Commission and the Council to bring about a ceasefire as soon as possible , in collaboration with the Arab countries - Egypt in particular - and the other members of the Quartet .
We are very hopeful about the statement made yesterday to the US Senate Committee on Foreign Relations by the Secretary of State-designate , Hillary Clinton , as regards offering pragmatic , dialogue-based and effective diplomacy .
Finally , Mr President , I come to the most important element : the European Union is a union of values with , in prime place , the value of peace .
I believe that the European Union must make every effort and use all its political weight in the interests of this cause , without allowing our thoughts to become muddled or our hearts to become hardened to such a conflict .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , debates of the kind we are holding today are very difficult for us all .
The reason they are difficult is that Israel is a friend , that many of us - and this is particularly true of me - feel bound to the country by ties of deep friendship .
With friends it is all the more important to discuss controversial subjects openly .
So far , this conflict has claimed 1 000 lives in 17 days .
It is a bloody conflict , and women and children are suffering particularly as a result of it .
There is a UN resolution that forms a basis for declaring an immediate ceasefire and opening negotiations .
It is crystal clear that the conflict can be resolved only on the basis of international law , and the fact that international law and international humanitarian law must be respected should be obvious to a democratic country based on the rule of law .
It is actually a shame that we are having to discuss this .
Therefore , all we can do to overcome the humanitarian crisis is to appeal for an immediate ceasefire .
What we say in our resolution is not just anything , but something that is vital in order to put a direct and immediate end to the loss of life , the starvation and the misery .
It is quite clear that the State of Israel has a right to defend itself .
It is entitled to defend itself against people whose aim it is to destroy the State .
Yet a democratic country based on the rule of law must always ask itself whether the means it uses to do so are proportionate .
In my estimation - and , I believe , that of most of my fellow Members in this House - the means are not proportionate .
( Applause from the left )
We must tell our friends in Israel , regardless of their political orientation , that we are aware that Hamas is no peace movement .
We know that it is led by people who do not share our fundamental values , and of course each rocket that is fired at Israel is an attack against which the State is entitled to defend itself - but , in spite of everything , it is a mistake to refuse to engage in dialogue .
If dialogue is the fundamental precondition for peaceful development , to refuse to engage in such dialogue is to perpetuate the armed conflict . A fundamental adjustment is needed , therefore .
There will have to be dialogue with Hamas .
If Israel cannot engage in this directly - I can understand the point of view of Israeli politicians who say we cannot talk to Hamas , even though many of the country 's citizens believe they should - if parliamentarians and members of the government say they do not want to , there are enough opportunities for international mediation .
For example , there is the Quartet , and one of the possible tasks of the European Union within the Quartet is to enable such mediation on dialogue .
It is a fundamental error to believe that there can ultimately be a military solution to this Middle East conflict .
I consider this a fundamental error regardless of which side believes it .
There can be no solution via terrorist acts , and there can be no solution via conventional military action .
The only solution there can be is dialogue between the parties to the conflict , with the help of international mediation .
What is needed is an immediate ceasefire .
This must be guaranteed by means of the mechanism provided by the international community , if necessary with the help of a multinational force with participation from Arab and , in particular , Muslim States .
This would be a way to now bring about a ceasefire and an improvement .
When I was a young lad and entering politics , I was told that one does not talk to terrorists .
At that time , the main terrorist was Yasser Arafat .
A couple of years later I saw pictures on television of this terrorist leader receiving the Nobel Peace Prize together with Israeli politicians .
What was possible then can be possible also in future .
Therefore , one question is whether progress is made to the extent that the available mechanisms produce the necessary dialogue .
On behalf of my group , I should like to thank all those , including from other groups , who worked on our resolution .
If this resolution , which is supported by all the groups in the House - I consider this a good sign - can help improve the atmosphere , we shall have made a contribution , however small , to ending loss of life that is intolerable to all .
( Applause from the left )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , the day will indeed come when we have to separate the good from the evil , but I think that , today , it is more urgent that we make our demands , which are : an immediate truce , with an end to rockets being launched into Israel and to Israeli operations in Gaza ; the delivery of humanitarian aid ; a lasting ceasefire , with an end to trafficking in weapons and munitions , with effective surveillance of the border between Egypt and Gaza , with the withdrawal of Israeli troops and with the reopening of the crossing points ; and , lastly , the lifting of the embargo - and all of this , at the same time .
This will be a highly complex phase , one that will no doubt or most probably require the presence of an international force , and I believe that the Union should prepare itself to take part in this .
I should like to make two additional points .
In order to succeed , the European Union will have to speak and act clearly and not in a disorganised manner .
It is very useful to have good intentions , but it is more important to be effective .
The United States will also have to make a commitment , as will the Arab League and its member countries .
Lastly I would add that , in order to offer a real alternative to the situation in Gaza , Israel will have to significantly improve the situation in the West Bank : 634 checkpoints , the splitting in two of the road network , 8-metre-high walls , as well as the countless acts of humiliation inflicted on the Palestinians , do not offer an appealing enough alternative to the inhabitants of Gaza to make them turn their backs on Hamas .
To conclude , I would say that the day will inevitably come when everyone will have to speak to everyone else .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , like everyone , we are all , obviously , involved in and upset by this situation , but I believe that it is a duty , at least for me , to reject any kind of hypocrisy .
The problem has very remote roots : the legitimate and sacrosanct right of the Palestinians to have a free state is coupled with the equally sacrosanct right of Israel to be recognised , and we know that Israel has been removed from the map in many countries .
We know that France , Italy , Spain and Germany would certainly not have stood for being removed from the map ; they would not have agreed to be considered non-existent .
We know that it was not Israel that started this umpteenth war and that terrorism is still one of the main problems .
I therefore believe , Mr President , that , setting aside hypocrisy , we now have a duty to start thinking in different ways .
We cannot believe that dialogue with terrorists is justified by the fact that so many civilians have died , because this would create an excuse for any terrorist in the future to use violence , force and death in order to obtain political legitimacy .
I believe that we , as the European Union , should finally start behaving more consistently and find the ability to tackle the problem of economic relations with countries that do not recognise Israel , and to provide humanitarian corridors that enable civilians , both Palestinian and Israeli , to reach a place of safety .
In this case it is the Palestinians that are suffering more , having said that , Mr President , I believe that it would also be right to review the position on aid that has been given and which is being given now , but over the use of which we have no control .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation is certainly enough to make one weep .
The hope for peace and security for those concerned vanished in the smoke of Gaza and under the bodies of the dead , and of the children , and of the women , and of the men , and of the wounded .
We are further now from a hope of security than we ever have been .
All those who think that this war is , according to the logic of the Israeli argument , a war justified by the fact that there was a rocket attack on Israel , and that the Palestinians should be taught a lesson , have not understood a thing .
They have not understood a thing , for teaching someone a lesson is a dismal way of educating them and one that has never worked .
Since the time of Clausewitz we have known that he who starts a war must know how to finish it , must know what the aim is .
Well , the aim of this war is more security for Israel .
We can say today that the aim of this war will never be achieved by this war and the way in which it is being waged .
The more civilian deaths , the more Palestinian deaths , the less security in the region !
That there is the drama , the tragedy that is currently taking place in that region .
And that is why we have to be very clear here .
Mr Schulz is right : Israel needs to be protected from itself !
Israel needs to be saved from the temptation of a solution that involves war and armed force .
The Palestinians need to be protected from Hamas .
Palestinian civilians need to be protected from Hamas .
That is our task .
It is not easy , but we must be clear .
I call on the Council to stop thinking in terms of upgrading , increasing , improving relations with Israel while the situation remains as it is .
This is a poor solution ; this is not the right solution !
( Applause )
I call on all those who rightly advocate a dialogue , a debate with Hamas , not to be naïve , to bear in mind the fact that a debate must be held with Hamas in order to improve the situation in Gaza , since they hold the power , but , at the same time , to realise that Hamas 's strategy requires there to be casualties .
Israel has fallen into Hamas 's trap : the more deaths there are in Gaza , the better it is for Hamas .
That is one of the truths that Hamas must also be told .
We refuse to accept this suicidal strategy of Hamas 's that seeks to create victims and martyrs in order to launch acts of aggression against Israel .
Hamas must be told this , too .
To conclude , I am going to tell you something : the only ones who can resolve the Hamas problem are the Palestinians .
As long as Israel continues to occupy the West Bank , as long as Israel fails to offer a positive solution to the Palestinians of the West Bank , more and more Palestinians will turn to Hamas .
If we give the Palestinians in the West Bank a hope of life , they will rise up against Hamas and they will rid us of Hamas .
Free the Palestinians from the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and the Palestinians will free themselves from Hamas .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Rahed is 50 years old ; he has lost his home , his three children , his wife and two sisters-in-law .
Rahed is in despair , and is in the centre that we visited .
He said , in deep distress , ' Hamas will say that it has won when this attack is finished , and Israel will say that it has won , but in reality it is we civilians who are dead . '
I would like to say another thing : in reality , with the dead bodies of women and children that we saw , and with over 4 000 wounded in the hospital without any treatment , what is dying there is justice ; what is dying is the dream of a Europe that wants human rights to be universal , and that is a tragedy !
We are ineffectual .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , you know that I have great respect for you , and I know that you are taking action and working together with others to achieve much .
I believe that we must understand , clearly and unambiguously , that this military war , this militarism on the part of Israel , is leading not to Israel 's salvation , but to its end , including its moral end .
This is what David Grossmann says , moreover , when he commemorates Mr Rabin , killed by a fundamentalist Jew , not a fundamentalist Islamist , because he wanted to achieve peace .
Bring in a cease-fire !
Bring in a cease-fire !
That is what a Norwegian doctor said to me , who is operating every day and working round the clock ( we are sending doctors to Gaza ) .
A cease-fire is what we want !
The Security Council must start to turn its words into concrete actions .
We agree with diplomacy , but we must use not only diplomacy , we must also use the instruments that we have .
One instrument that we have in relation to Israel is in fact the upgrade , and I am pleased to hear that today , for example , the European Commission 's representative in Tel Aviv has said that now is not the time to think about upgrading .
We should take a break from that , because what we must do is to bring about a cease-fire .
This is extremely important .
I think it is important , and that it is a strong message .
You were speaking about protection and international protection .
I believe that it is a mistake to think only about Gaza and Rafah .
Protection for the civilian population comes from the north , it comes from the Israeli attacks that come from Herez .
Border control is control of the main borders , Rafah and Herez , because for a long time , since 1992 , since the Oslo agreement , as you very well know , Palestinians have not been able to exit through Herez , and not even sick people get out through there .
We must therefore think not only in terms of the tunnels , and the weapons with which Hamas can arm itself , but in terms of absolutely all the prohibitions that exist for the Palestinians .
We need a cease-fire and an opening-up not only of humanitarian corridors , but an opening up of all the crossing points , because if the people do not have food to eat , if the people do not have trade , what can be done ?
Then that will be truly serious pressure for Hamas to stop existing and stop carrying out actions that harm the Israeli population .
Israel , however , should know that it is the West Bank which is militarily occupied and it should truly make peace , and not build settlements .
( Applause )
Many thanks , Mrs Morgantini .
I should like to express my respect to you and the other MEPs who took the initiative to travel to the Gaza Strip in recent days .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Palestine is Islamic territory , inalienably so .
Since its creation in 1987 , the Islamic movement Hamas has stuck firmly to this basic principle .
In this , it receives full backing from the Islamic Republic of Iran .
This ideological point of view leaves absolutely no room for the Jewish state of Israel in the Middle East , and the baneful effects of this Muslim totalitarianism are making themselves cruelly felt in the Gaza Strip .
Typical of Hamas 's philosophy is the military use of mosques in Gaza , with all the tragic effects that this entails .
I would in this respect refer you to the lucid report in last Monday 's Frankfurter Allgemeine .
If Europe really values the continued existence of the Jewish state of Israel , a confrontation between Hamas and its ally Hezbollah in Iran is on the cards .
Are we prepared to brace ourselves for this grim , albeit realistic , prospect ?
After all , a cease-fire or temporary armistice is to Hamas and company a mere pause for breath in the Jihad against Israel .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must say that I believe that the vast majority of this House shares the wishes for peace and the concerns that have so far been expressed by many of us here .
I also believe that what was said by the Council can be endorsed , and I would argue that the Commission has so far pursued a course that may be beneficial to dialogue : the opening up of the humanitarian corridors and the bilateral cease-fire might herald a subsequent commitment to organise an international safety zone .
Here perhaps Mrs Morgantini is right , in asking that this zone should relate not just to Gaza , but should extend to all Palestinian territories .
Basically , I have the impression that the wishes and the diplomatic activity of Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , to some extent at least , can be seen as adopting the same approach as that which the Pope sought to adopt on this issue .
I humbly wish to share the same kind of approach : after all these years , we must still seek a solution for two peoples and two states - that is a point which we must not forget - and we must seek , finally , to affirm international law .
There is not and never will be a military solution - Mr Schultz said that too , and every now and then I must refer even to him - and I must say that undoubtedly there will never be a military solution that resolves the problem in the Holy Land .
On this point , I believe that the European Union has the tools to support whatever diplomatic effort may be of use here .
I am sure Mr Schulz will be pleased to hear you mention his name in connection with the Holy Father !
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to describe my starting point .
Hamas opposes a two-state solution , rejects the right of existence of the State of Israel , has taken power by means of a brutal coup against its own people , fires rockets at civilians , and uses civilians , schools and mosques as human shields .
How , when trying to protect one 's own civilians , is it possible to react proportionately if the other side is using its own civilians as human shields ?
Therefore , the concepts of numerical comparison and proportionality are not applicable in a situation such as this .
In a war situation there is no proportionality - each war and each casualty is one too many , and it is not possible to balance figures for each side against the other .
This seems to me to be the sensible starting point .
Therefore , we should not be engaging in the kind of one-sided finger-pointing we have seen , but instead attempting to bring about a ceasefire and to provide help in this regard .

I believe that President-in-Office Schwarzenberg and his delegation , and also Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , with the help of other national delegations , have done more in this regard than any other party , for which I wish to thank them sincerely - I have seen no sign of the United States , hardly any sign of the UN and no sign of the other members of the Quartet .
We must ensure that this ceasefire has two components : there must be an end to the Israeli attack , and Hamas must be prevented from getting its hands on new rockets from Korea and Iran that would put Tel Aviv within range .
For this reason , it must be ensured not only that the firing stops but also , by means of international agreements including the Quartet and the Arab League , with Egypt in the key role , that the 15 km border is patrolled to the extent that no more shots can cross into Gaza .
At the same time , the Israeli attack must be stopped .
There is one final comment I should like to make .
This is just a small first step .
If Israel wishes to have moderate Palestinians to deal with in future - which would mean a two-state solution - then , once this is all over , care must be taken at long last that the moderate Palestinians supporting President Abbas have accomplishments to show to their own population , which means an end to the resettlement policy and to several other things .
After all , if the moderates have no successful achievements to show to their people , the radicals will triumph .
This must be the starting point of a new Israeli policy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the face of this vast tragedy our words are liable to be inadequate .
An army that kills hundreds of civilians , women and children , places itself at the same level as the terrorism that it is claiming to combat .
On the other hand , anyone who knows Gaza , even if only through having seen it on the map , knows that no military operation could be conceived without admitting the likelihood of a massacre of civilians .
Can Israel today say that it is safer , after having given rise to so much hatred and despair ?
If not with Hamas , directly or indirectly , then with whom must a way out of the blind violence be sought ?
Our resolution reinforces the call for a cease-fire already expressed by the United Nations Security Council .
We urge the parties to abide by it and we call upon Europe to take action to render it possible .
The risk is that this massacre , far from vanquishing Hamas , Mr Brok , will weaken the Palestinian Authority itself even further , as well as those in the Palestinian world who have staked everything on negotiations with Israel .
We should ask ourselves , honestly , what have they actually gained so far ?
Nothing .
That is the answer that we must give if we truly wish to start rooting out the hatred and the violence .
- ( FR ) Mr President , we are all partly responsible for what is happening today in the Middle East .
We , in Europe , and we , in the international community , have allowed the situation to get worse ; we did nothing when Israel 's security was under threat , and we did nothing when the blockade was making life in Gaza absolutely impossible .
Today is the 19th day of war ; 995 people have been killed , including 292 children , and there are thousands of wounded , some of whom are still waiting to be evacuated .
There are tens of thousands of refugees who no longer have a home and do not know where to go .
The humanitarian situation is becoming worse and worse : 700 000 inhabitants of Gaza no longer have electricity , one-third of them no longer have water or gas , and it will soon be three weeks since this situation first began , three weeks in which these people have lived or , rather , have done their best to survive .
There is too much suffering , too much hardship , and this must end , this must stop now !
Our responsibility to ourselves , as Europeans , is not to be obliging towards anyone .
Our responsibility to ourselves , as Europeans , is to put pressure on the two parties so that they finally agree to negotiate .
It is a matter of days , perhaps even hours , before the point of no return is reached with a land offensive , particularly in Gaza town .
Israel must be guaranteed its security , and the people of Gaza must have a guarantee that they will be able to live in peace in the future .
The borders must be controlled , and the blockade must be lifted .
All of us here know that , in order to obtain this agreement , it will perhaps be necessary for Europe , the United States and the Arab states - which are meeting the day after tomorrow - to all speak with one and the same voice .
I should like to express my firm conviction before I conclude . It is not the war that must be won today , but peace .
( Applause )

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I truly welcome the comments by the Commissioner and Mr Pöttering , in denouncing in no uncertain terms the grave responsibility that Hamas bears for having put an end to the truce , but equally clearly judging the Israeli reaction to be totally disproportionate .
Beyond the words , however , the crisis remains , and there are still thousands of people - the civilian population and children - who are in desperate need of humanitarian aid .
In all conscience , and without hypocrisy , perhaps we should ask ourselves some questions .
While our children were celebrating Christmas , how many children died in Gaza ?
Two or three hundred ; and how many Israeli civilians ?
Could the international community have done more ?
In my opinion , the answer is yes .
It ought to have done more .
We should feel the full weight of our responsibilities .
It is not enough to broadcast views on Hamas , on Israel , on the initial responsibility , or on who is more to blame .
Unfortunately , above and beyond the emergency , Europe remains inadequate .
In my view this is a serious inadequacy : an incapacity to build a real , strategic and lasting peace policy .
Today , clearly , we must issue a strong demand for a cease-fire , but this is not enough .
We must set out strict conditions to accompany the peace and development process in the Middle East .
To finish , I would also like to refer to the words of the Pope , who said that we need to give specific answers to the general aspirations of many in those lands to live in peace , security and dignity , as Mrs Morgantini also pointed out .
Mr President , I really am finishing .
Violence , hatred and distrust are forms of poverty - perhaps the most terrible to combat .
- ( FR ) Mr President , in Gaza , we have seen war and we have seen death , but we have also seen people , living people , people who have the right to live and whom we have a duty to protect .
Protecting the civilian population - this is the real emergency .
Nothing can excuse the fact that not everything has been done to protect this population , and I would ask you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , do you feel , today , that you have done everything you can to ensure that the Israeli authorities call an immediate halt to this indiscriminate and disproportionate military operation ?
The answer is most certainly ' No ' .
When rumours of the operation were circulating in the embassies the Council , against Parliament 's wishes , reaffirmed its determination to step up its relations .
This was a tragic mistake !
When NGOs call on the Security Council to have the International Criminal Court investigate alleged war crimes , the Council is unable to invoke the ' human rights ' clause of its agreement with Israel .
I am sick of hearing that we cannot do better , that we have done all we can .
It is in fact the deadlock of your essentially humanitarian policy to alleviate the damage caused by the military occupation and the war that is the biggest failure .
How far will we have to go in terms of violations of international law before we have the ' human rights ' clause applied ?
If we are not capable , today , of asking ourselves questions about the scope of effective mechanisms for applying pressure and for implementing , then I do not really know what kind of situation will justify our finally taking action .
I tell you straight : if the business-as-usual approach continues and remains an ongoing part of our relations with Israel , with the 1 000 deaths in Gaza , you will bury Article 11 of the Treaty , you will bury the Union 's ' human rights ' policy and you will bury the European project !
( Applause )
Mr President , returning from the Gaza Strip after seeing the massacre - predominantly of civilians - I feel the urge to express my wholehearted solidarity with the Palestinian people .
For 17 days , they have been facing the enormous Israeli war machine that is flagrantly violating international law .
I also express support for the peace forces in Israel calling for an end to this war .
After a long closure and siege that converted Gaza into the largest open prison in the world , the building of the shameful wall around the West Bank , the continuous expansion of the settlements , and the effective division of the Palestinian land , the occupying forces have moved to the fiercest military operation .
In this , the rocket attacks against southern Israel - and I stress that I am against any attack from whichever side on civilians - served as the pretext .
The ending of the ceasefire against the background of the power games in view of the Israeli elections is an insult to a whole nation .
The UN Security Council has adopted a resolution .
Israel is a state , not an organisation ; it is a member of the United Nations .
It has a responsibility towards the international community , and has to comply with this and all other resolutions adopted by the United Nations .
There should be respect for international law .
No impunity should be permitted any longer .
There should be a full international investigation .
The international community demands an immediate ceasefire , the immediate withdrawal of the military forces , access to humanitarian aid , and freedom of movement for the population .
Let UNWRA carry out its mission .
The EU has taken steps , but only at a humanitarian level .
It has to show decisiveness at the political level .
Use the clauses in the association agreements .
Stop the upgrading of relations with Israel .
Stop arms exports to Israel .
There can only be a political solution to this conflict .
There should be a full return to international law , which means ending the 42-year-long occupation of Palestine , and establishing a sovereign and viable Palestinian state , thus building a peaceful future for both Palestinian and Israeli children .
To save future generations , we need to stop the war now .
- ( FR ) Mr President , several thousand years ago , David confronted Goliath in order to find out whether the land was destined for the Moabites , the Philistines or the Hebrews .
Currently the same drama is continuing on this land , the source of one of the three pillars of our civilisation .
Today it is urgent , right , legitimate and necessary to ensure the security and recognition of the State of Israel .
To do so , a single solution is required , and that is to guarantee the birth of a truly sovereign Palestinian State .
Here , as elsewhere , multiculturalism has its limits .
Where there are two peoples , there must be two States .
If the European Union 's aid is indeed effective , then it must be focused on one objective : that of ensuring the growth of this Palestinian constitutional state where the rule of law protects the weak and helps the strong .
There is a sense of urgency , since , on this land , the extremists on all sides are powerful and in the wrong , while the children are moderate and victims .
The solution for transcending the demands of ' an eye for an eye ' is neither moral , nor military , but political .
So , it is time to get down to work !
Mr President , I abhor terrorism .
I repudiate the propaganda of terrorism .
Maybe coming from Northern Ireland heightens my awareness , so when I hear Hamas bleat because of necessary retaliatory action against its years of indiscriminate raining of rockets upon innocent citizens in Israel , then I am unimpressed because I know that Hamas , like the IRA in my country , are masters of the twin arts of terrorism and propaganda .
The situation is demonstrably clear .
Israel accepts a two-state solution .
Hamas cannot even abide the right of Israel to exist and thus unleashes endless relentless terrorist attacks upon its territory .
And when , after much forbearance , Israel hits back , they cry victim .
Sorry : they are the perpetrators and if they want peace the answer lies in their own hands .
Stop shelling Israel .
( EL ) Mr President , we all realise that the situation in Gaza is tragic .
It is bordering on a humanitarian disaster and it requires immediate action .
I would like to congratulate the European Commission on having stepped up its efforts , the Presidency on its initiatives and on coordinating national action being taken in this sector , and Egypt on the important and sensitive role which it is playing .
There is now an urgent need for a ceasefire and for a cessation of hostilities on both sides , for corridors from Israeli territory and Egypt to address humanitarian needs and for border controls to stop the illegal movement of weapons and people .
As the Commissioner said , the signs for a truce plan are encouraging and I hope that it will be accepted immediately and will be respected in practice .
So what are our next moves ?
Both the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council have already said that we need to support our objectives for viable peace and the creation of a Palestinian state which will live in peace and respect next to Israel .
They are not new .
We have announced them and we have supported them without result .
The vicious circle of violence continues with negative consequences not only for the people of Israel and the Palestinians , but for all peoples in the area and for the security of the international community .
Now we need to take stock of our actions , our political choices and our practices and take more courageous and different steps .
There is an urgent need for us to engage at bilateral level with Israel in an honest , in-depth dialogue and self-criticism within the framework of our friendly relations and partnership and for us to identify the mistakes made in promoting mutual trust between these two peoples .
We also need to strengthen this sort of dialogue with all Palestinians , to make them understand the importance of peace , cohesion , human life and unity between them .
( DE ) Mr President , after Prime Minister Topolánek made some joking remarks today , I can say that , as an Austrian MEP , I am pleased that both the Commission and the Czech Council Presidency are represented by Austrians .
I wish you a very warm welcome !
President-in-Office , I realise of course that your loyalties lie with the Czech Republic .
Ladies and gentlemen , when , shortly before Israel 's unilateral disengagement from the Gaza Strip , I travelled to the country as part of a delegation with Mr Schulz , as Chairman of the delegation , the Deputy Prime Minister at the time said , ' do not interfere , this will work well ' .
Others - such as former Minister for Foreign Affairs Josip Elin - said , ' this will lead to chaos ' - and he was and remains right .
Unilateral disengagement without negotiations , without having a negotiating partner , does not make sense .
However , neither was it very well-advised of us to decide against entering into dialogue with even moderate representatives of Hamas - who may not even have belonged to Hamas , but rather have been nominated by it in the joint government .
By taking this position , we helped to destroy this joint government .
I know that there were some who wanted to hold talks but were not allowed to - that , too , was a mistake .
We need dialogue !
I do not like Hamas , firstly because it is a terrorist organisation and secondly because of its fundamentalist views , but this is not a matter of liking or disliking ; it is a matter of solutions .
Therefore , we must return to dialogue and talks , as many of our fellow Members have already said today .
Also , the people in Gaza must be given the chance to live half-decent lives .
Why are they voting for Hamas ?
The answer is that they see them as the only chance , the last chance , of even surviving - and this must be changed .
We must give these people an economic basis for survival , too ; we must lift the boycott and end their isolation .
That is the only real requirement .
Mr Brok , whom I hold in very high regard , said that the principle of proportionality was not applicable - but that is not true .
The principle of proportionality applies to private as well as international law .
Anyone violating it also violates international law - and that is something this House really cannot accept .
( Applause )
Mr President , a friend who knows I was in Gaza just three days ago challenges me .
' Have you never seen pictures of five-year-old Jewish children facing Nazi rifles with their arms above their heads ? ' she writes .
' They break your heart . '
And her words highlight why we make allowances for Israel that we would not make for any other country .
They do not , however , explain why a people that suffered so much in the 20th century should now inflict so much suffering on another people in this one .

Israel has turned Gaza into hell : the ground is shaking with explosions , even during a ceasefire ; there are donkey carts on the street and F-16s in the sky , 21st-century killing machines just dropping bombs ; 300 children are dead already , hundreds more torn apart limb by limb .
This is not a proportionate response of a civilised power .
It is evil .
It is evil .
Yes , the Hamas rockets must stop .
I have said so to Hamas representatives in Gaza myself before now , but let us have no more sanctimonious talk from Israeli officials about the need to fight terrorism , because Palestinians being bombed could name terrorists and they would name Olmert , Livni and Barak .
We have some responsibility for Israel 's actions .
On no occasion in the past , on no occasion I can think of , has the European Union ever backed up its criticism of the treatment of Palestinians by the Israelis with any kind of action .
We give a green light to Israel to proceed as it would wish and we have compounded that failure by ignoring the lessons of history .
You cannot make peace without talking to your enemies , yet we refuse to talk to the elected representatives of the Palestinian people .
Now we are completing negotiations with Israel on an enhanced cooperation agreement .
We do not plan to condemn Israel : we intend to reward it .
Those who want peace in the Middle East , those who want to see justice for both sides , must recognise that it is time to think again .
- ( GA ) Mr President , the war in Gaza is frightening and scandalous .
Everyone knows that a military solution will not work in the Middle East .
A political resolution is the only way to re-establish peace and reconciliation in the area .
In order to do this , the violence must be ended immediately .
I support the creation of an independent , sustainable Palestinian state , but a reasonably good economy and a proper political plan must be but in place .
It should be our aim to ensure that those two states exist in the region and have respect for one another .
Israel is entitled to protect itself , but it has gone too far with these attacks .
The attacks are immoral , and the international community cannot accept them .
The peace process in the Middle East must be put in place immediately .
I hope that America 's newly elected president , Barack Obama , will be working on this .
We wish him every success with this important duty and with the challenge ahead of him .
( ES ) Mr President , I too was in Gaza a few days ago , and it was a very intense experience .
We also went to Egypt .
I believe that we are at the end of an era : the Bush era , and that the last throes of President Bush are proving particularly bloody and painful .
We are at a turning point when we can adopt a different policy towards the Middle East , in which I want the European Union to take the lead .
Mr Obama is also taking this line as he says that he will talk to Iran .
Yes , Mr Obama is going to talk to Iran and we must talk to everyone , including Hamas , in the Middle East .
This new policy in the Middle East must be a policy of cooperation and , at the very least , it must abide by our values and by international law .
The hundreds of children whom we saw in Gaza , who clung onto our arms and who looked at us with eyes full of hope deserve an answer , just like the children of Israel .
This requires concrete action ; it requires action on the ground , to give hope to the moderates .
The most regrettable aspect is that Prime Minister Fayad , President Abbas , President Mubarak and King Abdullah are currently being accused of treachery in the streets of the Arab world .
When I stopped my taxi in the Sinai desert to have a coffee , we only saw Khaled Meshaal on the huge screens .
That is the result , the collateral damage of this attack on Gaza .
It will not bring peace to Israel or the security that we want , and even less so will it bring anything good for us .
If we do not stop this conflict , it will bring hatred to Europe 's own streets .
( PT ) One thousand is the number of the day , one thousand deaths to teach a black lesson .
Excuse my frankness : how many more lives will it cost to elect Tzipi Livni and Ehud Barak in the February election ?
We are here today to demand a cease-fire and an end to the slaughter of civilians .
However , the resolution also raises issues about our own liability .
It reminds us that the Council decided to upgrade diplomatic relations with Israel , against the opinion of this Parliament .
This was complicity by anticipation .
Today I hear : ' It is necessary to talk to Hamas ' .
We would have saved years if we had respected the elections in Palestine .
The role of Europe is not to support the politics and the destruction imposed by the stronger side .
It is to listen to the clamour that is filling the streets and squares of our cities .
We demand a cease-fire now , but we must realise that peace depends on an end to the occupation .
This word has fallen into disuse , but it has to come off the list of banned words where it was put by power politics .
Mr President , what is happening in Gaza is heartbreaking .
That the devastation is perpetuated by a supposedly western nation is unfathomable .
I agree 100 % that Israelis have a right to live without the threat of rocket attacks .
But what is being done in Gaza is not justice : it is slaughter .
There is no excuse ; there is no possible justification .
The most shameful thing for us in the EU is that it is being carried out by one of our preferred trading partners .
In 2007 the value of EU-Israel trade was EUR 25.7 billion .
Given the amount of money we contribute to Israel 's economy , we carry a grave responsibility when that money contributes to the death of civilians and children .
If we do not act , the blood of those in Gaza will equally stain our hands .
I call on this Parliament and all EU bodies to impose trade sanctions on Israel immediately and to keep them in place until a meaningful ceasefire is agreed .
If we do any less than our utmost to stop this killing , we become accessories to the slaughter .
- ( FR ) Mr President , once again , weapons are doing the talking in the Middle East .
Once again , the main victims are women and children , of whom thousands have been wounded and hundreds killed .
Once again , history is repeating itself , in all its horror , on Europe 's doorstep .
However , we note that , in spite of its initiatives , Europe is not making an effective contribution in this major conflict , even though it is taking place in its immediate area of influence .
An overwhelming majority of the public are finding this difficult to understand , and they are increasingly refusing to accept such powerlessness .
Commissioner , we must vigorously and authoritatively take up the leadership in order to bring about peace .
The Union for the Mediterranean must play a major role , as must the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly .
In line with this , the European Parliament must support the Franco-Egyptian peace plan in favour of an immediate ceasefire , the securing of the borders between Israel and the Gaza Strip , the re-opening of the crossing points and , above all , the lifting of the blockade of Gaza .
We must also call for the immediate application of the UN resolution .
Once this first stage is over , we must go further by proposing the implementation of a military force , not a multinational one but a Euro-Mediterranean one .
This gesture would be the founding act of a confirmed political will to achieve a ' European peace ' , something for which all the peoples of the Mediterranean have been waiting for so long .
I should also like today to draw your attention to a new situation .
With the Middle East conflict , we are little by little entering very dangerous territory , that of the clash of civilisations .
Indeed , ever since the start of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict , there has always been a groundswell of Arab public opinion .
Today , it is Muslim public opinion , which extends far beyond the geography of the Arab states .
This suggests a radical change in the nature of the conflict .
Europe has an historic responsibility , that of urgently strengthening the dialogue between civilisations .
- ( FR ) Mr President , I have taken the floor so many times in this House to say that we should seize any opportunity of peace , however slight , and that , in spite of everything , we should talk to Hamas , because it won the elections , that I no longer wish to return to these subjects .
I am overcome with sadness and anger , and while I do not wish today to let myself become overwhelmed with emotion in the face of this massacre , in the face of the war propaganda that I hear around me , in the face of the confusion , in the face also of the wave of hatred and anti-Semitism that is beginning to sweep through our streets , I have but a few words to say : Europe must go back to basics , and for me , these are obvious facts , but sometimes it is good to point them out .
Firstly , a Palestinian 's life is equal to an Israeli 's life , but not only his life , his future and his freedom , also .
Secondly , international law must be respected , and international law of course means an immediate ceasefire .
There are all the UN resolutions and the Geneva conventions as well , however .
The fact is , this region , today , has become a lawless region where everything is seemingly permitted and where a population is being held hostage .
Thirdly , justice will have to be served for all these crimes , no matter what they are or where they are committed .
There will never be security without peace , or peace without justice .
Transitional justice does exist , it is made for that , and , if it is not applied , the hate will continue to spread .
Over the last few days we have built up a capacity for hate that will prove more dangerous than the bombs .
Europe must enforce the application of the conditions of its partnership agreements , including paragraph 2 of its association agreements on respect for human rights .
This is an obligation of these treaties from which it cannot be exempt .
Lastly , Israel is not a special case .
It has responsibilities as a State and it cannot be put on an equal footing with Hamas .
When it comes to international law , there is no such thing as a ' get-out-of-jail-free ' card .
On Sunday we left behind us in Gaza a population that was caught in a trap , imprisoned in a ghetto below the bombs , and hundreds of thousands of children whose futures are today in our hands , and we came out of Gaza simply because we are Europeans .
The only Palestinians leaving Rafah are those who go feet first in ambulances , because they are dead or because they are wounded .
Europe will no longer be Europe , and no citizen will recognise himself as European if we forget these basics .
( Applause )
- ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to start by echoing the words of Mr Cohn-Bendit .
It is despair that grips us today ; this war is a tragedy .
The images of suffering and of death that have flashed across our screens non-stop for three weeks now are unbearable , as are , I hasten to add , all the images of war , all the conflicts , including those that are spoken of much less , if at all , such as Congo , Darfur , Zimbabwe and , before that , Chechnya , the horrors of which took place amid a deafening media and , I would stress , political , silence .
I have already stressed on several occasions in this House the fact that the indignation of some of my fellow Members varies according to circumstances .
However , as Mrs Morgantini has also often pointed out , there are no accounts to be kept when it comes to people dying ; there is no hierarchy in suffering ; every casualty , be it a man , woman or child , from whichever side , is one victim too many .
So , what should we do now to ensure that our debate today is not what it often is - a somewhat pointless , futile confrontation ?
Continuing to hurl abuse at each other about the historic responsibilities of the different parties seems to me to be a perfect example of such futility .
I have taken the floor late in this debate , so the arguments have been heard .
Questions can certainly be asked about the scale of the Israeli crisis and of the Israeli counterattack , but not , under any circumstances , about Israel 's right to security .
Which of our western governments would agree to watch thousands of missiles fall on its citizens without reacting ?
The question answers itself .
Above and beyond the call for an essential negotiated ceasefire , for a guarantee , of course , of the delivery of humanitarian aid , and for an end to the supply of weapons via the tunnels , the real issue , today , is necessarily aimed at the future .
The fundamentals of peace are well-known : they have already been identified at Taba , Camp David and Annapolis .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner has made this point . Most , though not all , of course , of the elements are on the table , and this involves sacrifices being made on both sides .
And , when I talk of sacrifice , I agree with Mr Schulz , who is not in the Chamber at present .
It is not a question of knowing whether a dialogue will be held with Hamas , but of knowing how it will be held , and under what conditions .
Most of my fellow Members have exceeded their speaking time by 50 seconds , so allow me to finish , Mr President .
The answer is that given by Yasser Arafat , in May 1989 , when he declared his freedom-destroying and deadly charter null and void .
Those words , moreover , have become part of the Palestinian vocabulary .
Inter-Palestinian reconciliation , above all , comes at this price , and our role as the European Union is to get the protagonists in Palestine and Israel , but also their Arab neighbours , Egypt and Jordan , to become partners of a lasting peace agreement .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , on Sunday , 11 January , we visited the border city of Rafah in the Gaza Strip , which is completely sealed off .
This means that the civilian population has no chance of escaping the daily bombardments by the Israeli army .
If you have not seen it with your own eyes you cannot imagine how much the people of Gaza are suffering and how urgent it is to reach a peaceful , definitive solution to the conflict .
We were all deeply affected on a personal level by the immensity of the suffering of the Palestinian people , and also of the devastation .
Therefore , I wish to reiterate , in the strongest terms , that the Israeli bombings must be brought to an immediate halt , as must Hamas ' rocket fire into Israel , and the smuggling of arms into the Gaza Strip from Egypt must also be stopped .
In addition , the borders must be opened immediately to allow into the area the aid deliveries that are ready and waiting to supply the civilian population .
We also saw doctors at the border ready to travel into the area to provide help , but being unable to as the border was closed .
Therefore , I would appeal once again for the borders to be opened to allow the assistance to be provided .
- ( CS ) Mr President , who would not experience anguish on seeing children killed by a missile ?
This is a terrible feeling , but it should not warrant hypocrisy .
Which European countries would show as much restraint as Israel and , for years , put up with an attack of more than 7 000 missiles , at each moment threatening the lives of more than one million civilians ?
However , the inhabitants of Gaza are not just innocent victims .
They enthusiastically , knowingly , freely and democratically elected Hamas and its charter .
When they spoke of liberation , they did not mean the liberation of Gaza , which is already free , but the liberation of Tel Aviv and Haifa from the Jews and the destruction of the State of Israel .
Anyone who elects criminals must logically share their fate .
Especially when these criminals hide behind the skirts of women and children as they would hide behind hostages , when they fire missiles from schools and transform mosques into huge weapons depots .
I remember the bombing of Dresden in 1944 , when British aircraft razed the city to the ground and killed 92 000 civilians , mostly women and children .
There was no hypocritical umbrage .
The Germans freely elected Hitler and shared in his fate .
The Gazans also knew who they were electing and why .
By the same token , a significant portion of the funds flowing from the EU into Gaza ended up in the hands of Hamas .
Perhaps this was so that Gazans , with full bellies and well provided for by the EU , could devote all of their attention to excavating tunnels for smuggling in increasingly lethal weapons to be used against Israeli civilians .
Proportional indeed !
( SV ) Mr President , there are two important things that characterise the debate here today .
The first is that an overwhelming majority of this Parliament wants to bring about a quick ceasefire .
The second is that there is overwhelming support for the requirement for all parties involved to accept the state of Israel 's right to exist within peaceful borders .
This is the starting point that is important for the European Union .
It is important , because it is a tragedy that we are witnessing in Gaza .
Every life that is lost is a tragedy , whichever side of the border they are on .
Let us not think that this tragedy would be any less if those who deliberately kill civilians succeed in reaching even further in amongst civilians by means of rocket fire .
It is also a tragedy because it creates obstacles to the realisation of a Palestinian state and thus a peaceful solution .
It is a tragedy that is also befalling the international community , because what is happening now has not happened overnight , but has been built up through rearmament , through the smuggling of weapons and through rocket fire over a long period .
What is important for us to see is that this is not a tragedy that is built on conflict between Jews and Palestinians .
I strongly object to anyone trying to demonise a nation .
When I heard Mr Davies trying to lay the blame on a nation , I heard a tone that I do not think should be heard in this Parliament .
It is not a conflict between Palestinians and Jews , it is not a conflict between Israel and the Palestinian authority , it is a conflict between extremists and moderate forces in the region .
Let us support the moderate forces by making it clear to everyone who is pursuing hatred and wants to eliminate the state of Israel that they will not succeed .
If Europe sends out this message , we will also strengthen the moderate forces and lay a better foundation for peace .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to address those who have detonated their charges of deception and demagogy in this House .
This is one in a series of wars , each of which has its similarities , but also its differences .
The conflict we are discussing today is an asymmetrical conflict .
For three years , Israel was bombarded with home-made missiles , and not a single word of censure was uttered in this House against those who fired them .
Today we are condemning Israel .
It is easy to condemn Israel , because it is a member of the UN .
It has something to condemn , it has authorities .
There is a government that can be condemned and censured .
On the other side is a terrorist organisation whose real identity is not known .
An organisation which plays with the lives of innocent people by acting behind their backs .
Another asymmetrical element is that we count the Palestinians who have been dramatically killed while being used as human shields , without countering this with the Israelis who have been killed and the thousands who live under threat , because bloodshed cannot be compensated by more bloodshed .
But the worst thing in this House is the asymmetry between words and actions .
It is easy for us to talk , but very hard to take effective action .
Without an international presence , this conflict will never be resolved .
Finally I would like to address those protesting against Israel 's disproportionate action .
Ladies and gentlemen , would you want a terrorist organisation to fire 7 000 missiles from Israel into Gaza ?
Would that be proportionality ?
Because this is a disproportionate conflict in which the law is ineffective , we will have to simply get used to it , otherwise we will just be going round in circles and using words which are not backed up by reality .
Opinions uttered in front of the television by a warm fire are not adequate to the truth about this conflict .
Ladies and gentlemen , I really must insist now that you keep to your speaking time .
I have never interrupted speakers , even when their speaking time had elapsed , but Mr Schwarzenberg is already giving us more of his time than we were expecting .
He has until 5.20 p.m. at the latest , I have been told .
I would entreat you to bear in mind the time for which you applied .
Being a general , Mr Morillon will set a good example .
- ( FR ) Mr President , achieving a lasting calm in Gaza will be possible only if a multinational intervention force is deployed under UN control .
For the first time , Israel seems resigned to this solution , which has been demanded time and time again by the Palestinians .
I do not know when this force will be able to intervene ; intervention will not be possible before an agreement has been reached between the parties to the conflict , but we all hope that this will be as soon as possible .
I do know , however , that this mission will require those conducting it to be completely impartial .
I believe that the European Union will therefore be in the best position to take action and - why not , Mr Pöttering ? - to do so within the framework of the Union for the Mediterranean .
It will be in the best position to take action since , rightly or wrongly , the Americans are considered to have sided with the Israelis , and the Arabs , with the Palestinians .
Do you not think , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that we ought to prepare ourselves for this ?
Mr President , long-lasting conflict and occupation give rise to anger , rage and disappointment at the efficacy of legal authorities , producing something we call the ' Hamas effect ' , as a serious factor .
The denial of Israel by Arabs , Islamics and Hamas is unacceptable , as is using children as human shields .
Neither should the constant threat under which Israeli children live be allowed .
The question is whether , in this vicious circle of aggression , the present Israeli authorities are able to take the lesson from the six-year-long history in the area , and apply the scalpel-like strategy for two states .
I know that they fear the threat from an aggressive and unpredictable neighbour shelling them with rockets , but in this matter the international community , including the EU , could come with help .
Is this risky solution acceptable , today , to Israel ?
But is there any other solution ?
If there is , tell me .
To expect Hamas to die out naturally , or by bombing them out , looks like a naïve expectation , so more courage is needed by Israel .
The Western powers did not create two states in 1948 , but they should do so now .
The core responsibility does not fade away .
Let us be more courageous in this strategy .
( SL ) The Israeli state has ordered the Israeli army to destroy Hamas in Gaza .
However , the Israeli army is eradicating Hamas by killing Palestinians in Gaza .
One third of all the dead are children and half of all the dead are women and children - but they are not members of Hamas .
The extent of the military violence is huge and disproportionate .
And how can a ceasefire be achieved when neither party recognises the other 's legitimacy ?
The enemy needs to be perceived , not as the object of attack and destruction , but as a subject , a partner with whom a ceasefire is possible and who will be responsible for preserving peace in the future .
Israel has to recognise Hamas and initiate dialogue with them , and vice versa - Hamas has to recognise Israel .
There is no other way .
Any kind of peace is better than bloody conflict .
Military violence must immediately give way and priority to a political solution .
However , Mr Ehud Olmert , the Israeli Prime Minister , is still trying to boost his bedraggled reputation by not allowing a ceasefire .
- ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , let me congratulate you on the results of your joint negotiations , the troika negotiations in Israel .
Unlike the press , we know that it was your mission which led the Israeli side to debate the opening-up of humanitarian corridors and a daily ceasefire .
I think this is the first time the Israelis have accepted Europe as a major partner and the Czech Presidency as an important representative .
Despite enormous pressure from the left , the European Parliament yesterday agreed on a quite exceptional resolution .
Even in such extreme circumstances , this is a balanced resolution , a resolution that can be supported by the right , a resolution which is not just a pamphlet or a political victory for the left .
We have avoided inserting an equals sign , however notional , between an existing State and a terrorist movement .
Recognising the existence of the State of Israel , renouncing violence and the entry of Hamas into PLO agreements remain the key objectives , as does the requirement of achieving a permanent ceasefire as soon as possible .
Yet we have provided no added value .
The three leading Israeli representatives , Barak , Livni and Olmert , are currently at odds over the conditions and guarantees under which they are willing to implement a ceasefire .
The key is clearly Egypt and it consists in a guarantee of tunnel checks and smuggling checks which would be acceptable to the Egyptian side .
What is the Council doing at this time ?
How is it proceeding in negotiations with the Egyptian side on the technical mission , international monitoring , technical surveillance , and the opening of the EU BAM Rafah ?
What can the MEPs meeting tonight with the Egyptian ambassador demand of the Egyptian side , or vice versa , how can we contribute to the negotiations with Egypt ?
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to call on the Council and the Commission to step up pressure on both sides of the conflict in order to stop the ongoing violence .
We have here Security Council Resolution 1860 and we must comply with its provisions .
It is necessary to adopt safeguards ensuring the long-term ceasefire and to allow a humanitarian corridor to be opened .
It has been stated repeatedly here that there is no military solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
The road to lasting peace leads only through political negotiations .
Here it is necessary for the European Union , in cooperation with the new United States government and the League of Arab States , to play a much more prominent political role than has been the case thus far .
The long-running conflict must be ended through a political agreement based on a two-state solution , enabling Israelis and Palestinians to live together in peace within secure , internationally recognised borders , and striving to build a peaceful system of regional security throughout the Middle East .
Mr President , we are debating yet another humanitarian tragedy in our neighbourhood - next door to my country - by two of our partners in the Mediterranean .
Alas , the Palestinians have not yet accepted that suicide bombs or Kassam rockets will never deliver liberation from the occupation of their land .
Israel does not realise that such an extensive military response nourishes new potential suicide bombers and invites new Kassams at the first possible opportunity .
What about the innocent civilians , the non-combatants , women and children ?
Nobody cares about them .
Nobody cares about children killed , mutilated , burned and traumatised by the hundreds - children of Israel and of Palestine .
We , from the comfort of our television sets , feel nauseated watching them .
How about those on the ground ?
What can we do ?
Just entering into the classic blame game does not help the civilians .
Making calls and resolutions does not help the civilians .
How can we pass from words to deeds ?
The time is right to negotiate with the interested parties the formation of an international force - as was suggested by other colleagues - to go into Gaza with a large police component composed of Arab countries to train and help a Palestinian authority police force in a large UN mandate to impose law and order , as well as a military European force to ensure there is an end to rocket firing and weapon smuggling , and that there is the full opening of the crossings .
We can no longer leave the fate of the civilians in the hands of the opposing sides .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a great Italian anti-fascist , Piero Gobetti , said that when the truth lies all on one side , to adopt a Solomon-like position is to be totally biased .
That is the case for Gaza at the moment ; I hope that Parliament will be able to say the right words to stop Israel .
If it does not do so , it will be seen as shameful by history , the Palestinians , European public opinion and Arab public opinion .
Israel is bombing and decimating a ghetto .
The sons of those who were exterminated have become exterminators .
There is no excuse for this , nor is the argument that Israel has a right to its own security enough .
Anybody , if he wishes to , can see that nobody is today able to threaten Israel 's security or its existence .
This is clear from the imbalance of forces on the ground ; it is clear from the numbers of the dead and wounded ; it is clear from the support that the West continues to lavish on Israel .
The only purpose of this massacre is to prevent the creation of a Palestinian state .
In this way , peace is being killed , and therefore we need to stop Israel .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council and the Czech minister for foreign affairs , because they are still with us ; we are not very used to a strong presence in this Chamber , such as that demonstrated today by the Czech Presidency .
I believe that Mrs Muscardini is right ; I advise those who do not know what things are like in that area and who need to be able to express precise opinions to go and see how things are on the ground , by going either as a tourist or for other purposes .
Some of us have been to Palestine under various circumstances , as observers for the Abu Mazen elections or other elections , and I believe that only seeing things in person can give one an accurate idea of how things stand .
I believe that throughout these events , which date back decades and are not just recent , the only losers have been ourselves in the western world , because we have never seriously tackled this problem and never sought to resolve it ; we continue to see it as a problem between two opposing parties .
I have been to Palestine several times , and I have been to Israel several times , so I know the situation , not perfectly , but well enough , and I believe that in reality there are not two parties involved there but three .
In this specific case the problem is between the terrorists and the state of Israel , and the Palestinian people are the victims caught in the middle .
Hamas does not represent the Palestinian people ; perhaps it represents a section of it , but it certainly does not represent the entire Palestinian people .
I have a film , which I believe that many Members will have had ; the film shows all the Israeli victims , including children and people of all ages , victims of all the rockets that have been fired and are still being fired by Hamas .
It is no accident that there is a large difference between the Gaza Strip and the West Bank .
I address this comment to the President-in-Office of the Council , and to our fine Commissioner , representing Europe .
I believe that we need to tackle the situation properly .
I believe that the most important thing of all is that today the position of Abu Mazen should be reinforced ; he is the weakest figure of all in this situation , together with the Palestinians , who count for nothing in this affair .
I believe that the real losers are all of us .
( EL ) Mr President , public opinion throughout Europe is calling for one thing from the Union : to put a stop to the slaughter of the Palestinian people .
We must condemn blind violence whatever its origin , but we need to be consistent in recognising that Israel is responding with state terrorism on a massive scale .
The asymmetrical retaliation , the blatant disregard for any concept of international and humanitarian law on the part of Israel cannot be tolerated .
It is unacceptable for white phosphorus bombs and experimental weapons to be used against civilians and it is inhumane for innocent women and children to be targeted .
If this happened in Africa or some other part of the world , our reaction would be immediate and the UN Security Council resolution would be binding .
However , in the case of Israel , we confine ourselves to statements and fruitless discussion .
I believe that we should use every political tool , including the Association Agreement , to persuade Israel to stop the illegal violence against the Palestinian people and to stop prohibiting access to humanitarian aid .
We cannot be bystanders because that makes us complicit in the slaughter .
The only solution is an immediate ceasefire and the opening of humanitarian corridors to Gaza and the start of dialogue with all sides .
Mr President , the horrific events in Gaza during the past two weeks have brought international condemnation against Israel .
We have witnessed colleagues during this debate today lining up to see who could express the strongest outrage against the Jewish State .
However , for one country in the Middle East , this was exactly the outcome it had sought : Iran has supplied missiles , munitions and other sophisticated weaponry to Hamas for years .
It has provided money and training for Hamas fighters .
Its objective was to provoke Israel into a ground war and the bloody result , with gruesome photos of dead children on TV screens and in newspapers around the world , is the best possible recruiting sergeant for fundamentalist Islam and the Iranian mullahs ' vision of a global Islamist movement united against the West .
The fascist regime in Tehran is the main sponsor of war and terror in the Middle East , and the tragic outcome is exactly what Tehran wanted .
It distracts domestic attention in Iran from the economic crisis caused by the collapse in the price of oil , and it distracts international attention from the mullahs ' rush to produce a nuclear weapon .
Iran 's foreign policy objective is to become the dominant regional power in the Middle East .
It wants to unite the Islamic world in submission to its own austere and disturbing vision of a totalitarian Islamic brotherhood , where human rights , women 's rights and freedom of speech are ground into the dust , and , shamefully , the West has done nothing to confront or expose Iranian aggression .
Faced with mounting evidence of the mullahs ' sponsorship of terror , the West has gone out of its way to appease Tehran , even agreeing to its primary demand of disabling the main Iranian opposition movement , the People 's Mujahedin of Iran , by placing it on the EU terror list .
This must stop .
Mr President , firstly , let us be clear that this Parliament will today support the UN Security Council Resolution 1860 .
It should be implemented without delay .
As one of the MEPs here who has been in Gaza through the blockade , a ceasefire and a withdrawal are not enough .
Of course we want the rockets to stop and the terrorists to stop their movements , but we must see a ceasefire and an end to the blockade so that the people of Gaza can begin to live their lives .
This is an issue of respect for international humanitarian law .
Human Rights Watch and Islamic Relief have told me that the three-hour daily pause is simply woefully inadequate to get in and to distribute aid .
It is an issue of proportionality .
Save the Children say that the killing of 139 children since the conflict began , with 1 271 injured , cannot be justified as self-defence .
I welcome the statement today by the EU envoy in Israel , Ramiro Cibrian-Uzal , who said that the EU and Israel have put negotiations on the upgrading of relations ' on hold ' at this time for these reasons .
So they should .
( DE ) Mr President , first we need an immediate and permanent ceasefire on both sides - there is a broad consensus on this in this House .
However , afterwards , we - the EU and the international community - cannot leave the fate of the people in the Gaza Strip in the hands of Hamas and Israel alone .
Hamas does not have the interests of the inhabitants of Gaza at heart , as it knew very well that Israel would respond to constant rocket attacks - and not only during election campaigns .
During the last year , surveys in Gaza have shown a fall in political support for Hamas in favour of Fatah .
It seems that Hamas is cynically counting on political support for Hamas increasing again with the large number of Palestinian victims , out of victim solidarity .
Israel , on the other hand , has almost exclusively the interests of its own citizens in mind , and so international criticism is directed mainly at the extent of Israel 's military operation and at the country 's acceptance of the large number of civilian casualties .
Therefore , we Europeans should not stop at negotiating a further ceasefire and financing the repair of the infrastructure .
I can already see the Commissioner 's letter of amendment : I am sure the draft is already finished and ready for submission to the Committee on Budgets .
Nor is it sufficient to keep an eye on whether Egypt closes the tunnel system at the border with the Gaza Strip to arms smuggling .
I call for the whole Quartet , including a strong Arab presence , to make a joint commitment to sending troops with a robust peacekeeping mandate to the Gaza Strip and the surrounding area - in the interests of the people in Gaza , Israel and Egypt .
In parallel , the peace process itself must be driven forward rapidly .
Otherwise , I fear that we shall see the kind of incidents we have been seeing in Gaza with ever greater frequency , and neither the Palestinians nor the Israelis deserve this .
( ES ) Mr President , the Spanish members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament view the situation in Gaza with horror , pain and shame , but also with a commitment to defend peace , protect those who are suffering most and maintain dignity and hope .
Our horror is at the repeated scenes of murdered children and women heartbroken in their endless suffering following the bombing of the ghetto that Gaza has become .
Picasso depicted this same horror in his Guernica painting of our Guernica razed to the ground by the Junkers of the Condor Legion seven decades ago .
Our pain is at the enormous suffering of so many victims .
Our shame is at the inability of everyone - our countries , the European Union and the international community - to firstly prevent and secondly end the criminal aggression which we condemn .
Our shame and also indignation are at so many lies , so much ambiguity and so much hot air .
Our shame is because we know exactly what is happening , yet we are not acting with the necessary forcefulness and coherence .
History will therefore demand an explanation from many as accessories to the crime , at the very least due to their failures .
As it is always ' better late than never ' and as it is vital to keep open a door to hope , the European Union must support the belated Security Council resolution .
However , it must ensure that this is strictly observed , just as our association agreement with Israel must also be strictly observed , which provides for its suspension in the event of behaviour such as that which is occurring .
Incidentally , is Hamas also responsible for the media blackout that I have not yet heard anyone condemn ?
Mr President , I wish to begin by expressing my deepest sympathy for all the innocent people , both in Israel and in Gaza , who have suffered in recent weeks and months as conflict rages .
But we need to take care that our natural humanity , our very justified concerns , do not distort our view of the true nature of the situation that we are dealing with .
In Gaza , Hamas has created a terrorist fiefdom : it tolerates no opposition to its views , it has murdered those Palestinians who opposed it , it has split the Palestine Authority , it refused to stop terror attacks on Israeli civilians , it refused to recognise the right of Israel to exist , it refused to acknowledge the peace agreements previously negotiated .
I recall the words of Hanan Ashrawi three years ago , when I was monitoring the Palestinian elections .
She foresaw the imposition of rule by the forces of darkness - how right she was !
We should not be surprised that a Hamas MP should take pride in stating that death was an ' industry ' for the Palestinian people .
He was referring to the use of suicide bombers and the deliberate use of civilian human shields to protect potential military targets .
It is , of course , a direct contravention of international humanitarian law to use civilians in this way .
Faced with such an intractable , callous and hateful enemy , what do we expect Israel to do while its citizens are constantly subjected to terror attacks ?
The international community took little notice .
When Israel took non-violent action , such as imposing blockades or cutting electricity , it was castigated .
Now that it has taken military action in reaction to Hamas provocation , it feels the weight of international disapproval .
The sad reality is that the Palestinian people have been atrociously served over many years by those who have control over Palestine Authority areas , by the international community , which has tolerated extremism and corruption , and by the Arab world , which has done nothing practical over many decades to improve their lives or prospects .
We need a Marshall Plan for the Middle East .
It is not just peacekeepers that the Palestinians need but a decent civil administration , free from corruption .
The civil administration needs to be put under international control but first of all the terrorist lifeline - weapons , monies and political indulgence - must be cut .

Mr President , I could agree with what Mr Van Orden says about Hamas , but the fact is that none of what he says justifies the bombing of civilians by Israel .
That is the fundamental point : we have to stop the bombing , whether it is coming from Hamas or coming from Israel .
I hope the resolution accompanying this debate will receive a strong vote in this House tomorrow , and I hope it will strengthen the hands of the Commission and the Council in pressuring both Israel and Hamas to stop the killing .
Since Israel withdrew from Gaza , it has turned it into the largest prison in the world , and for the last three weeks it has turned it into a slaughterhouse , illegally using terror against terror , killing civilian men , women and children , and killing the possibility of a viable two-state solution in the process .
There can be no upgrading of Europe 's relations with Israel so long as it fails to engage in constructive and substantive negotiations with its neighbours and all the Palestinian elected members , including Hamas .
It should be made clear by Europe that any escalation of this war on Gaza will be followed by an escalation of our reaction to that war .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioners , members of Council , fellow Members , I find the behaviour of the parties in the Gaza conflict to be cynical .
I consider it cynical and unacceptable that Hamas uses the civilian population - even children - as a human shield .
I consider cynical and inhumane the Israeli stance which , on the pretext of self-defence , uses disproportionate means , shooting masses of Gaza residents and most severely affecting the civilian population , including children .
I consider cynical and mendacious a foreign diplomacy which , with notable exceptions , strives to maintain appearances and yet even after so many days is unable to secure protection for the civilian population or aid agencies , and unfortunately is unable to protect children either .
I speak up for the children , because no end can justify the means of unnecessarily ending innocent lives .
We must consider each child 's life to be of equal value , on either side of the border .
This is the fundamental axiom which each party to the conflict must hold equally important , if there is ever to be true peace in that region .
Acceptance of the values of respect for human life , protection of civilians and promotion of humanitarian aid can form the foundation for reaching a lasting ceasefire , achieving peace within Palestine and between Palestine and Israel .
Mr President , Hamas unleashed terror on Israel 's citizens and has provoked retaliation .
It seems from this distance that some of them relish the new civilian - including child - martyrs and the publicity it gives their cause , no matter how horrible it is for right-thinking people to take that in .
I have never given succour to terrorism , nor am I a critic of Israel , which has a right to peaceful coexistence in the region , but we would have to be turnips not to feel emotional upset and moral shame at what is happening at present in Gaza .
The Israeli response is totally disproportionate and the deaths of young children are particularly shameful .
I have not , to date , opposed the new EU-Israel agreement .
I believe the advice of the Dalai Lama last month here in Parliament that the best way to influence China on Tibet is to keep good relations with them .
I think that also applies to EU-Israel relations , but how can we get their attention to express the level of revulsion felt here at the scale of what is happening ?
I may add that yesterday a note on the humanitarian needs of the region was distributed to those of us who attended the joint meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee and the Development Committee .
I urge the Commission and the Council to ensure that a totally comprehensive humanitarian aid package is ready so that we can move in there and help these suffering people at the first opportunity .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , one thing that was mentioned at the beginning was whether we should contact Hamas .
I do not think it is yet time to do so .
In the last months , Hamas still definitely behaved as a terrorist organisation .
As long as it behaves as such , it cannot be officially contacted by the representatives of the European Union .
I admit , being an old man , that I have seen many terrorist organisations during my time growing up from their beginnings , becoming more or less acceptable , and being accepted by the international community .
I have seen it in Africa .
I have seen it in Ireland .
I have seen it in many places .
That happens .
But first of all they have to stop acting as a terrorist organisation .
Then I will be ready to speak with Hamas or with anybody else , but not before they have given up acting as a terrorist organisation .
I think it is important to state this , because the European Union cannot give up its principles .
There are ways of hearing what their ideas are , there are indirect contacts with politicians in the region who are in contact with them , which is important and good , but it is not yet time for the European Union to have direct contacts with Hamas .
I think we should be adamant about that .
In other respects , we should praise Egypt very much for its important role in the last weeks and days for its efforts and hard work on achieving a ceasefire and maybe even an armistice with , at the very end of the process , peace in the region .
I know how difficult the question is .
We are in contact with the Egyptians the whole time .
We know what important work they are doing , and I would like to congratulate them .
There was a question on how we can assist in the region .
First of all , those who are on the spot will tell us clearly what they need .
It is not for us to decide what we should give them .
They have to ask us and the European Union .
Many European Union Member States have stated their readiness to help in every possible way - technical ways , sending advisors , preparing whatever means are necessary - but this must , first of all , be with the consent of the relevant states there .
That is the first task to be carried out .
I heard one important suggestion , which was to prepare a Marshall Plan for the Middle East .
I think it is a very good idea and we should follow it .
This region really needs a genuine build-up of the ideas which helped Europe so much after the war .
Ms Ferrero-Waldner and others mentioned what the mission achieved .
I think we achieved a lot , and I would like once again to commend Ms Ferrero-Waldner , who did the main work in our delegation in the humanitarian sphere , where what we have achieved still works today .
But , let us be clear , even these very difficult negotiations in the Middle East are based on the design already structured during our delegation 's visit to the Middle East .
This basically deals with how to organise peace and what is necessary .
Our plan is based on what we found out then and discussed with our partners .
There was a discussion about upgrading our relations with Israel .
As you know , that was a decision taken by the Council of Ministers of the European Union in June 2008 . This can be changed only if the ministers of the European Union decide to alter the decision .
It cannot be changed , even by the words of a very respectable representative of the European Union in Jerusalem .
I admit that in the current situation it would be premature to discuss how to upgrade our relationship with Israel and whether there should be a summit in the foreseeable future .
For the moment we really have more urgent and more important questions to solve .
Again , I would state that the decision was taken by the Council of Ministers , and that is it .
What can be done to stop Israel ?
Let us be frank - very little .
Israel acts as it acts and , being a lifelong friend of Israel , which I state today and I state quite frankly , I am not so happy with what it is doing at the moment .
I think its politics are also harming Israel .
That is one thing , but the European Union does have very few possibilities , other than speaking very clearly and very honestly and asking our partners to stop it .
The solution has to be found by our partners in the Middle East , by Israel , by Egypt and the others involved .
The European Union can help there .
The European Union can assist by offering every type of help if a ceasefire is agreed to achieve the stated aims : closing the smuggling passes , closing the tunnels , guarding the sea etc .
It can help in Gaza in many ways , such as reconstruction or assisting with humanitarian aid .
The European Union can do all that , but , to be quite honest , we do not have the power and means to say ' stop ' .
Does Parliament think we can send a huge armed force to the Middle East to stop the fighting parties ?
No .
We do not have the possibilities , and both Israel and Hamas are dependent on powers other than European powers .
Israel has mighty allies outside of Europe too .
There are limits on our power to achieve something .
We can help , we can assist , we can offer our good services and we can be very engaged .
In that respect , we have achieved quite a lot .
But do not overstate our possibilities .
Mr President , Israel states it is exercising its right to self-defence .
In that case , the rudiments of the just war principles , including proportionality , must be adhered to .
The fact that Israel is ignoring this is patently clear , and for us to ignore this fact is patently wrong .
The use of phosphorus on civilians with the claim of civilisation is not compatible .
Clearly , the EU alone cannot resolve this .
But there is a white elephant in the room .
We need the resolve of the USA .
Their disappointing response has been imbalanced and unjust .
The timing of these actions by Israel has been strategically calculated , but , Mr Obama , 20 January is fast approaching .
The world is waiting and the EU is a willing partner !
Will you restore those values we share with you or will you allow such injustice to prevail - yet again ?
Will you work with us to provide protection for all concerned ?
The Palestinians ask you - how can it be right that your country asks for humanitarian aid on the ground , but remains silent when there are only bombs from the skies ?
Colleagues wanting to break Hamas with military means alone : go and see Gaza and the West Bank .
Reawaken your basic humanity and you will see why Hamas gains strength .
This is not the way to help Israel or Palestinians .
An immediate ceasefire is only a necessary start .
Mr President , it is very clear that the parties to this conflict are failing to respect international humanitarian law and that the civilian population of Gaza is consequently paying a very heavy price .
There must be accountability in international law where such warfare principles as proportionality and non-discrimination are not respected .
One of the tenets of a just war provides that conduct should be governed by the principle of proportionality .
The force used must be proportional to the wrong endured .
Unfortunately we have seen a large degree of carelessness by the Israelis .
While acknowledging the fact that Hamas began the rocket attacks against Israel , the Israeli reaction has , in my opinion , been disproportionate .
The numbers speak for themselves : over 900 Palestinians have been killed in contrast to a much smaller number of Israelis .
Israel must realise its responsibility to measure its use of force right away in compliance with international law .
On the other hand , it cannot be overlooked that Hamas is still listed as a terrorist organisation by the EU and continues to refuse to renounce its arms struggle .
Not only that , but Hamas has consistently declined to recognise Israel 's right to exist .
Hamas and other Palestinian armed groups must recognise that the people of southern Israel have a right to live without bombardment .
Mr President , for all those who observe the Israeli-Palestinian conflict , this might be a time in which we are tempted to put our hands in the air and scream in despair .
I do not think we should , however , because I think the greatest test of our humanity today is to really understand the issues at hand .
The first issue is that there can be no lasting solution to this conflict without stopping the bombardment of Israel .
The second issue is that there cannot be a lasting solution to this conflict without opening Gaza to humanitarian aid .
Indeed , President Peres has been absolutely right in saying that Gaza should be open for aid and not enclosed for rockets .
I think this is quintessential , and everyone agrees to this .
There cannot be a return to the status quo ante , and I think we could do a number of things here .
Firstly Parliament can bring both sides together to talk ; secondly we should stand behind the Commission and the Council and support their efforts ; and finally we should firmly support the Egyptian track of negotiations , because that is the only track that can lead to a solution and to the ceasefire which we currently all hope for .
Mr President , it is not just the Members of this House who have been outraged by developments in Gaza .
The European public have also been outraged by the suffering of the people in Gaza and the Israeli blockade for far too long .
Added to this are the constant attacks and the terrifying Israeli military assaults on innocent civilians , especially women and children .
The calls by the world community for an immediate ceasefire are falling on deaf ears .
Palestinians need urgent access to food , medical aid and security .
Israel must , at the very least , respect the principles of international law .
Unless it does so , Israel should lose any remaining support it has from the international community .
It is unfortunate that the UN 's resolution has been sidelined .
It is also regrettable that the EU still needs to find a role .
Perhaps it can do so if it takes stronger measures than it has done so far .
It is not enough just to put the upgrading of the relationship on ice .
We have leverage .
We are a major trading partner .
We are a major funder in that region .
So we are able to exercise that role .
Mr President , is it ethically acceptable and is it excusable in international law that , in its endeavour to neutralise Hamas terrorists , the State of Israel can embark on a major military campaign of terror and gross violation of UN conventions and human rights against 1.5 million trapped , innocent civilians ?
Is such action consistent with our own EU values of justice and democracy ?
Is the Israeli lobby so strong that it can cause the US and the EU to - in effect - stand idle and just watch unspeakable atrocities being committed in the name of the fight against terror ?
If the answer to these questions is yes , then we should all commend as brave the Israeli Government for their action in Gaza .
If the answer is no , then we should strongly and clearly condemn Israel and must take swift and effective steps against it , including trade sanctions , in order to end the carnage in Gaza today and in the future .
I disagree strongly with the minister who left , who said that we can in effect do very little .
We can do a lot and we must .
Mr President , I was elected to this House 25 years ago .
This is probably the most important debate in which I have taken part .
Madam Commissioner , I hope you listened very carefully to the Foreign Affairs Committee last night and to this Parliament today .
I hope you may reply in your debate to say , unlike President-in-Office Schwarzenberg , that there is moral power that the European Union may exert on the aggressor on this particular occasion .
The Israeli people are a just and honourable people who have suffered miserably throughout the centuries in this continent .
They will understand your recommendation to the Council of Ministers now that the EU should withdraw any contact with the Israeli authorities until they stop the bombing .
( ES ) Mr President , we must tell Israel with absolute conviction to stop killing and to allow the wounded to be treated and the victims to be fed .
It must be told that its attitude towards international law will have consequences for its relations with Europe .
I want to congratulate the few young European voluntary workers who are suffering together with the people of Gaza , in particular Alberto Arce .
They represent the best of the values of solidarity and freedom held by this Europe of ours , which needs to act accordingly in such a terrible conflict .
( DA ) Mr President , I just want to say two things .
First of all , I would like to remind everyone that our decision expressly states , and reiterates , that we have put our support for upgrading on hold , and I very much hope that we will not merely carry on as if nothing has happened just because the Presidency says so .
My second point is that Israel has at no time delivered what it promised in connection with the negotiations .
There was no ceasefire because Israel did not actually lift its blockade during that period , and I feel I must also raise Annapolis , where Israel promised to freeze settlement activity .
What actually happened ?
It simply went and increased the rate of settlement .
The rate of settlement building has never been as rapid as it has been since Annapolis , and I believe that as long as no progress is made on the ground we will never get Hamas to act in accordance with the rules we want it to play by and that , for that reason , we must ensure that Israel fulfils its side of the bargain .
Mr President , yesterday we had a joint meeting of the Delegations for Relations with Israel and with the PLC , and one can imagine the intensity , emotion , accusations - and the suggested solutions - after 18 days of war in Gaza and around 1 000 deaths .
The fact is that Israel , after eight years of waiting and absorbing around 8 000 missiles that terrorised one million citizens along the Gaza borders , finally ran out of patience .
They began securing safety for their citizens , as is their full right and obligation .
Hamas is a terrorist organisation and is the clear culprit and a burden for the Palestinian people in Gaza .
The solution lies in an invigorated Quartet and particularly in redoubling the joint effort between the new US administration and a stronger and more integrated EU .
I welcome the Czech presidency , its priorities and its immediate and active involvement in the region .
( RO ) This conflict , which has lasted a very long time , is based on problems to do with territory , as well as cultural differences which are sometimes treated in an exaggerated manner .
The long-term solution is a protected , secure Israeli state , along with a sustainable Palestinian state .
This solution cannot be achieved , however , through terrorist attacks or armed actions .
In order to achieve a normal way of life , the Palestinian people need to create for themselves a state based on democratic institutions and the rule of law , which would ensure economic development .
They need to renounce terrorist acts and turn their concerns to creating a normal political climate , facilitating the election of politicians to lead the state , who genuinely wish to resolve this conflict through negotiation .
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to lend my support to those condemning the attacks and to show my solidarity with the people of Gaza .
Minister Schwarzenburg says that the European Union cannot do very much .
The European Union should abandon the upgrade of relations with Israel and the agreements that are currently in force should be cancelled until Israel fulfils its duties under international law .
Even before the recent immoral attacks , we saw years of collective punishment of the Palestinian people .
The scale and type of attacks carried out on Gaza by a modern army against a besieged people , who are already weak as a result of isolation and siege , is absolutely horrific .
The blame that was put on those same people was wrong - we must be clear in saying that the biggest victims here are people , the innocent people of Gaza .
( PL ) It is with great pain that we observe what is going on in the Gaza strip .
We do not support Hamas ' methods of fighting and provocation , but Israel has chosen a disproportionate means of resolving its dispute with the Palestinian people .
There has been a definite violation of the principles of international law .
Neither party to the conflict is interested in peace for the other party .
Both parties see only their own interest - that is national egotism .
International opinion is against the continuation of this war .
The European Union and the UN , supported by many countries , should intervene decisively .
It is time to end this unfortunate war .
Israeli troops should return to their barracks .
Hamas has to stop firing rockets at Israel .
We must guarantee more urgent humanitarian aid to the civilian population and administer care to the casualties , of whom there are said to be approximately 3 000 .
We need to build the country up and help it return to normal life .
That is the scenario I ask from the current leadership of the European Union and the European Commission .
Mr President , I would just like to ask whether we will still be having a debate on gas today or whether it has been deleted from the agenda .
We are waiting here .
There is not only a Middle East debate but also one on gas on the agenda .
Has it been deleted from the agenda ?
That is the next item on the agenda .
( SL ) I was disappointed by the last announcement by the Foreign Minister of the Czech Republic , which is currently heading the Council .
Of course , we can pin all our hopes on our Commissioner . But the death toll is rising .
If we continue to talk in this manner , in a week 's time 1 500 people will probably be dead .
Speaking to Hamas is difficult .
It is on the list of terrorist organisations and it is difficult to take action against it .
Israel , on the other hand , is our friend , Israel is our partner and an important member of the international community .
Israel has to abide by international decisions , the resolutions of the United Nations and also by the recommendations of its friends and partners .
If it fails to do so , its friends and partners must be able to condemn its actions and to threaten sanctions against it , as well .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I will be brief because it was a very long debate .
Let me say first of all , as a member of the Middle East Quartet for four years now , the European Union has a role to play , but of course we do not have the strongest role to play .
That is sometimes frustrating for all of us , particularly in such a difficult moment when you would like to immediately achieve a durable and sustainable ceasefire as we have proposed , but when it can , unfortunately , not be achieved so quickly .
I would like to give you , at least tentatively , the latest information that I got now , which is in the news , saying that sources in Egypt close to negotiations report that Hamas is reacting favourably to the latest Egyptian proposals .
There is movement in any case .
I am not yet sure whether this is really confirmed , but there will also be a Hamas press conference in the evening at 20.00 .
Hopefully things will go forward .
At least , this is what we all want .
Second , despite all the frustrations , we have no other possibility than to go on working for peace .
This is what we will do . I am committed to that as long as I am a member of this Middle East Quartet .
We can only achieve it together and we also have to help and enhance Palestinian reconciliation efforts , because only then will it be possible to totally avoid the anomaly of Gaza .
Third , as soon as there is a ceasefire we will try to do everything to totally restore the basic services to the population that have been so badly disrupted .
I think , most importantly , what is necessary now is to put an end to this destruction and to go for reconstruction and try to come to peace .
We have talked at length about this , so I will not extend myself , but this is my spirit and I hope there is a good moment .
To conclude the debate I have received one motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Given the barbarity that has struck the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip , which the recent resolution of the UN Human Rights Council denounces and condemns , what is required and demanded is the following :
A firm denunciation of the violations of human rights and of the crimes perpetrated by the Israeli army , the state terrorism of Israel !
A clear condemnation of the cruel aggression of Israel against the Palestinian people , which nothing can justify !
An end to the aggression and the inhumane blockade imposed on the population of the Gaza Strip !
Urgent humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian population !
The withdrawal of Israeli troops from all the occupied Palestinian territories !
Respect for international law and the UN resolutions by Israel , the end of the occupation , the settlements , the segregation wall , the assassinations , the detentions , the exploitation and the innumerable humiliations that are inflicted on the Palestinian people !
A just peace , which is only possible by respecting the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to an independent and sovereign state , with the 1967 borders and its capital in East Jerusalem !
In Palestine there is a coloniser and a colonised , an aggressor and a victim , an oppressor and an oppressed , an exploiter and an exploited .
Israel cannot continue with impunity !
in writing . - The reaction to the conflict in Gaza has to be more balanced than it currently is .
No excessive violence can be excused , yet we have to look deeper into the origins of the conflict .
Negotiations with Hamas as it is are not possible .
A terrorist grouping which is cynically using its own people as a shield against attacks is not interested in negotiating a true peace .
Furthermore , we need to take into account that Hamas has assumed an important role in the chain of terrorist movements which lead to Hezbollah and the Tehran terrorist regime .
So Hamas has to be seen as part of wider efforts to destroy the fragile stability in the Middle East and substitute this with fundamentalist extremist regimes that allow in principle no right of existence for Israel .
Indeed , we need to understand that the question of Israel 's security is also linked to the EU 's security .
The EU must exercise its authority to address first and foremost the roots of the conflict .
To avoid further killing of Arabs and Israelis , the Arab partners have to recognise unconditionally Israel 's right to existence and contribute to stopping the infiltration of extremist movements and even more deadly weapons to this region .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , it is an incontrovertible fact that the civilian population in Gaza and southern Israel have been deprived of the right to an existence worthy of human beings .
One news agency told a story of two children who were about to cross the road in Gaza .
They did not look right or left to see if anything was coming - they looked up because they were afraid of what might come down from the sky .
There are clearly two guilty parties when it comes to Gaza 's massive humanitarian crisis .
The irresponsible action of Hamas in the Palestinian territories , the cowardly way in which it hides among the civilian population , and the provocation it engenders with its rocket attacks are all indications of the unsustainability of the Palestinian government .
Israel 's disproportionate attack on the already frail and desperate Palestinian enclave is another indication of its indifference to international humanitarian obligations .
We must call for an end to this madness in the shape of an immediate and permanent ceasefire .
As a first step , Israel should allow humanitarian aid into Gaza , where an improvement to living conditions would also constitute one of the paths to peace in the long term .
The Middle East Quartet needs to make a move in the right direction , with the new US administration showing the way .
Egypt has a special responsibility , because of matters to do with borders , and its role as mediator with the Union has given us hope .
World history shows that the quest for peace pays off in the end .
We cannot give in , adapt or become accustomed to the notion of an unresolved conflict , because there is no such thing .
According to Nobel Peace Prize Winner Martti Ahtisaari , peace is a matter of will .
The international community may try to encourage and foster this will , but only the parties concerned can produce it , and lasting peace .
Commissioner , could you take this message from Europe : ' People of the Holy Land , show that you want peace . '
in writing . - There is something disturbing about a world apparently helpless to save innocent children from being blown apart in war .
Despite all the words , there has been no let-up in the bombardment of Gaza , which has , so far , resulted in the deaths of 139 children and injury to 1 271 .
Sadly , these shocking numbers will increase .
Hamas rocket attacks on Israel have provoked the response it desired - counter-attacks and the loss of civilian life and a further entrenchment of positions .
I deplore that innocent civilians are used as human shields .
This has to stop .
I do not apportion blame - there is wrong on both sides , but I do stress the need for an immediate and effective ceasefire .
It is vital to allow unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance and aid to Gaza without delay .
Would that humanity could only see the futility of such wars .
Every image of the dead in Gaza inflames people across the Arab world , and I am worried that the essential tenet of the Middle East peace process is slipping away : the so-called two-state solution , an independent Palestinian state coexisting in peace with Israel .
It is incumbent on the international community to redouble its efforts to find a solution .
in writing . - ( FI ) We are all now witnessing the wholesale slaughter of civilians by Israeli soldiers in Gaza .
We , or more precisely many Members on the right , are closing our eyes to what is happening .
It could not happen without the political right-wing elite in the United States of America and the EU closing their eyes .
The eye-closers are also the ones arming the killers of civilians .
It is time we raised the matter of severing diplomatic relations with the perpetrators of genocide and the ethnic cleansers .
in writing . - ( HU ) The situation in the Middle East fills me with anxiety .
What will it take to have peace ?
How many civilian casualties will it take before there can be a true ceasefire ?
In Bosnia-Herzegovina it took at least 10 000 for peace negotiations to begin , for peacekeepers to arrive on site and for disarmament to begin .
A few days ago we commemorated the destruction of Nagyenyed ( Aiud ) .
160 years ago , several thousand innocent civilians , including women and children , were massacred in this Transylvanian city and its environs .
Since that time it has not been possible to remember these victims together with the majority population .
There may come a time when Israelis and Palestinians not only remember each other 's victims together , but join forces to build a lasting peace and future .
Until then , the task of the European Union is to serve as a responsible example .
There is a lot for us to do in building peace within Europe , too .
We need cooperation between majorities and minorities on an equal footing .
At the very least , we need to join together to remember the victims .
There is still a lot to be done in the EU in the area of respect for individual and minority rights .
in writing . - ( PL ) During January 's plenary session , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the conflict in the Gaza Strip .
Both sides in the conflict were urged to implement an immediate and lasting ceasefire and to halt military activities ( Israeli 's military action and Hamas ' rockets ) , which had for some time prevented aid and humanitarian assistance from getting through to the citizens of the territory where the conflict was being played out .
It has already cost thousands of victims , with civilians , including women and children who have been suffering for almost three weeks .
There is a shortage of basic necessities such as drinking water and food .
UN facilities have been attacked .
The resolution calls for observance of international law , which would resolve the existing conflict .
Israel is our friend , and is entitled to defend itself as a state , but it must be firmly stated and underlined that in this case the means it has used are highly disproportionate .
Israel needs to talk with Hamas , to negotiate , because the previous methods have not worked .
The European Union also faces a difficult task : it needs to find mechanisms which will lead to dialogue and understanding between the parties which will permanently end the conflict as soon as possible .
Gas supplies by Russia to Ukraine and the EU ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on gas supplies by Russia to Ukraine and the EU .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , the Council would like to thank the European Parliament for placing this item on the agenda of its first part-session this year .
You will probably agree with me that the Czech presidency displayed remarkable foresight when it placed security of energy supply as one of the cornerstones or priorities of our presidency this year .
The European Union is undoubtedly facing a major gas supply disruption as a result of the dispute between the Russians and the Ukrainians and between the Gazprom and Naftogaz organisations .
The extent of this supply cut now covers about 30 % of the Community 's total gas imports .
So this is a situation that not even the Cold War years have seen us exposed to - the total cut-off that we are facing today .
The Council and the Commission were aware of the potential problem .
As you know , we faced a similar situation three years ago , in 2006 , and this is more or less a recurring annual problem , as each year Russia increases the prices of the gas it exports to its neighbouring countries towards market levels .
Therefore , we were extremely vigilant , in view of the Community 's large degree of dependence on Russian gas .
Indeed , for some Member States , dependence on the gas supplied by Russia reaches about 100 % .
I would like to stress in particular the difficult situation of countries like Bulgaria or Slovakia . It also gives us an explanation as to why , for example , in the central and eastern European countries , this is problem number one - the people are freezing and it is on the front page of the newspapers .
I know that in some other countries , which are not facing the problem with that kind of intensity , the situation is probably different , at least in PR terms .
This time , we already received a formal warning from the Russian side on 18 December 2008 through the EU-Russia early warning mechanism that a problem might occur if the ongoing negotiations between Ukraine and Russia did not result in an agreement on prices , transit fees and payment of the debts .
So we were not that surprised by what has happened , but we were surprised by the magnitude and the intensity of the cut .
Contacts , therefore , took place at the highest level prior to 1 January 2009 in order to avert the disruption of supply .
The Czech presidency had been monitoring the situation well before the beginning of the year .
I personally already met Russian officials in Prague two days before Christmas Eve .
The Commission took adequate precautions in order to follow the development throughout the holiday period and shared its information with the Gas Coordination Group in early January .
Both prior to and after 1 January 2009 , the presidency and the Commission - working very closely with Andris Piebalgs - received assurances from both actors that gas deliveries to the EU would not be affected .
As you know , the Czech presidency , together with the Commission and with the aid of some Member States , has been in contact with both the Ukrainians and the Russian gas companies and travelled several times in order to meet with both sides .
In these contacts we have not sought to blame either side , or take sides , or even act as a mediator , since this is a commercial dispute .
Rather , we have emphasised to both parties the gravity of the situation , stressing the fact that the credibility and dependability of Russia as a supplying country and of Ukraine as a transit country are both clearly damaged .
As the gravity of the situation has increased , we have also acted as a ' facilitator ' as far as deliveries of gas to the Community were concerned - a role that was very much appreciated by both parties , because they were not talking to each other at all .
Let me give a brief synopsis of what has happened since the early morning of 1 January 2009 - New Year 's Day .
On 1 January 2009 , Russia announced it had stopped deliveries of gas to Ukraine , whilst keeping deliveries to the EU at full level .
That same day , the Czech presidency and the Commission issued a statement calling on both sides to look for a prompt solution and honour their contractual obligations towards EU consumers .
On 2 January 2009 , as it became clear that deliveries to the EU were beginning to be affected , a formal declaration by the Czech presidency on behalf of the EU was issued and early in the morning on the same day in Prague , we received a Ukrainian delegation led by the Minister of Energy , Yuriy Prodan .
This was made up of all parts of the Ukrainian political spectrum , such as the adviser to President Yushchenko , representatives of Naftogaz and the representative of the MFA .
On 3 January 2009 , we had a lunch in Prague with the Director of Gazexport Alexander Medvedev , and I personally took part in both meetings .
Both meetings revealed a flagrant lack of transparency as regards contracts between Gazprom and Naftogaz and especially a lack of confidence which prevents progress in reaching an agreement .
The stories given by both sides were totally different on certain issues , so that was the moment when we started to push the monitoring issue .
In an effort to tackle this problem of divergent views , the idea of a joint fact-finding mission by the presidency and the Commission , led by the Czech Minister of Industry and Trade , Martin Říman , and by Matthias Ruete , the Director-General of DG TRAN , emerged , and it obtained the mandate to do this from an extraordinary COREPER I session , which we called on 5 January 2009 , the first working day after the holidays .
The mission went to Kiev .
They also visited the dispatching centre and then the next day they travelled to Berlin to meet the Gazprom representative on 6 January 2009 .
Also on 6 January 2009 , as the gas supplies were severely reduced to several EU Member States , leading to a major supply disruption , an extremely strong statement by the presidency and the Commission was issued , calling on both sides to immediately and unconditionally resume gas supplies to the EU .
The presidency and the Commission then sought to accelerate the conclusion of a prompt political agreement between the Russian Federation and Ukraine so that gas supplies could be restored without further delay .
Gas supplies were also the number one topic of the European Commission 's meeting with the Czech Government , traditionally the strategic session , which took place on 7 January 2009 in Prague and also dominated the first informal council which we organised in the Czech Republic - the general affairs informal meeting held in Prague last Thursday .
Again , we were planning to discuss energy security in advance , but , of course , we had to react promptly and thus adopted a strong declaration by the presidency on behalf of the EU , which was approved by all .
Following the complete standstill reached by gas supply transiting through Ukraine on 7 January 2009 , with severe consequences for those Member States with little possibility to mitigate the cut , we stepped up pressure and after lengthy and difficulty negotiations got both sides to agree on sending a monitoring team composed of independent EU experts , accompanied by observers from both sides .
This team was tasked with providing an independent monitoring of gas flow transiting through Ukraine to the EU and is deployed in both countries .
Monitoring was defined by Russia as a precondition for the resumption of gas supplies .
Deployment of this mission was not easy to achieve , as you probably observed .
First , the resistance of the Ukrainians to include a Russian expert in the monitoring mission had to be overcome , then an annex added unilaterally by Ukraine to the agreement painfully brokered by our presidency was refused by Russia .
After several trips by Prime Minister Topolánek to Kiev and Moscow and difficult negotiations with President Yushchenko and Prime Minister Tymoshenko and also Prime Minister Putin in Moscow , the agreement was eventually signed on 12 January and created a legal basis for the deployment of the monitors , and asked for the resumption of Russian gas supplies to the EU .
Russia then announced that the supply would be resumed on 13 January at 08.00 in the morning , but then - I do not know whether it was 13 January - the progress did not take place as expected .
On Monday 12 January we , the Czech presidency , convened a special Council of Energy Ministers in order to press for further transparency on transit-related issues , identify short-term mitigating measures to be taken until supplies are fully restored and identify medium- to long-term measures that are needed to prevent the consequences of such major disruption in future .
The Council also adopted the conclusions reflected in document 5165 which urged both sides to resume gas deliveries to the EU immediately and to develop solutions that prevent recurrence .
Furthermore , in these conclusions , Council agreed to urgently develop the strengthened medium- and long-term measures relating inter alia to transparency regarding the physical flow of gas , demand and storage volumes , regional or bilateral solidarity arrangements , to address the issue of missing energy infrastructure interconnections ( which is a huge problem ) , to continue to diversify the transport route and sources , and to address the financing aspects of this , also by speeding up the revision of the Security of Gas Supply Directive .
A further meeting of the Gas Coordination Group on Monday 19 January now looks likely .
The Energy Council , the TTE , will revisit the issue at its scheduled 19 February meeting through the conclusions it will adopt on the Commission 's Communication on the Second Strategic Energy Review .
These conclusions and the Commission Communication will be discussed at the March European Council meeting which will no doubt devote adequate attention to the events of the past weeks .
Allow me also to make a couple of final remarks in that introductory statement .
First , the key objective of the presidency in the recent dispute has been an immediate resumption of gas supplies in the contracted amounts .
The dispute is not over yet , as we all know . Therefore it is essential that the EU does not become entangled in the bilateral quarrels between Gazprom and Naftogaz .
Second , both the presidency and the Commission keep urging both parties to dialogue in order to reach a compromise under which gas supplies to the EU could be restored .
The failure to respect the agreement of 12 January by either Russia or the Ukraine would , in the view of the presidency and the Commission , be unacceptable .
The conditions for the resumption of supply - as stipulated in the agreement - have been fulfilled and there is no reason therefore not to restore the supply fully .
The presidency is well aware of the number of problems which persist .
These need to be addressed , otherwise the insecurity concerning Russian gas via the Ukraine will linger on .
First , there is this issue of the technical gas that the Ukraine needs to keep its transit system running .
It is necessary that both sides reach a transparent agreement defining who is responsible for the technical gas supply and who pays for it .
Second , it is crucial that the Russia-Ukraine contracts on gas prices and transit fees set clear and legally binding conditions preventing similar disruption from recurring .
The presidency , together with the Commission , have repeatedly called on both sides to sign such a contract .
However , neither we nor the Commission intend to intervene in the negotiations on the contractual conditions between the two commercial subjects .
The presidency is also aware of the widely-shared consensus among the Member States that short- , medium- and long-term solutions be adopted without delay that would prevent similar situations from recurring in the future .
Energy security is one of the top presidency priorities .
The presidency has taken the lead in chairing the discussion on possible solutions for our energy dependency trap : be it the informal Council , as I mentioned , or the TTE-Energy session .
Of the issues mentioned in the Energy Council Conclusions , I would like to mention the following .
Firstly , the Member States agree that the creation of a functional and efficient solidarity mechanism is one of the cornerstones of future EU energy security .
Secondly , solidarity presupposes interconnections of European energy networks , as well as improvements in energy infrastructure .
Thirdly , increased gas storage capacity is crucial for the operability of the solidarity mechanism .
Fourthly , in the light of the current crisis , the presidency also urges agreement on the review of the Directive concerning measures to safeguard the security of natural gas supplies by the end of 2009 .
Furthermore the EU needs to diversify its gas resources and supply routes .
To this end , the presidency will organise the Southern Corridor Summit in May 2009 , expecting tangible results as regards the diversification of resources and supply routes and as regards closer cooperation with the countries of the Southern Caucasus and Central Asia .
EU energy security is not feasible unless internal energy security market is completed and functional .
Therefore the presidency is looking forward to close cooperation with the European Parliament to compromise on the Third Energy Package at second reading .
The presidency is also ready to continue discussions of the Second Strategic Review with the aim of reflecting its outcomes in the Spring Council Conclusions .
Finally , in order to boost energy security the EU should strengthen the transparency mechanism and so on .
I think the Community is prepared for the situation both politically and technically .
Politically , the presidency , together with the Commission and other Member States , has invested , and will continue to invest , considerable effort in order to solve the situation .
Technically , during these recent weeks , we have acted in accordance with the Directive concerning measures to safeguard the security of natural gas supply .
This Directive established the Gas Coordination Group , which now proves its value .
It requires Member States to prepare national emergency measures for this type of situation , sets minimum standards for the security of the gas supply to household consumers , and it prescribes that the Gas Coordination Group should ensure the Community coordination .
This mechanism has had a considerable effect in mitigating the effects of the crisis .
To give you an idea , gas from storage was used and sold to neighbouring countries and even to members of the Energy Community , alternative fuels were used for electricity production , gas production was increased - including from Algerian , Norwegian and other Russian sources - extra deliveries of gas were made to neighbouring countries .
I stop here .
I assure you that everything is being done , both at the political level and at the technical level , to incite the Ukrainian and Russian negotiators to re-install full contractual gas supplies to Europe and to minimise the negative consequences to our citizens and economies until that is the case .
As you know , we are on the hotlines all day in Parliament because time is expiring and we need to have results .
If we do not have results , it will inevitably have political consequences in our relations with both countries .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we are currently living through one of the most severe energy crises in European history , comparable with the oil crises that we had in the 1970s and 1980s .
The difference is that those oil crises were global while this is very clearly an EU crisis .
Where are we today ?
Well , in spite of promises made and the protocol signed on Monday 12 January 2008 between Russian and Ukrainian ministers , myself and the two companies involved , Russian gas is not yet flowing through Ukraine to EU consumers .
The Commission has fulfilled its part of the deal : providing a European team of monitors to be spread over key places in Russia and Ukraine to observe the operations and report on their accuracy .
We were able to mobilise a team composed of Commission officials and industry experts in 24 hours and they were already in Russia and Ukraine last Saturday to enable the flow of gas to resume as soon as the protocol was signed .
Yesterday Russia resumed gas deliveries to Ukraine in relatively small quantities that meet less than one third of the normal flow , but decided to use an entry point which , according to the Ukrainian company , is difficult to use , and this led Ukraine to stop transport .
The report of our monitors confirms that it was technically difficult ( though not impossible ) to ensure the transport under these conditions .
Today , unfortunately , the same situation occurred and the only solution is for the two parties to ensure full coordination of their technical operations , so that volumes and entry points match the requirements of the gas transport system .
If there is no further coordination , there will be no gas supply , and EU monitors and the Commission on the spot are trying to encourage both sides to find this technical agreement .
At the same time , I do not take sides .
I do not want to blame one or the other party .
But it is very clear that both parties have lost their reputation as reliable energy partners of the European Union .
( Applause )
Returning to the history of the last month , I wish to say that the EU reacted promptly , voiced its concerns , and both parties have been constantly urged by the highest-ranking political leaders to restore immediate supplies and to fulfil their obligations .
In normal contacts with both parties earlier in the years , knowing from previous experiences that deals are usually struck in the night from 31 December to 1 January , we always reminded them : ' Please find a solution to your bilateral gas issues because it is affecting our transit ' .
Well , unfortunately this was not the case .
We know where we are today in spite of all these efforts , and I strongly believe that the solution is in the hands of the two parties .
But do they want a solution ?
The presidency and the Commission have called and are still calling on Russia and Ukraine to resume gas flows immediately .
We have done our part .
We are genuinely able to provide a full response about where the gas goes : not one cubic metre of gas goes in a different direction without us noticing .
I believe that the measures that we have taken are sufficient .
But if both parties say that some other measures are necessary , we are ready to consider that , because I also see the lack of coordination and contacts between the two sides .
This is the immediate crisis .
What next ?
I know that whatever solution we will find now is temporary , so to restore the credibility of this transport route we will need a long-lasting solution ; so the contacts between those parties will definitely be continued during the Czech presidency , but will also , unfortunately , have to continue under the Swedish presidency .
But I believe that we have provided answers for security of supply in the Second Strategic Energy Review , in the work Parliament and the Council have done on the energy and climate change package .
These are the solutions provided , and we cannot rely on external suppliers which unfortunately do not honour their contractual obligations and do not take into account consumer interests .
But I would like to stress particularly two issues that should be addressed immediately :
One is the lack of interconnection .
Yes , there has been solidarity , but in a lot of cases it was hampered by the lack of sufficient infrastructure to deliver gas from the storage facilities that are there to the places where there is an acute need of gas supply .
I believe that the debate on the recovery plan , where infrastructure is also mentioned , is really a good instrument to address these places , because there is not always enough commercial interest to really provide for this type of intervention .
Second , we definitely missed an opportunity in 2004 when we discussed the Gas Supply Security Directive .
The instrument which was prepared was weak and did not meet the current needs .
We have prepared , and we will shortly be submitting , the new draft proposal on the Security of Gas Supply Directive ; an impact assessment is being made and in the coming weeks it will be here in Parliament .
I believe we should react immediately and really find coordinated Community mechanisms to respond to this type of crisis .
The presidency has really worked very hard and I would like to congratulate the presidency for always taking the lead , with the full support of the Commission .
I believe that in these difficult times the European Union has proved that it is speaking with one voice .
The European Union is led by the presidency and supported by the Commission .
But I also very much welcome all the activities that the European Parliament carries out , because Parliament provides the basis for an agreement .
If two parties do not speak at government level , if the companies are trying to play games , which could provide for political stability ?
It is the broad political basis in Ukraine and Russia that speaks together , and I would thank Mr Saryusz-Wolski for his activities in providing this exchange of views , and also President Pöttering who took part in conciliating both parties .
The solution is so easy if they would just talk to each other .
So I believe these were very important activities and I very much hope that after today 's meeting in Parliament - because it is followed by both sides - there will be additional encouragement to resolve the issue .
The party suffering the most is the party that is not responsible for this crisis , the party that has come in to facilitate matters ; and this facilitation costs European taxpayers and European consumers money .
So I believe it is high time the gas flowed again towards the European Union in stable conditions .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , this major disruption in supply is a dramatic one for European citizens , European industries and European jobs and it comes on top of the economic crisis .
We parliamentarians of this House , in our coming European elections , will all have to answer questions about what we have done to protect our industries , our jobs and our citizens .
Contrary to some initial opinions , the problem concerns political and multilateral entities and is not bilateral and commercial in nature .
Three years ago , when we witnessed the first gas crisis following Russia 's cutting of energy supplies , Europe realised its vulnerability and its limitations .
Already then it became obvious that we need a common EU foreign policy on energy .
Our group , the PPE-DE Group , has supported this idea from the very beginning .
It was our group which took the lead by asking for an own-initiative report towards a common European foreign policy on energy , which I had the honour to present to this House in September 2007 and which was unanimously supported by all the political groups and adopted almost unanimously .
It called for a comprehensive strategy with a precise road map towards a common EU external policy on energy , recommending a number of actions to be taken : in the short term , solidarity mechanisms , unity in defending our interests , more efficient energy diplomacy ; and , in the medium term , diversification including Nabucco , storage , investments and interconnections .
Some of our recommendations have been addressed - albeit belatedly - in the Commission 's second strategic energy review .
We welcome this and also the efforts of the Czech presidency to solve the current crisis and to mediate between the two sides .
However , this is not enough if we are to avoid similar situations in the future , and this will only be possible if we equip ourselves with a truly common EU energy security policy and solidarity , which would offer lasting , sustainable and systemic solutions .
It means the combined weight of Member States , represented by the European Commission , in negotiations , and a single EU voice vis-à-vis our partners , be they producers or transit countries .
Meanwhile , we could envisage buying gas directly from Russia at the Russian-Ukrainian border .
I have two questions for the President-in-Office and the Commission .
Commissioner Piebalgs and Deputy Prime Minister Vondra , could you elaborate on the scenario of the EU stepping in and taking over responsibility , with the Ukraine , for the transit ?
Secondly , what pressure instruments does the EU possess ?
What action could we take in response ?
Our group would expect the presidency and the Commission to undertake swift and radical actions and measures vis-à-vis our energy partners , Russia and Ukraine , to restore gas supplies .
Our group will ask Parliament to be closely and permanently involved , even during the campaign and until the elections .
I would inform you that we have established a contact group between the European Parliament , the Russian Parliament and the Ukrainian Parliament .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , my group requests that a temporary committee be set up pursuant to Rule 175 in order to answer many of these questions , which Mr Saryusz-Wolski has also raised ; in other words , that we join with the Commission and the Council too , of course , to draw the appropriate conclusions - which we can hopefully draw together - from the situation by the May part-session .
The talks we have held with the representatives of Gazprom and Naftogaz - Russia and Ukraine , in other words - have confirmed our impression that both sides are behaving irresponsibly .
I can reaffirm clearly what Commissioner Piebalgs said : at the moment neither is acting responsibly , nor as a responsible partner of the European Union .
This must have the appropriate consequences .
For all my support for the initiatives taken , I must say that we have known for some time that Ukraine is refusing to build the monitoring stations it promised ; the money provided by the European Union remains unused , and we have not reacted .
We have also known for at least two months that agreement was not reached by the deadline of 1 November that was laid down at the beginning of October .
In my eyes , 18 December was perhaps a little too late .
The Commission should have done rather more here to be prepared for the worst-case scenario , and should also have told Member States what was possible .
Admittedly , a great deal of solidarity was shown , but I should have expected it to foresee the possibility of a negative development such as this .
Yet what is important now is not that we point the finger - this is not my intention - but just that we draw the appropriate conclusions , that we are better prepared next time ; or rather - much more importantly , of course - can prevent such a situation recurring .
I must add , Commissioner , that we have perhaps spent a little too much time discussing liberalisation and markets - particularly in the gas sector , as you are well aware .
This would not have done us any good , and indeed it is not doing us any good now .
As we have always pointed out , the gas sector is unusual , it is tainted - one could even say determined - by politics , and it is no use elevating the liberalisation of the gas sector to the supreme principle when we still have Ukraine and Russia playing this out politically .
We do need a strong common line of communication in this regard , and this must be demonstrated just as strongly .
I agree with much that has been said here .
We need more pipelines ; we agree that the Nabucco pipeline is a very important project .
You yourself also mentioned the trans-Sahara gas pipeline , to which we must give some thought .
These things will not happen overnight , but signals must be sent out .
We need many more interconnectors and interconnections .
Yet these , too , will not just appear .
Do not think that the market will take care of this , as it will not , since it has no interest in doing so .
After all , these are investments that are not immediately profitable , but are made so that there is a reserve .
The same is true of the gas reserves , of course .
It is absolutely unacceptable for many countries to have few or no gas reserves or even refuse to notify the Commission of such reserves .
We have to make common cause in this regard .
For all my criticism of details , this House and the Commission must really call several Member States to order and require them to pursue a common European energy policy at long last .
I agree with Mr Saryusz-Wolski on this point : we have indeed called for this together , and received far too little support from the Council - or rather the Member States .
If we want this , I do ask that we develop a common strategy on it by May - our last sitting .
After all , it is unacceptable for this Parliament to go into recess or to the elections without our really having drawn the appropriate conclusions from these tragic events - hopefully together .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( HU ) We now have an agreement and many promises , but still no gas .
Enough of this !
We cannot allow Europe to be an innocent victim of a cynical power play .
If the gas supply does not resume immediately , this must have clear and decisive consequences .
We cannot tolerate a situation in which millions of Europeans are without heat , we cannot tolerate several hundred thousand jobs being endangered .
Until now , Europe has avoided conflicts with the countries concerned and has made political concessions and gestures .
This policy has failed .
We Liberals have long been demanding a significant reduction of our dependence , our energy dependence , on Russia .
The clear lesson from this crisis is that the Nabucco pipeline needs to become a true alternative , and must therefore be given financial support .
We need to create a common energy policy with stronger solidarity among Member States , with better coordination and by linking up the networks .
We need to speed up the development of renewable and alternative energy sources and to improve energy efficiency .
However , this will resolve our problems only in the medium and long term , and thus we need to remind Kiev and Moscow firmly to fulfil their international commitments , and to announce that insofar as this is not done , there will be consequences for all aspects of our bilateral relations .
Russia must give evidence of acting in good faith and do everything in its power to see that gas delivery resumes without delay .
Ukraine must also be made aware that although at the moment it is paying a political price for gas that is lower than the market price , this price is actually costing them more than market price because it extends Ukraine 's vulnerability and susceptibility to blackmail .
Now the European Union is also being put to the test before its citizens .
Is it able to defend its interests effectively ?
If it fails this test , then Europe has no real future , but if it succeeds , it can look with optimism towards the future .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the gas crisis in Europe is a permanent one and much more profound than the European political elites would present it .
We must emphatically underline that it is not purely economic in character .
It is above all a political crisis , based on Europe 's helplessness in the face of Putin 's aggressive policy .
Let us not deceive ourselves - Russia is not concerned with a few dollars .
The background to the events of the last few days have been the aggressive actions of the Kremlin , which aims to extend its domination in the region of South-Eastern Europe .
Ukraine is of strategic important to the Russians not only because a gas pipeline to Europe passes through its territory , but because the Russian Black Sea fleet is stationed at Sebastopol .
The lease on this base is due to end in 2017 , but few believe that the Russians will voluntarily leave the Crimea .
Gazprom 's demands are backed by the entire political and military machinery of the Kremlin , whose aim is to discredit and weaken the Ukrainian government and bring Ukraine to its knees .
Unfortunately , Europe 's passive attitude has helped Putin to draw closer to this goal .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I too wish to start by saying that the Czech Republic has had a very tough start to its Council Presidency and that , in connection with this new gas crisis , it could not have done any more in recent weeks to put right the lack of clarification in matters of European external energy policy that there has been in previous years .
We are all currently seeing a demonstration that the oft-cited phrase ' external energy policy ' stands for a common strategy that does not exist in Europe .
Over and above this debate about Russian gas , Europeans collectively must answer the question as to what relationship they actually want to have with Russia in future .
Gas is just one issue , the trade in raw materials is just one issue , but we are talking about the fundamental relationship of the European Union with its largest neighbour on the east of our continent , and that does need to be clarified .
At the same time , it must be clarified how the European Union means to deal in future with the countries that are still wavering between Russia and the EU .
In my opinion , we could actually have foreseen what has now happened in Ukraine .
It is no surprise to anyone familiar with Ukraine that not only Gazprom and the Russian State but also Ukraine mix politics and economic interests .
The worst threat facing Ukraine at the moment is that the interests of certain political players could now result in the loss of the closer relations with , and reputation in , the European Union that the country has achieved .
The criticism that has been levelled at competent figures in Russia during this dispute goes at least equally for Naftogaz , RosUkrEnergo , those in charge and the Ukrainian Government .
This is much more than a trade dispute , and I think that the Czech Presidency has steered us through it well over these last few days .
I hope that the plans the Commissioner has presented will bear fruit .
I should like to congratulate the Commission on its clear position on the inappropriate attempt to re-connect the high-risk reactor Bohunice to the power network .
That would not be helpful , but rather would constitute a further infringement of Community law , this time from within the European Union .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioners , President-in-Office of the Council , the Commission has taken on the role of mediator in the dispute over gas between Russia and Ukraine and done its best to start deliveries .
It has not been my custom to praise the Commission , but , on behalf of my group , I would now like to say thank you .
It has acted not as a judge but as a doctor ; not a surgeon , though , but more like a psychiatrist .
There is now a need and a use for such people .
They get cold in other parts of Europe when in Ukraine the President and Prime Minister engage in a power struggle .
Given such circumstances , the proposal yesterday by Mr Saryusz-Wolski , Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , that the EU should introduce sanctions to safeguard the flow of gas is irresponsible .
Should we agree that the EU should start to boycott Russian gas ?
Poland , of course , should set an example to others in this and refuse Russian gas .
Our group hopes the Commission will continue to mediate actively to bring about harmony .


on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I quote from a speech made on this subject by my colleague , Godfrey Bloom , on 25 October 2006 : ' The thought , the idea or the concept that the United Kingdom 's energy supplies could possibly be controlled by some sort of arrangement with a gangster like Putin is absolutely ludicrous .
It is absolute madness to expect anything from a piece of paper signed by Putin . The man is a gangster ' .
Mr Putin is now doing what any competent gangster would do - withdraw supply and force the price up .
Europe will face two options : be prepared to pay much , much more for a precarious gas supply from Russia , or find alternative suppliers , if that is possible .
The UK must ensure its dwindling gas supplies are kept as a national resource and not allow them to become an EU common resource .
We must also embark on a programme of building new nuclear power stations .
- ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , despite all the current efforts of the European Council and the Commission , some Member States remain without supplies of Russian gas , their economies are at risk and people are afraid of freezing .
This is a high price to pay for the European Union 's short-sighted foreign and energy policy . And , unfortunately , it is being paid by the weakest .
Ladies and gentlemen , empty gas pipelines , production cuts and chilly schools are the price of the unnecessary Russophobia that is harboured by those members of the Union who have opposed the resumption of strategic partnership negotiations with Russia .
It is the price of our uncritical support for the orange segment in the Ukrainian political spectrum , and for trying to manage policy on Eastern Europe from Brussels .
It is the price of our fanatical rejection of nuclear energy .
Furthermore , it is the price of the long-term efforts to interfere in the national energy policies of individual Member States .
What advice would you give to the Slovak Prime Minister Fico , who now faces a ' Sophie 's Choice ' ?
While temperatures are 20 degrees below and the gas has stopped flowing from the East , the Commission in Brussels is threatening to penalise Slovakia if it restarts the nuclear power plant in Jaslovské Bohunice .
Is it really meant to stand by while factories collapse and people freeze during the 20 days of reserves that remain to Slovakia ?
Ladies and gentlemen , we are now seeing the importance of energy self-sufficiency for each State in the European Union .
How nice it is to have a warm home-spun shirt instead of a threadbare EU overcoat .
We should learn the lessons from this and avoid the transfer of energy-related powers to Brussels , as sought for under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Mr President , it is almost uncanny how history has repeated itself over the interruption of gas supplies through Ukraine at this time of year .
Yet we should not be surprised , for when better to catch people 's attention , especially during a cold spell ?
It is not difficult to figure out the Russia agenda in all this , but I was particularly struck by the idea floated in the press that Gazprom urgently needs to make a deal based on higher gas prices , linked to last year 's oil price high , before those gas prices come down following the oil price fall .
Be that as it may , the implications remain the same as three years ago .
EU Member States are at risk of over-dependence on gas imports from one dominant supplier .
It is no longer good enough to say that we need Russian gas and they need our hard currency , so the trade is safe .
We need to take action to safeguard security of supply .
Member States must bite the bullet and be prepared to pay for adequate gas storage facilities and stocks .
Agreeing a level of how many days ' supply constitutes a reasonable reserve would be a good start .
Diversifying supplies is another obvious step to take and the construction of LNG terminals around Europe is a good example .
Looking at the Nord Stream and Nabucco pipeline projects in a more favourable light seems logical .
We need to redouble efforts to improve efficiency and increase conservation of energy in electricity consumption - both in industrial use and domestic consumption .
There are huge savings to be achieved .
Above all , we need to rebalance our energy mix and to do so with the twin objectives of security of supply and climate change policy .
By increasing the share of electricity from renewables , nuclear energy and clean coal technology , we can do both , but each of these options takes time to deliver and , in the mean time , we must tackle improving energy efficiency with urgency and imagination .
( NL ) Mr President , I can endorse the view of many fellow Members .
What has unfolded in recent weeks has led to great surprise .
Even yesterday , I found myself considerably irritated when I listened to Russian and Ukrainian counterparts declaring here that they were certainly not at fault .
We are constantly receiving contradictory information about what exactly is going on .
We hear one story , then another , and it is very difficult for us MEPs to find out the precise facts .
We hope that this confusion will be resolved in the next few days and that gas , as promised , will flow once more .
Should gas flow once more , does this mean we go back to business as usual ?
I should not think so .
In 2006 , the same thing happened , but then the impact on the European Union was far less serious ; the cause of the conflict between Moscow and Kiev back then was the gas price , which resulted in a break in the gas supplies to Europe .
We warned back then that there was a risk of a repeat scenario , and that has now come to pass .
We know that gas supplies are re-negotiated every year , because Ukraine and Russia work with one-year contracts .
It was not until last month , when the crisis broke out again , that the European Union swung into action .
Much of what we already discussed in 2006 has eventually failed to have any effect .
Even then , we knew we were too dependent on one pipeline that supplies nearly 80 % of the gas via one country .
Even then , it was discussed that we should work on alternative supply routes as a matter of urgency .
Even then , it was clear that we were not entirely sure if we could help each other as EU countries in the event of problems in certain countries , as is currently the case in Bulgaria , Slovakia and a number of other countries .
Little has been done about this in recent years .
It became clear in recent weeks how difficult it is to put a mechanism in place with which we can help each other out .
Russia and Ukraine have dealt themselves and their reputations heavy blows .
It is , in my view , not up to us in the first instance to blame one country or the other .
What is obvious is that both countries have little awareness when it comes to customer-friendliness .
In actual fact , they are now causing major detriment to their top customer .
We are one of Russia 's good customers , we pay for this pipeline through Ukraine , we pay our bills on time and we pay global prices for the gas .
I think that this cannot be hammered home enough to both parties .
This situation does throw up a number of questions , of course .
What about the conflict of interest in the gas sector in Russia , the Kremlin 's influence on Gazprom ?
I happen to be a little more knowledgeable about Ukraine and I know from experience that the gas business in that country is a very shady one ; I believe that we should look into a number of matters in greater detail .
Like Mr Swoboda , I am in favour of a parliamentary inquiry into how this situation came about , into what the EU failed to do that it should have done in recent years , and into how exactly these gas sectors in Ukraine and in Russia are set up , so that we might be able to prevent a similar situation from happening again in future , or gain a better understanding of what is going on right now .
( PL ) Mr President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , in the agreement signed in October last year , Ukrainian premier Yulia Timoshenko and Vladimir Putin stated their readiness to move to world prices for the transmission and storage of gas over three years .
This agreement was underlined by a formal agreement between Gazprom and the Ukrainan Naftogaz .
However , Gazprom has recently issued a demand for a huge price increase to unrealistic levels .
This type of blackmail is possible because Gazprom has a monopolistic hold over Ukraine .
Many countries of the European Union are in a similar situation .
This means that unlike petroleum , there is no free market for gas in Europe .
In the United States the price of gas has recently fallen to USD 198 per 1000 cu.m. , while Gazprom is demanding USD 450 from Ukraine .
This situation has to be changed through diversification of gas suppliers , and by building a transmission network within the European Union and among neighbouring countries so that , as with oil , there is a true pan-European gas market , which will curb the potential for monopolistic pricing blackmail .
( PL ) Mr President , this gas crisis shows how important it is for the European Union to speak in one voice on the matter of gas supplies , particularly gas supplies from Russia , which is not a reliable partner and supplier .
In July last year the European Parliament adopted a report by the Committee on Petitions which I had authored , clearly stating that the question of energy and gas supplies to Europe is not a matter for bilateral relations .
The issue then was the Northern Gas Pipeline from Russia to Germany .
I now appeal to the Commission , as well as the Presidency , to ensure that the European Union speaks with one voice , and that it be made an issue of EU-Russian , rather than bilateral relations .
I call for the implementation of all the demands contained in the report of 8 July last year , which stated that the European Union should be genuinely and truly integrated .
( PL ) Mr President , several politicians have spoken in the debate on gas on one side or the other of the conflict .
However , we do not know the facts of the situation .
The EU observers are helpless .
All we know is that we are dealing with frivolous organisations .
The situation is also evidence of the European Union 's deficient energy policy .
No support is given to alternative ideas , such as building nuclear power stations .
The use of coal is opposed under environmental pretences .
We have reached a situation where the only alternative has been to make Central Europe dependent on the East , the situation of poor Slovakia being a case in point .
- ( SK ) In connection with the Ukrainian-Russian conflict involving gas supplies I would like , as an MEP representing the citizens of the Slovak Republic , to draw the European Union 's attention to the fact that this conflict of interests affects not only the two parties that are blaming one another for the mess , but also a third party whose citizens are becoming the victims , as there is still no prospect of Russian gas being delivered through Ukraine .
Slovakia has been without gas for eight days and , with the current emergency restrictions on industry and companies operating under a crisis regime , we can maintain supplies for only eleven days .
Slovakia 's gas is again stuck somewhere between the two warring parties .
To put it briefly , two parties - two truths , no gas .
Let me inform you that today , at 11.45 , Ukrainian Prime Minister Timoshenko rejected Slovakia 's request to renew natural gas deliveries , explaining that : ' Ukraine does not have enough gas , we do not have our own reserves and neither will you ' .
I would also like to emphasise that as a result of our dependence on Russian gas and the impossibility of reopening the V1 nuclear power plant at Jaslovské Bohunice , the energy security of the Slovak Republic is increasingly under threat .
Commissioner , I thank you for your proposals and efforts to find a solution .
I do know of one measure you can take - suspend the contributions to Ukraine as one of the irresponsible parties .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a dramatic situation , as we know .
The actions of Russia and Ukraine are irresponsible .
It must also be said that the Commission is blameworthy in that we were relatively slow to take action , although it is also true that Commissioner Piebalgs has addressed this issue excellently over the past few days .
The team of experts was a splendid idea , and I think he deserves thanks for the events of recent days .
However , this is also the time to ask why our reactions to such events are always so short-term .
How many times has Russia attracted attention in this regard ?
It is certainly not the first time .
We have now seen gas supplies being turned off periodically for several years , and so we must ask ourselves whether we - the European Parliament and the European institutions - have really done enough about the issue of security of supply , or whether we have been perhaps prioritising other issues .
I think that Mr Swoboda was right to ask this question .
We have made a great effort to work out whether and to whom and on what conditions to sell and privatise the networks .
We have spent weeks , even months , addressing the issue of how to respond to the climate issue , and not given sufficient thought to the fact that there is a third very important political project too : that of security of supply .
What have we done to ensure a more varied energy mix in Europe , and to reduce our dependence ?
What have we done to ensure that coal power stations also figure in this mix ?
With our climate policy , we have actually discredited these coal power stations and thus increased our dependence on gas .
What have we done to increase our support for nuclear power ?
The answer is far too little , far too timidly .
What have we done to get other permissible pipelines sorted out ?
What have we done in the field of LNG ?
What has been done in the field of external energy policy ?
The events of the last few days have meant that it is high time we addressed the issue of security of supply in energy policy .
That is clearly the crucial question .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioners , Parliament will soon vote on three of the packages on the electricity and gas markets .
We have just approved the energy and climate package , but now there is a crisis we should organise a meeting on a bigger scale to include our partners .
We have the political capacity for that and we have need of cooperation .
I am also in favour of the notion of a work group set up under Article 175 that would report back to this Parliament , in May , for example .
The Russian and Ukrainian delegations should also be present .
It is a serious situation , as has been said .
Millions of people are freezing and factories are being shut .
By preventing gas from reaching the EU , Ukraine involved us in its problem .
Russia did the same when it cut off the EU gas section .
Gas is flowing , however , through other transit countries .
Thanks to speedy action on the part of the Union - and thanks go to the Commissioner for this - the meter readers are in place .
Russian gas has evidently started flowing to the Ukrainian network , but it is still not reaching the Union .
A peculiar situation has come about .
Both the EU and Russia are trying to construct energy pipelines in new areas : the EU outside Russia and Russia outside its former Soviet Republics .
It is work for those in the pipeline industry .
I would not be too inclined to impose sanctions on the parties in the row , however , and I do not think that sanctions are wise .
I am sceptical about using force , as it might hurt us more than it hurts them .
On the other hand , I would regard linking the Energy Charter Treaty to the future Partnership and Cooperation Agreement as being especially important .
One possibility would also be to set up a syndicate to administer the flow of gas through Ukraine : that would be a quick and urgent measure .
A neutral party also ought to be involved .
- Thank you very much for this final point .
( SV ) Mr President , the EU is the world 's largest economic power .
Nevertheless , many people are freezing in their own homes .
Why is the EU unable to guarantee heating ?
Now , as never before , it is clear that the EU must reduce its dependence on Russian gas .
The EU must build up a common electricity and gas market in order to protect its population 's access to energy .
This requires solidarity within the Union .
France and Germany are in a key position .
No one , not even Germany , can count on more gas from Gazprom for many years to come .
Nord Stream is no solution .
The mediation in the gas war between Russia and Ukraine will give the EU a good opportunity to demand that both parties follow rules that are compatible with a common energy market within the Union .
We must take advantage of this opportunity .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to look at this problem in a broader political context .
In reality , the so-called Russo-Ukrainian gas war is one of the stages in the fight for influence in Europe .
Both Ukraine and Georgia are states that we should gladly have on our side , but Russia wants to renew its former influence over them .
Just as the middle of summer , with the beginning of the Olympic Games and the middle of the holiday season , was chosen for the invasion of Georgia , so the middle of winter , the time of the New Year holiday , was chosen for the gas war .
Moreover , neither state was shown the expected path to membership in NATO and the European Union .
It was already foreseeable , once we were unable to strike back appropriately against Russia for its aggression against Georgia , that Ukraine would be the next target .
Russia 's political technology is one of the strongest in the world and that state has demonstrated that it is prepared to sacrifice enormous resources in order to achieve its political goals . On this occasion , by dragging out the conclusion of the agreement in order to discredit Ukraine .
This type of political technology also has enough resources to influence processes in countries in which it has an interest , and , unlike us , it plans and forecasts events .
A compromise must be reached , gas supplies must be restarted , if Russia has enough reserves to supply . Thank you .
( BG ) Thank you , Mr President .
The general opinion is that Bulgaria was the country most affected by the gas crisis .
It goes without saying that blame is still being apportioned by both whoever is guilty of cutting off the gas and whoever is guilty of the fact that Bulgaria has ended up with reserves which are not sufficient for it to withstand this gas crisis .
However , let us now look at what we could do in the future .
One option is a purely internal political one that involves finding an alternative source which Bulgaria can use to meet its needs in other similar situations .
But the other option we have at the moment is directly dependent on the will of the Commission .
We have , or rather , Bulgaria has a huge energy source which was closed at the time for political reasons .
This source is the Kozloduy nuclear power plant .
At the moment Bulgaria has been operating electrical power stations run on coal , which pollute the environment much more than a nuclear power plant does .
I am sure that fellow Green Members will agree with this .
Shutting down the first four blocks at the Kozloduy nuclear power plant , which underwent dozens and dozens of tests that proved they were completely safe , was a huge mistake .
This has caused huge harm to the Bulgarian people and now the Bulgarian people are continuing to suffer even more because we do not have anywhere to obtain energy from .
This is why I am making the following appeal to the Commission : it is high time to allow both Bulgaria and Slovakia to open their totally safe nuclear power plants , providing them with a safeguard against their energy shortage .
Mr President , Russia 's use of interrupting gas flow as a diplomatic weapon has once again proved why we need a common EU external energy security policy by intergovernmental cooperation .
Such a policy has the obvious benefit of minimising our exposure to Russian strong-arm tactics by encouraging alternative sources such as LNG , and new gas pipelines such as Nabucco and the trans-Saharan route , and building an integrated EU electricity grid .
However , it will also provide an impetus to the green agenda by encouraging renewable energy and energy efficiency and a renaissance of nuclear energy .
I support Slovakia 's emergency demand to the Commission to reopen their closed Bohunice reactor , which will also help to address climate change .
There is no doubt in my mind that Russia is bullying Ukraine and trying to destabilise the government by even implicating the United States now in this whole debacle , ahead of the presidential election in Ukraine next year , and also jeopardising Ukraine 's Euro-Atlantic aspirations .
However , the EU has been dragged into this row as a collateral victim of the Kremlin 's gas diplomacy .
I cannot help feeling that Russia 's action was timed to coincide with the start of the Czech presidency , although Prime Minister and Council President-in-Office Topolánek has shown great skill in handling this emergency .
Ukraine is possibly guilty as charged of siphoning off some Russian gas , but it is perhaps understandable in the context of the bilateral arrangements still unresolved between these two countries .
Ukraine is currently obliged to pay an intermediary company an extra USD 500 million a year .
Given that Ukraine 's gas debt to Russia is USD 2.4 billion , the debt could have been wiped off in about five years by scrapping this payment , which , allegedly , according to the deputy prime minister of Ukraine , ends up in the pockets of corrupt politicians .
We need to resist any attempt to drive a wedge between Ukraine and its future with the West , and in particular its future as a full member of the European Union .
The best way to ensure that Russia can no longer bully or put pressure on Ukraine , or even provoke the EU into bullying Ukraine to settle , is to champion a common EU external energy security policy which will show solidarity between the Member States at times of crisis and energy shortage .
Mr President , the problem we are coping with is not a mere Russia-Ukraine dispute .
There is a Europe-Russia dispute having as its object the geopolitical status of Ukraine , a European Union-Ukraine dispute having as its object the European perspectives of Ukraine , a European Union-Russia dispute having as its object the Russian monopoly on the gas supply and a European Union-Ukraine dispute having as its object the Ukrainian monopoly on gas transit .
All these disputes combined place us in the middle of an energy war , which is about power-sharing .
In this war we are not hostages but combatants .
We are not mediators but one of the sides having a legitimate interest .
This war extends its consequences from one crisis to another .
Could we cease the combat and organise a peace conference ?
We need rules for a free energy market shared by our Russian and Ukrainian partners .
We need guarantees and mechanisms to enhance these rules and an arbitration system for dispute settlement as well as an institution to put in motion those mechanisms .
We need a common European energy policy , served by appropriate legal and political instruments and consolidated by an integrated agreement with the supply and transit countries , Russia and Ukraine respectively .
Sanctions cannot work .
Confrontation is not the solution either .
Let us be united and negotiate strategically and comprehensively .
To this end , we have to organise an interparliamentary ad hoc working group formed by European Parliament , Russian Duma and Ukrainian Rada representatives to follow the process of consensus and strategy-building on a permanent basis as long as necessary .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our society cannot function without energy , as is evident right now .
Gas must continue to flow and in the short term it is , to my mind , especially important that all diplomatic paths be negotiated .
This is what the Commission and Council are doing right now in a very commendable way so as to ensure that the gas supplies are back on track as quickly as possible ; threatening with legal action is not a very effective course of action , of course .
In the medium term , I think it is very important to set up a European market for energy , provided that measures are taken that we have so far failed to take .
It is time for action .
I can see the Member States playing an important role in this , as in the accelerated installation of the Nabucco and North Stream pipeline , for example .
Above all , we must ensure that one European network is created for both gas and electricity , which will reduce our dependence and enable us to create a properly functioning market and to show more solidarity and better anticipate shortages .
We will have to roll up our sleeves , though , and I wonder why the Member States have so far failed to take any measures .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union has successfully tackled global warming : adopting a motion was enough to achieve instant success .
We managed to lower temperatures in Europe and bring in a winter that has affected the entire continent .
This is proof of the European Union 's power and capability according to the principle ' to want is to succeed ' .
But our success has turned into defeat , because now we need more heating for our homes and workplaces .
This was something officials did not foresee .
In energy policy , the European Union is beginning to resemble the doctor in Hašek 's story , ' The Adventures of the Good Soldier Švejk ' , who prescribed one treatment for all illnesses - an enema .
The European Union has limited itself to verbal declarations , conferences , and in particular flirting with Russia , giving Russia the courage to use energy resources as an instrument of political pressure .
To make matters worse , it found an ally in the form of Germany , with whom it is building a gas pipeline under the Baltic .
The conclusion is clear for all to see : we need to take urgent measures for independence from Russian gas supplies , bearing in mind the maxim of ' the weakest sink first ' , meaning that first we need to rescue the countries bordering and wholly dependent upon gas supplies from the East , such as Poland and the Baltic States , unless the European Union considers private interests and the interests of those representing Russia to be more important .
( BG ) Thank you , Mr President .
At the moment , citizens in 18 Member States are being held hostage in the political dispute between Ukraine and Russia .
I use the term ' political dispute ' because we all witnessed how Gazprom and the energy supplies from Russia are being used as a political weapon to exert pressure on a sovereign state .
Europe 's citizens are being held hostage .
The gas is supplied from Russia . The valve has been turned off in Russia .
Yes , Ukraine does bear some guilt and so , I appeal to both the Council and the European Commission to tell our friends in Ukraine in no uncertain terms that unless both the opposition and government adopt a united stand on the key issues affecting their development , they will not be able to cope with this pressure which is being exerted on them and us respectively .
Just as we have a consensus in our countries on key issues , they too must have a consensus on key issues .
Secondly , Gazprom must pay our countries penalties because at the moment Bulgaria , which is the most seriously affected country in Europe and is totally dependent on the gas energy supplies in Russia , must claim its rights and must claim them against the supplier , which is Russia in this case .
Thirdly , when it comes to energy in Europe , the one and same message must be given .
We must clearly say ' yes ' to nuclear energy in Europe , ' yes ' to alternative energy sources , ' yes ' to the different pipelines which make us less dependent on a single supplier , ' yes ' to bigger storage facilities and ' yes ' to more links between Member States so that we can avoid a similar type of crisis .
Last of all , I would like to say that in our case , the Bulgarian Government is also coming in for severe criticism .
During all the years it has been in power , the government has been concealing the supply agreements with Russia and has not been doing anything to diversify our country 's supply sources .
( BG ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , as a representative from the most affected country , I am appealing to you and the institutions which you represent to take immediate action to restore the supplies , while using every political means and every grounds under international law .
I hope that , on the grounds of the principle of solidarity , the Council and Commission will accept the Bulgarian proposals to include as part of the unused EUR 5 billion the projects for establishing cross-border links between Bulgaria and Romania and Bulgaria and Greece , and for expanding the storage facilities at Chiren so that the most urgent needs can be covered , as well as for developing opportunities to jointly use the liquefied gas terminals .
As rapporteur for one of the documents in the third energy package , I feel that the issue of ensuring transparency above all and complying with the rules is more important than all the other issues relating to the third country clause .
I also hope that the Commission will respond as soon as possible to the request that we sent with Mrs Podimata concerning the long-term measures which will be adopted so that we can actually have , prior to the Spring European Council , a common policy and effective measures that will resolve problems similar to those which have occurred just now and were described today by Mr Barroso as unprecedented , unjustified and incomprehensible .
( BG ) In spite of the agreement between Russia and Ukraine to restore Russian gas supplies to Europe , our hopes of receiving gas have been dashed yet again .
No matter whether the reasons are technical , financial or political , this unprecedented gas embargo cannot be justified .
During a winter with record low temperatures , it is reckless and inhuman to condemn millions of European citizens to being cold .
For Bulgaria , the EU country most affected by this , it is especially important for the principle of Pacta sunt servanda to be observed and for the gas supplies to be restored immediately .
Fair compensation should be sought for the harm and suffering caused to people and for breaching the agreements .
I would like to congratulate the Czech presidency for its active role as a mediator involved in resolving the crisis .
Now more than ever , the European Union needs to put into practice the old motto of solidarity proclaimed by the Musketeers : ' All for one and one for all ' and provide financial aid to countries that have suffered , like Bulgaria , for vitally important projects which will provide it with energy security .
It is high time to demonstrate the strength and unity of our union by adopting a long-term energy strategy .
( LT ) It is clear that this gas supply crisis is a political problem , not a commercial dispute .
Both Gazprom and the Naftogaz company are carrying out the principal task in this conflict - trying to prove to all of us and society how impossible transit is in a technical , technological and economic sense .
This is repeated constantly .
All the more so because these partners of ours , the European Union 's partners , are guided neither by elementary business practice nor by the Energy Charter .
It seems that this does not exist for our partners .
Unfortunately , I cannot see any willingness on the part of either Kiev or Moscow to come to an agreement .
It seems to me that they are aiming to buy time in these negotiations and I believe that only political measures will help solve the political problem until the technical questions surrounding transit are resolved .
I think that we must strive for political agreements and political guarantees between the European Union , Russia and Ukraine , until our goals are reached in the medium or long-term .
One other thing on energy solidarity .
Bulgaria 's Prime Minister and Slovakia 's Prime Minister are going to Moscow and Kiev to negotiate .
This week of energy solidarity should not end with the negotiations once more taking on a bilateral format ; I think that energy solidarity would be for Bulgaria and Slovakia to renew nuclear power operations in this situation .
This would be true energy solidarity .
Mr President , I draw three fairly obvious conclusions from the impasse with Russia and Ukraine .
Firstly we must reduce dependency on gas , more and more of which will have to be imported .
This means increasing our commitment to indigenous energy , including especially renewables and nuclear power .
Secondly , we must improve EU solidarity with mutual support between the Member States for electricity , gas and oil supplies .
This implies much improved and extended grids and pipelines .
Why should Bulgaria have no gas , while Romania on the other bank of the Danube has gas ?
Why does Slovakia have no gas while neighbours , Austria , Poland and the Czech Republic do ?
These gaps in the gas grid must be closed , urgently .
What is the timing for this , Commissioner Piebalgs ?
Thirdly , we must diversify our sources of supply and our storage facilities for gas and oil .
Why are we not making fuller use of the depleted southern North Sea gas fields for storage ?
We must greatly expand our liquefied gas infrastructure and develop pipeline systems from alternative sources and through alternative routings .
We need better and more connections with Norway , with North Africa and West Africa , with the Caspian and Caucasus , with the Levant and Gulf States in the Middle East .
In conclusion , I therefore ask the Commission and Council if they are promoting renewables and nuclear urgently enough , investing sufficiently in the construction of pipelines and LNG terminals and in developing the political relationships which will ensure continuity and diversity of supply .
We clearly cannot depend on Russia or the Ukraine to anything like the present extent .
We must put our own European interests first and without delay .
( PL ) Mr President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , Russia 's behaviour in shutting off the gas to customers in the European Union is intolerable from the viewpoint of the contractual undertakings signed by Russia .
European customers pay for their gas supplies from Russia within a specific time , and have the right to expect deliveries to be on time , regardless of any disputes between Russia and Ukraine .
Premier Putin 's decision to halt supplies before the TV cameras is not only in breach of signed contracts , but also shows that Gazprom is not a business operating under market principles , but a firm carrying out the Kremlin 's political behest .
This debate should send out a clear signal to Russia and Ukraine to immediately reinstate gas supplies .
I would also like to say that the behaviour of the Ukrainians is disappointing .
Lack of understanding with Russia , vague rules on paying intermediaries for gas and political infighting at the highest places in government compromise Ukraine in the eyes of the public and prevent that country from implementing its European aspirations .
This is very painful for me , as Ukraine is am important neighbour and strategic partner for us .
The present gas crisis has finally confirmed that Europe needs to look after its own energy security .
We cannot tolerate inaction any longer .
I call , Commissioner , upon the European Commission to immediately put forward legislative initiatives which will make the necessary diversification of energy supplies possible , which will secure genuine , and not feigned energy solidarity , and result in the interconnection of the national gas transmission systems of individual Member States .
( BG ) Ladies and gentlemen , in the light of the intense economic crisis and severe consequences of the gas conflict , synergy is required among all the national and European institutions .
The scale of the problem requires us to focus our efforts and alliances at EU level and beyond party boundaries on behalf of Europe 's citizens and their interests and rights .
Alternative sources of energy and new technologies will reduce our dependency on importing raw materials and energy .
The economic and social problems arising from the gas crisis are now being followed by ecological problems .
The switch from using gas to fuel oil for whole industries , as has happened in Bulgaria , is hampering the European Union 's plans to cut greenhouse emissions .
We appreciate the European institutions ' prompt intervention , but we need a privileged partnership for improving our energy independence .
This is why the European economic recovery plan must take into account through financial support the current needs for building an alternative energy infrastructure , especially for the most dependent countries , like Bulgaria .
We call on the European Parliament to adopt a clear position supporting coordinated actions taken by all the institutions aimed at resolving this gas crisis and preventing a recurrence of such a crisis in the future .
( SL ) The transport of Russian gas across Ukraine is not just a bilateral issue or a commercial dispute .
It is a problem with a strong multilateral component , because the sale and transit of gas can constitute a commercial activity only if the necessary conditions are met . The minimum conditions in this regard are , in my opinion , transparency , clear-cut rules , competitiveness , credibility and control .
My question and concern is who will compensate the companies which have already had to suspend their activities ?
Who will compensate the individual citizens affected ?
By this , I mean that Europe needs to call somebody to account .
What can we do now ?
Let us intensify our diplomatic efforts .
We must be quicker and more efficient at shaping common energy policy .
The third area I would like to draw your attention to is diversification : diversification of sources , supply routes and the countries from which we import energy products .
As regards gas , I would like to mention two priority areas , in particular : the use of liquefied gas and the Nabucco pipeline project .
Both of these will result in our diversifying supply routes and exporting countries .
The Nabucco project must be given precedence over the North Stream and South Stream projects , not only at a European level , but also at the level of each Member State .
For this reason , I would like to request that the Commission provides us with at least basic information on the progress of the Nabucco project .
I would also like to ask what additional action the Commission has taken in order to prevent these kinds of difficulties recurring in 2010 , and to give us some indication of when gas is likely to start flowing into the Union again .
( HU ) Madam President , now that gas delivery is expected to resume as a result of the initially hesitant but ultimately coordinated , decisive intervention by the European Union and in spite of various technical and other supposed problems , we can breathe a sigh of relief , but we cannot rest on our laurels .
For one thing , the cause of the dispute between Russia and Ukraine has not been uncovered and resolved , and thus could flare up again at any time .
In addition , the gas crisis has once again demonstrated our dependency and vulnerability .
Recognition of this fact can unblock the delay in developing a common European energy policy , the first step of which is for Europe to take joint responsibility for securing supply .
In order to do so , we need to develop new sources and delivery routes , as well as interconnections between the networks of the Member States .
We cannot , however ; expect these developments to take place on a market basis ; rather , European sources need to be made available based on common European interests .
The Nabucco pipeline represents a long-term solution , while development of the networks connecting the new Member States could already begin today , using the EUR 5 billion designated for the purpose in the economic stimulus programme .
This would mean getting two birds with one stone , since this infrastructure could stimulate the European economy and provide jobs , while at the same time it could mitigate the effects of similar crises .

( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is not a new problem : it has been the subject of debate for years here in plenary and in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
Moscow has never made it more obvious how vulnerable we have become and how easy it is to bribe us .
It is now time for action .
Commissioner , your diagnosis of a lack of interconnection could not be more accurate .
We have to work on this , as it is , indeed , something we can do something about .
We have to interconnect the gas networks within the EU .
One of the main reasons this has not been done is that the licences are national .
We should harmonise these more effectively , as they are different in every Member State .
We have to find solutions to better streamline the national procedures .
I am aware of the fact that the Committee has little authority in this area , but we should still try to bring about a break-through .
What might work - and this is also mentioned in the Commission proposal - is if a coordinator was appointed for each cross-border project who could mediate in the area of interconnections and could get things moving .
This coordination may be fundamental , and indeed it is where wind energy is concerned .
I am pleased to find out that , in your second review , you clearly stated that coordination will be a feature of the planned development of an offshore network for wind turbines , particularly in respect of the connection with land networks .
Secondly , we should turn our attention much more to liquefied gas ( LNG ) , seeing as it is much more flexible and leaves us far less vulnerable .
Thirdly , the networks should be aligned to sustainable energy which , as we know , will be generated locally , and we must ensure that it is granted priority access to the network .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , it is clear what we have to do .
I assume that the political will is now here for us to swing into action and that fundamental and specific decisions will be taken at the forthcoming spring summit .
( PL ) Madam President , a customer who pays an agreed price has fulfilled an obligation .
Russia is responsible for the crisis , and should be subjected to sanctions , Commissioner .
Ukraine is clearly in the middle .
If Russia cannot accept Ukraine 's political direction , it will have to get over it , as it got over the loss of political influence over the countries of the Soviet bloc .
The world is changing , and it simply needs to accept this fact .
Russia 's theatrical performance in shutting off the gas seemed to show that it did not care about selling us its product .
At least that was how it looked .
I believe that for the good of its economy and of its people , Russia should pay attention to the market and to its image as a trustworthy partner .
The two parties ' dependence on one another , I stress , is probably the most important aspect of this contract and of cooperation .
I believe that the Russians will ultimately discover this truth , and Europe will consider Russia and become a good mediator .
- ( SK ) Gazprom and Naftagas are gambling with the trust of European consumers .
Hundreds of companies in Slovakia have been forced to suspend production and people are freezing in their homes in Bulgaria .
European citizens should not have to pay the price for commercial and political games .
It is hard to judge which party is more to blame , but one thing is clear - Slovakia and Bulgaria urgently need help .
They need an immediate solution , they need an immediate renewal of gas deliveries and they need to know what will happen with their nuclear power plants .
I believe that despite all that has happened we will not turn our backs on the countries of the former Soviet bloc , including Ukraine , which want to free themselves from Russian influence .
The citizens of Ukraine should not suffer just because their politicians have failed .
Madam President , generally speaking , I could agree with those colleagues who commended the active role of the Czech presidency .
However , I cannot agree with the political tone expressed by the Deputy Prime Minister Mr Vondra in his introductory remarks .
His political tone is too calm .
Yes , we have spoken , and we speak , with one voice , but this voice is not strong enough .
Because , when we consider the plight of the millions of citizens in Europe suffering in this severe winter , we cannot be calm here .
I wonder why it is so .
We will have to act , and I agree with most of the colleagues who asked for an investigation , because we have to find out which of the two sides is more irresponsible .
Both are responsible !
Perhaps the reason for this calm political talk is the fact that now it concerns not only Russia but also Ukraine , and this is not correct .
I really think that not only this Parliament but also the presidency should raise its voice in the name of the citizens who are suffering .
Madam President , this crisis highlights the importance of making the EU more energy-independent , but , while we are discussing energy supply , we must not forget the fundamental importance of also controlling energy demand .
We have a 20 % -by-2020 EU energy efficiency improvement target and a number of pieces of legislation focussed on energy saving .
These energy efficiency actions will not only help to tackle climate change and fuel poverty : they will also very significantly improve Europe 's energy security .
There is of course a good reason why the Commission 's action plan on energy efficiency has an international element to it and recognises the importance of encouraging energy efficiency improvements in countries outside Europe , not least countries supplying and transiting energy to Europe .
The fact is , if they use less , we are likely to get more .
That is important above and beyond the immediate political side to this crisis .
( HU ) Madam President , I suggest that we speak clearly .
The European Union has not learned from its experience in the 2006 gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine , and failed badly in the present crisis .
Decision-makers reacted to the turning off of the gas taps as if this had been completely unexpected .
This energy supply crisis , the most serious to date , may be the final wake-up call for Member States , and we must take steps to reduce our energy dependency .
I trust that it is now clear to everyone that the conflict that has erupted between Russia and Ukraine is not merely a private bilateral legal dispute , if only because it affects hundreds of millions of citizens of the European Union .
The present crisis is not only a test of our common energy policy , but also of EU solidarity .
What is at stake now is whether Member States can move beyond the policies based hitherto on separate deals .
What is at stake is whether the European Union is capable of speaking and acting in unity in so crucial a matter .
Madam President , I am glad to see Mr Vondra back .
I thank him for explaining the gravity of the situation , but when is the Council going to learn that until the EU speaks with one voice on energy issues , in particular in relation to Russia and the Ukraine , we are going to be in a weak position ?
I am going to give you an example where the Council does not do that .
We shall shortly be starting negotiations on the second reading of the energy liberalisation package .
The Commission came up with a very carefully crafted position on third countries investing in the EU , suggesting that the Commission speak on behalf of the EU on these issues .
What have you in the Council done ?
You have retreated to national positions and said , no - we Member States we want the final say , not the Commission .
It is this divide-and-rule , the oldest trick in the book , which you and your fellow colleagues have fallen for .
Until you understand that pooling your powers to gain more leverage internationally is the way to go , we will always be in a position where we are vulnerable .
You must answer the European citizens as to why they are now sitting in the cold .
You have to change your position on this line .
Will you do so ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , firstly let me offer my apologies to you .
I am here for the first time and perhaps I spent so long on the introduction that I contributed to the delay .
But I think this summary of how we have been acting since the early morning of 1 January was worthwhile .
Speaking with one voice is exactly what we are trying to do in this adventure .
I think we are quite successful in doing that for the time being .
You mentioned the internal energy package .
This is not a subject of the current debate ; we are discussing the emergency situation .
But I can tell you that , from what I know of the discussion in the Council , the various fears about going for complete unbundling were simply motivated by strategic concerns in some countries .
This is the debate about a third-country clause etc .
However , I mentioned in my statement here that the Czech presidency takes this as one of its priorities , and we will do whatever we can to find a solution and compromise between the Council and Parliament .
But do not expect that it will bring us a miraculous solution like in those kinds of gas games in central and eastern Europe .
It is different from being on an island , where you have the freedom to bring energy into any port you wish , as opposed to being located somewhere like Slovakia or Bulgaria .
Yes , you are right that there are countries which are better equipped , even in that particular region , for that kind of emergency situation .
However , I think we should also be aware of the fact that , for example , you cannot build gas storage facilities wherever you want .
You need the right kind of a geological environment .
For example , we are fortunate in my country that all storage facilities are located in the eastern part of the country .
We can pump from those storages and distribute gas even if there is almost no supply from outside .
We are able to survive for a few weeks or months , but no longer .
On the other hand , Slovakia unfortunately has those geological positions in the western part of the country and to reverse the flow is not an easy operation .
You need to have the compressors on the pipelines and , if you do not , then it causes trouble .
To those who argue that this is a political problem : concerning speaking with one voice , I can tell you from all my experience that of course it is a political problem .
It is a political problem because people are freezing so it is a politically difficult situation .
Of course I agree with those , like Jacek Saryusz-Wolski or István Szent-Iványi , who argue that this is a kind of cynical game and , in fact , at the heart of this is the fight about who is going to control the infrastructure in the country in question .

Others , like Hannes Swoboda and Jan Marinus Wiersma , stress that we should not take a black-and-white approach to this and that Ukraine deserves some attention - you are also right : of course Ukraine is not making this easier .
That is , at least , my own view .
But then we should be aware of the fact that Bulgaria and Slovakia are in a terrible situation , because suddenly there is a country that wants to exploit this difficult situation and to put those countries into conflict with Ukraine .
That is what we can see right now , from the developments today , for example .
So it is difficult - what can we do ?
Then there are those who are afraid to enter into the game at all because they view it as being like the card game Schwarzer Peter , with the danger that whoever ends up with the black card will foot the bill .
I do not think that the one who is afraid to play is courageous .
I think a courageous person is one is willing to take a risk .
Why not buy gas on the Ukrainian-Russian border ?
An excellent example !
We have discussed this , but who are the contractors on the EU side ?
They are private companies who are afraid because they do not have control over the gas coming in .
There obviously should be a solution but that would require the willingness of Ukraine to give up a stake in the pipeline .
As you know , their Parliament prohibits that and they are not ready to do it .
European companies should take a certain role , and there is nothing that can be done in a matter of weeks or even months .
So we need to step up the pressure .
But today , for example , we said that legal action must follow here .
I think this is important on both sides .
I do not want to repeat myself and again take longer than I should .
I want to thank you above all for your interest and your active attitude - from Jacek Saryusz-Wolski , the PPE-DE Group , to all of you here .
We need your help and your attention .
We need your help in drawing attention to this issue to those in European countries where this is not a problem on the front pages .
That is mostly in this part of Europe , where there is no emergency situation .
That would help us to speak with one voice in a more active way .
Last , but not least , I agree with most of you who were arguing for the need for a more strategic approach , the need for medium- and long-term solutions - this is exactly what the Czech presidency is planning to do .
We have the six months - and we have perhaps four months to work with you on it - but we are in complete agreement with the Commission and Member States to move the agenda forward in order to make this a key item for the March European Council and , of course , also to organise in May the Southern Corridor Summit in order to promote the diversification of the supplies such as the Nabucco project and others .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I will try to be as brief as possible .
From the foreign policy point of view , there are many consequences and we started to look into these consequences in 2006 when we had the first wake-up call .
The most important thing is what we can do together in the future .
We have one problem and that is , of course , the Treaty .
In the Treaty there is no common external security policy .
In the Treaty of Lisbon we will have a solidarity clause , which could then be used to give the better coordination that has been used and mentioned everywhere .
Secondly , for two years we have had energy diplomacy .
Quite a number of memoranda have been signed .
We have been working on this but much is still theory or is in the preparation phase .
It is very difficult to get all the actors together at once .
We can normally only do the framework , for instance for Nabucco .
We tried then to get the volume of gas needed in order for Nabucco to be supplied and built .
There , I think that public-private partnerships are necessary .
This is my second point .
The third is , of course as we all know - and it has been said so often - that this gas conflict is a commercial one , but one that also has great political connotations .
We also see the very poor state of Russian-Ukrainian relations , but our main goal has to be to stabilise the situation as much as possible .
One of those possibilities will be our new Eastern Partnership idea where we will want the eastern partners to work together .
On Ukraine , we will be holding a joint international investment conference on the rehabilitation and modernisation of Ukraine 's gas transit system at the end of March .
I think this is a highly timely event .
Concerning the bilateral relationships - EU-Russia or EU-Ukraine - I think it is clear that the energy supply and transit aspects of the new agreements currently being negotiated have taken on a new importance and will be there .
My final point is that we are not only looking towards the east , but also towards the south .
We have already been working with many Arab countries on initiatives to get gas , via Turkey , hopefully to a Nabucco pipeline .
That means that diversification of pipelines , sources and , of course , of different energy - as has been said here - will be the way to go in the future .
For this , we also need the right legal basis and this is difficult .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members , I will just say a couple of things .
First of all , our task is to restore supplies immediately because people are suffering , industry is suffering , people are losing jobs ; so that is the main task , not to create additional obstacles .
But , after that , an analysis should take place , and measures should also be taken .
We should revisit some of our stereotypes , because if 2006 could be called a wake-up call , this is a real shock .
In reality we are underestimating what really happened .
If two countries ' governments have accused each other of turning off the tap of the gas pipelines , then the only conclusion that I can draw - because I trust the countries and governments - is that somebody tampered with the pipelines , and that is very difficult to believe .
So what has happened is really extraordinary and I believe it should have a huge impact on the energy policies that we are trying to create .
That is why I believe that no issue should be taboo any more .
We really should discuss how to guarantee security of supply under all possible conditions .
And , to be honest , I never expected full disruption of supply .
It was never in my expectations : it was a shock for me too .
You can blame me as Energy Commissioner , and say ' You should have foreseen this ' .
But it was never to be expected .
It is something new that never has happened before and we should in future be prepared for such a type of measure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Thursday 15 January 2009 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The European Union is facing , once again , a crisis with its supply of natural gas .
It is not clear who is to blame .
Russia ?
Ukraine ?
Both ?
I urge the European Commission to make public information indicating the reasons which have sparked this situation .
The European Union must assume the responsibility of stating who is actually to blame .
The crisis has highlighted , unfortunately , that many of the European Union 's countries are vulnerable to energy blackmail and may end up suffering as a result of the misunderstandings , more of a political than an economic nature , between the countries from the former Soviet Union .
It is obvious that we must speed up the process of creating a common European energy policy , based inclusively on a common external approach .
We must expedite the process of diversifying supply sources and transit routes for natural gas .
In fact , accelerating the Nabucco project is vital .
I think that the Energy Commissioner must submit a report detailing the actions which have been taken or , more precisely , which have NOT been taken by the Commission to support the Nabucco project during the last year .
in writing . - ( PL ) In today 's debate much has been said about gas supplies and the links , interconnections and dependency of the European economies .
We must learn from the present crisis .
We also have to regard the Yamal 2 project as something rational and in our interest .
It is not only better than the Baltic pipeline to Germany , which bypasses Poland , but will increase our energy security .
If it is built , Yamal 2 will mean a significantly greater transit of gas via Poland to Europe , as well as being a more cost-effective and efficient solution than the Northern Pipeline , and in addition , it can be built more quickly .
This I believe is the way we need to direct our efforts to ensure energy security for all EU Member States .
The gas crisis spotlights two major problems which the European Union is facing .
On the energy front , we still do not have a common strategy , due to the absence of the cohesion required for this .
At present , 11 of the 27 EU countries have been affected as a result of supplies being cut off .
However , the dependency on Russian gas is a common security problem , bearing in mind that the energy weapon can be used at any time , especially against Russia 's former satellite states .
In this situation , it is the EU 's duty to find a solution for creating a secure energy zone for new Member States .
The real problem for Europe is diversification of gas sources and not the transit routes between Russia and the EU .
Secondly , the gas crisis shows the political weakness of a divided , hesitant European Union .
One of the glaring shortcomings comes from the EU presidency .
We need , particularly in times of crisis , a representative voice to speak on behalf of the EU .
A choir of several voices risks casting ridicule on the idea of a United Europe , not to mention its international image and influence .
This is why it is necessary to establish a European presidency for a longer duration , which is also independent of Member States ' political structures .
in writing . - Another wake-up call .
The current gas crisis shows once more how weak and ineffective our EU energy policy is .
When under big pressure EU national governments rely , basically , on their own resources and sources .
This is not surprising under the circumstances , but it shows another facet of lack of EU solidarity .
This crisis also highlights what is a must for future steps in EU energy policy if we wish to have one , in reality .
As for oil stocks we should develop gas storage .
We need to diversify gas suppliers , supply routes and delivery mechanisms ( as in the case of liquefied natural gas ) .
The construction of the Nabucco project should be speeded up and the money for this project should be enhanced by involving the EIB in its funding .
The argument that not enough gas would be available were new transport routes to be developed does not stand scrutiny .
We need to develop renewable energy resources at a faster pace and save energy .
Last , but not least , we need to develop cross-border energy interconnectors , so that EU Member States can help each other if need arises .
, in writing . - ( HU ) The European Union has not learned from its experiences in the 2006 gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine .
Decision-makers reacted to the turning off of the gas taps as if this had been completely unexpected .
This energy supply crisis , the most serious to date , may be the final wake-up call for Member States : we need to take steps to reduce our energy dependency .
The conflict that has erupted between Russia and Ukraine is not merely a private bilateral legal dispute , given the fact that it affects hundreds of millions of EU citizens .
The present crisis is not only a test of our common energy policy , but also of EU solidarity .
What is at stake now is whether Member States can move beyond the policies based hitherto on separate deals .
What is at stake is whether the European Union is capable of speaking and acting in unity in so crucial a matter .
The inactivity of the past days is particularly painful , given that the European Commission made a good job of defining the steps which may reduce Europe 's dependence .
We can only agree with what is set out in the Energy Security and Solidarity Action Plan .
Investments must be made as soon as possible in developing alternative delivery routes and in linking up existing networks .
Support for energy efficiency infrastructures needs to be expanded and we need to strengthen the energy dimension of the EU foreign policy that is currently taking shape .
I believe that the current crisis would not have had such a drastic effect if the Member States had not come to their senses only at the last minute , and had committed themselves to a common European energy policy in more than just words .
in writing . - ( PL ) It appears that the present crisis in the supply of gas to Ukraine and to Europe has far greater ramifications than previous crises which were the result of the same problem of Russia 's monopolistic position in gas supplies to the EU .
It has helped us to grasp the true meaning of concepts and terms we often use , but do not always comprehend , concepts such as energy security , EU solidarity , common energy policy or diversification of supplies and means of delivering gas and other fuels .
We do not even need to know the real reasons behind Russia 's behaviour to draw our conclusions .
Knowing the motives is obviously important for making a moral and political assessment of how individual countries and firms behave , but the fact remains that regardless of the motives of the individual parties to the agreement , some citizens of the European Union have been exposed to the painful results of having no gas .
The truth is important , but it will not deliver gas .
Let us use this opportunity to get serious answers to several questions .
Will we be able to draw the right conclusions from the present situation ?
Will we be able to rise above the short-sighted perspective being used by political parties who are at present in the opposition , and who are cynically using the situation to make unfounded attacks on their own national parliaments ?
Will Nabucco be built ?
Will we increase our mandatory fuel reserves ?
Will the ideological opponents of atomic energy change their views ?
Let us hope so .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , the lesson of the present gas crisis is compelling , and the European Union must learn from it .
It is yet another turning point , and should be the last one that exposes the lack of governance of 27 countries .
This is what the people of Europe expect , even in those countries not directly affected by the gas blockade , and which are less reliant on supplies from Gazprom .
The mechanism of solidarity , sketched out in the 2004 directive , is wholly unsuited to today 's challenges .
We need to agree on a practical common policy on solidarity , security and diversification in energy .
We do not need slogans .
We need investment in infrastructure .
We need to secure ourselves against a future crisis by increasing our gas storage capability .
Energy solidarity requires cross-border connections joining the transmission networks of individual countries .
Poland is a good example of this : although it is supplied mainly by pipelines from Russia which bypass Ukraine , and therefore less exposed in the present crisis , it is nevertheless cut off from Western Europe 's transmission and storage system .
We are concerned that one outcome of the present crisis is that it has reduced the credibility of Ukraine , and not just of Russia .
This effect of the gas war is no less important than the temporary problems experienced by consumers during a harsh winter .
It is very difficult for us to discuss the topic of the gas crisis given that the Council , EP and European Commission ended up with their hands tied at the end of it .
But the debate is very important , albeit inadequate .
I would like to thank all fellow Members from various political groups and Member States for their expressions of support for Bulgaria and the other countries which suffered from the crisis .
At the same time , this does not make gas appear and create normal European living conditions for our fellow citizens .
As a result of this crisis , Bulgaria has turned from being an energy centre in the Balkans into a gas crisis capital .
This is why urgent action is needed .
The consequences of this crisis are humanitarian and economic .
This is destabilising our country , on top of the financial and economic crisis .
The EP must adopt a resolution where it sets out its position and the measures which will help us overcome the crisis .
Here and now .
These measures must include nuclear energy and a quest for new sources of natural gas .
We need a new action mechanism and set of tools .
If the EP is not part of the solution to the problem today , it will become part of the actual problem .
This will result in a negative political outcome for the EU .
The current crisis has highlighted once again that the main problem is dependency on the energy resources located in the Russian Federation and the use of this situation by the Russian Federation in a manner which lies outside standard international procedures .
The declarations made by the President of the European Commission and the President of the Council during the time of the crisis in Georgia referring to a change in the EU 's relationship with Russia need to be put into practice .
The Treaty of Lisbon needs to be ratified so that we can create a common European energy policy .
We must start building the Nabucco gas pipeline without delay .
It is absolutely necessary to promote energy projects which raise the profile of the Black Sea region and use the energy sources from the Caspian Sea region .
The enlargement of the European Energy Community to the east and the inclusion , as a priority , of energy as a topic in the new framework created through the Eastern Partnership may also contribute to resolving the current situation .
in writing . - Russia blocked gas supplies at an extremely inopportune time for European consumers and it is essential that the gas deliveries are restored without further ado .
But , after having resolved the crisis , we must take a long look at our dependency on gas from Russia , and there are two aspects that ought to be considered .
First , Russia must assure its capability of fulfilling its commitments to the EU .
The failure of outdated technology and infrastructure may jeopardise the stable flow of gas to the EU .
It should also be noted that despite ambitious plans on the Nord Stream gas pipeline there is no certainty that the output of Russia 's natural gas fields is sufficient for meeting their commitments .
Second , the Kremlin has a history of using economic instruments as political tools .
The European Union should never become a victim of such political behaviour .
I encourage the EU to diversify its energy package to avoid its dependence on one single natural gas provider .
In my opinion , there are two aspects to the problem of gas supply from Russia to Ukraine and then on to the EU .
The first is that many people are up in arms hollering ' How dare Russia do this ! '
I ask : Why should not it ?
If the EU itself is primarily a neo-liberal project where the market supposedly resolves everything , why should not Russia be allowed to behave commercially and demand payment of the money owed to it by the debtor ?
The gas crisis was not triggered by Russia but by Ukraine , and it is not a political problem , but an economic issue .
This needs to be made quite clear !
The second aspect is the focus ( which I have criticised several times in the past ) of EU bodies and institutions - and Parliament is no exception - on problems that are irrelevant and only divert attention away from the really urgent issues .
This was reaffirmed by the reaction to Russia 's legitimate decision to suspend gas supplies .
Rather than the embarrassing pampering accorded to the Ukrainian administration as a sort of ' protective filter ' between Russia and EU countries and rather than dreaming up the perfect shape for a cucumber , the EU should have been preparing for a crisis of this kind long ago .
How has the EU helped the Slovaks and Bulgarians , for example , who have been hit hardest by the gas crisis ?
Was it able to help them at all ?
If not , there is something wrong with integration .
In the gas war between Russia and Ukraine , those who have ended up affected most are the most innocent .
The current situation clearly shows how dependent Europe is not only on the source of the resources , but also on the transit countries .
It also shows how unjust the criticisms have been about the alternative pipelines , such as the Nord Stream and South Stream pipelines .
Unfortunately , it highlights too how helpless the European Union is in providing assistance to its Member States which were most affected and in guaranteeing its citizens ' security .
Our basic task now is to restore gas supplies .
The EU also needs to utilise its entire political resources to persuade Russia and Ukraine to free the 18 Member States which they are holding hostage .
The second measure needs to be support for the countries most severely affected .
In the climate of an economic crisis and contracting markets , the blow from a gas shortage may prove to be fatal for many companies in my country and thousands of people will end up out of work .
Who will be responsible for this ?
The third and most important measure in a long-term plan is the construction of the alternative gas pipelines , especially Nabucco , investment in connecting up the Member States ' gas supply networks and the building of storage facilities to ensure larger reserves .
The only conclusion from all of this is that we need a single European policy , but it is a pity that we always realise this after a deep crisis .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , the matter of the crisis in gas supplies to the EU , in Ukraine and in the Balkans should be viewed primarily as an element in the struggle for political and economic influence in the former Soviet republics .
The country that is being fought over now is Ukraine .
Russia has joined in the election campaign that is underway there . It wanted to use this to show the Ukrainian public that if it remains true to Russia , Ukraine would have cheap gas and oil .
The present conflict also shows that this kind of geopolitical influence is more important to Russia than good relations with the EU .
Russia has factored the economic costs of shutting of gas supplies into its actions .
So we should not delude ourselves - this is only the start of the struggle for influence in Ukraine .
In its inherent blindness , the European Union wants to continue to rely on imports of gas and oil for energy .
At the same time its own resources of coal and lignite ( in Poland included ) , are lying idle .
I do not know whether this is political stupidity , or simply a matter of keeping energy pressure over particular countries in the Community .
The issue of Ukraine and the European Union being supplied gas by Russia must be resolved as quickly as possible .
The European Union needs an energy security policy , as well as a diversification of its resources and solidarity in the energy sector in order to prevent such crises which affect its citizens .
More than half the EU 's Member States are affected by Russia halting the supply of gas .
In Bulgaria , the supply of gas to industry has been reduced or interrupted as this country is 90 % dependent on gas from Russia .
I support the stance of both the Presidency and the Commission in urging both sides to engage in dialogue in order to reach a compromise .
Without technical coordination between the two sides , gas cannot be supplied .
In the future , we need to keep the dialogue open with both sides in order to avoid ending up in similar situations .
The Council and Parliament are proposing , through the energy package which is under discussion , a series of measures which involve using more energy suppliers for the consumer 's benefit .
We hope that the package will be adopted at second reading .
This crisis must be resolved as soon as possible because it is affecting both Europe 's citizens and its industry .
We need a common external policy in the energy sector .
Question Time ( Council )

President-in-Office of the Council . - I know that my friend Milan Horáček is a man who has been committed for a long time to observing the human rights situation in Russia , and I want to thank him for doing that because this is exactly what this body , this organisation , should do .
Regarding the question on that particular issue , I would like to assure him that the Council fully shares the concerns about developments as regards the rule of law and democracy in Russia .
The Council is of the view that our partnership with Russia must be based on respect for international law , democratic principles and human rights .
Therefore , the Council will continue to press Russia to implement fully the obligation it has signed up to as a member of the Council of Europe , and of course the OSCE , and also in the framework of the PCA - the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with the EU .
The cases quoted by you and your colleagues are of great concern and the Council will continue to follow developments closely .
The Council raises its concerns with Russia on a regular basis as part of the political dialogue , in particular in the twice-yearly human rights consultation introduced in March 2005 .
Russia 's actions in this and other areas will be taken into account in the negotiations on a new agreement with Russia - that is very important - and also in other aspects of EU-Russia relations .
Achieving robust provisions on human rights in the new PCA currently being negotiated is also one of the EU priorities as set out in the negotiation directive which was approved by the Council last year .
The strategic partnership with Russia , which some are talking about , must be built on shared values ; otherwise it would have no sense .
The EU needs the new agreement , but so does Russia .
It is crucial that the negotiations , as well as the text of the agreement itself , mirror values which are dear to us , such as the rule of law .
Personally , I can promise that I would like to stress that the unity of the EU is absolutely decisive for achieving results here .
( DE ) Madam President , I have a problem with the fact that the Council has repeatedly told us in the past that relations with Russia take priority , but in the particular cases of Mikhail Khodorkovsky , Platon Lebedev and also Svetlana Bakhmina there is no progress of any kind to be seen .

( DE ) Mr Vondra , I hold you in high regard as an experienced human rights activist , and I also regard Czech creativity very highly , hence my questions .
Can you help us find new ways to bring the issue of the Yukos prisoners closer to a solution after years of talking , in other words to develop a degree of actionism ?
Also , how can we bring the human rights issue into somewhat sharper focus in practical terms in the negotiations with Russia ?
Minister , thank you for your answers .
Would you agree that , if the Council had strongly and convincingly presented this problem to the Russian side , demonstrating that the EU is serious about such a scandalous violation of justice , economic relations would also have been on a better footing today ?
Would you agree that unless the Khodorkovsky and Lebedev case finds a just and transparent solution , the EU cannot expect Russia to meet its economic commitments either ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I think that , having a Czech presidency , you cannot expect us to stay silent .
I was not silent when we were discussing energy security and I was not silent in the past when we were discussing the Khodorkovsky case and other cases .
You probably know that we will have a troika meeting in February where the presidency will be represented by the Foreign Minister , Karel Schwarzenberg .
Certainly , in those cases to which you refer , we will consider the steps , but of course whether there are results or not is totally in Russian hands .
We can simply create a certain environment to keep up the pressure , but it is up to Russia to respond .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I thank you for this particular question , because I come from a country which is a great friend of free trade .
It is the bedrock of our economy - about 80 % of our GDP is somehow produced by the activity which relates to this trade .
So you can be sure that our presidency is keen that the Union remains fully committed to reaching a balanced , ambitious and comprehensive agreement in the WTO Doha Development Round .
We will be working hard on that .
Regarding the question of my presidency 's ambitions in relation to world trade liberalisation , the presidency has clearly defined its main priority on this subject in the context of the Council 's 18-month programme for the French , Czech and Swedish presidencies , as well as in its own work programme , which was published last week and was also introduced here to some extent by the Prime Minister today .
According to this programme , trade policy remains a very important tool for addressing the opportunities and challenges of globalisation and fostering economic growth , jobs and prosperity for all citizens in Europe .
Efforts will be sustained to promote an open , market-oriented and rule-based world trading system for the benefit of all .
Trade policies should also contribute to the Union 's environmental and climate objective , in particular by encouraging the expansion of trade in environmental goods and services .
The Union continues to stay fully committed to reaching a balanced , ambitious and comprehensive agreement in the WTO Doha Round .
Moreover , my country has set three priority areas for its presidency of the Council .
One of these priorities will be the European Union in the world .
In this context my country will highlight the importance of trade policy as a means of driving forward external competitiveness , economic growth and the creation of new jobs following the EU 's new trade policy strategy called Global Europe , as well as under the revised strategy for growth and jobs .
Parallel to the multilateral system , the Czech Republic will back the Commission 's efforts to negotiate trade agreements with promising partners or regions - such as Korea , India , ASEAN , Mercosur and the Andean Community countries and Central America , and potentially China as well - and to negotiate free trade agreements with the EU 's closest neighbours , for example Ukraine , or to start such negotiations once the prerequisite conditions have been met , as in Russia .


The presidency will present its programme on the trade area to the Committee on International Trade on 20 January 2009 .
Regarding food security in the EU , the presidency is of the opinion that protectionism will not help to secure food supply in Europe or worldwide .
Therefore , the presidency supports the liberalisation of world trade within the framework of DDA and discussions on CAP reform with a view to making European agriculture more competitive .
That means dismantling export refunds .
These elements , such as transparent liberalisation of world trade and competitive agriculture , are the base for enhancing food security as well .
Food security in the EU has much to do with the international trade in food products that makes them available at competitive prices and sets the right incentives for those Member States where they can be produced most effectively .
Food security nowadays lies not only in the local production of food , but in a country 's ability to finance the import of food through exports of other goods .
In this sense , an open , multilateral trading system with a diversity of countries supplying food products may be a better guarantee for stable and secure supplies .
Thank you , Council , for the detailed answer , which I will need to study , although I do not think we will agree .
I would draw your attention to a report voted through this Parliament on global food security , for which I was a rapporteur , which very clearly says that the market will not provide us with food security and certainly will not give farmers the income stability that they require .
So could you clarify for me whether you believe that free trade in agriculture is the way forward and that that is your priority under your presidency ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I can give you a short answer - yes !
If there is free trade in agriculture , there is no hunger in the world .

( DE ) Mr Vondra , it is always being said that agricultural policy is there for only the 3 % who farm , but there are 100 % of us who eat .
I , for one , eat heartily , and I should like to state very clearly my belief that food security is existential .
We are currently seeing the problems of energy dependence .
I am in favour of free world trade , but we must be able to feed ourselves from our own soil , and so we need to preserve our farming structures : this cannot be left solely in the hands of the market .

First of all , like my colleague before me , Mr Hannan , I would like to welcome the Czech presidency - it will be an interesting contrast with the last presidency of the EU - and once again apologise for the disgraceful behaviour shown by some of my colleagues in this Chamber .
It is all very well saying that we want to kick-start the WTO talks , but we have had Indian elections , we have had US elections and we have got European elections .
With all these elections going on and changes of administration , how can we really kick-start the WTO talks ?
( GA ) Madam President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his answer .
I would like to ask him a question about the Czech President 's plans to provide support to disadvantaged areas .
As I understand it further help is needed , and is needed desperately , by disadvantaged areas in the European common agricultural policy .
I would like to find out what the Presidency intends to do about this .
President-in-Office of the Council . - The problem of disadvantaged areas throughout Europe is one of the particular problems which are constantly being discussed in relation to the CAP .
I think that we are all , or mostly all , in agreement that we should move from direct payment to a payment for developing rural areas , if there is some kind of redistribution , rather than to continue with protectionist measures .
So there are the ways and means , and certainly we are working closely with Commissioner Fischer Boel .
I am not an expert on agriculture but I think you certainly would have the opportunity to also approach our Minister for Agriculture and discuss this in detail .
May I wish the Czech presidency every success during its term in office .
I would like the Minister to comment on the experience to date of Czech farmers and the Czech agri-food industry of the common agricultural policy , whether they are satisfied and whether it has made good improvements to their particular lots in different enterprises .
How do they - and how do you , the Czech people - view the common agricultural policy as applied to the Czech Republic ?
( RO ) Unfortunately , the economic crisis is leading to job losses .
Purchasing power is decreasing .
Quality of life also means , however , healthy food .
Romania has a very large number of farmers , but their farms are small in size .
I would like to ask what support you have in mind for small agricultural producers , especially in the new Member States .
President-in-Office of the Council . - In the new Member States you have different conditions .
For example , my country does not have as many small farms as in certain other European countries .
We have a very competitive farming industry with large farms but , if you go to neighbouring Poland , for example , the situation is somewhat different .
On Mrs Doyle 's question of how we are doing : well , I have some farmers in my constituency in Northern Bohemia and , on the one hand , they are doing better because they got more money .
So we have farmers with Hugo Boss ties now .
We did not have this five to ten years ago .
On the other hand , they also feel some kind of injustice because of the differences in payments between the older Member States and the new Member States .
It is a question of elementary justice in the system , and it should be corrected .
At the same time , we believe that the CAP should be reformed .
This is the only way to keep Europe competitive .
So we have here a complex problem .
I am not an expert who can go into the details , but I think that we should at least be able to agree on the basic lines .
And Mrs Ţicău 's question ?
I am sorry , Minister , I was not sure if you had addressed both questions .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I was trying to respond to both questions .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Situation in the Horn of Africa ( debate )
The next item is the position of the Council and the Commission on the situation in the Horn of Africa .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , at this late hour I wish to make a few remarks on the Council 's position on the Horn of Africa .
The Horn of Africa of course is a challenging region which deserves our particular and increased attention as it has a major impact on the EU .
The EU closely follows developments in this region and prepares to engage even more with the countries of the Horn of Africa .
I know that Parliament also keeps abreast of developments .
The visit that your delegation made late last year to Eritrea and Ethiopia and also Djibouti was important .
I also took note of the motion for a resolution on the Horn of Africa that has been elaborated partly in the context of this visit .
It clearly displayed to the region and to Europeans the growing engagement for the Horn of Africa within the EU .
On behalf of the Council , I welcome the involvement of Parliament in our efforts to address the challenges in the Horn of Africa .
There are several sources of tension in the Horn of Africa . I will get to them in more detail .
However , in the view of the Council these tensions are often linked in one way or another within the region .
For this reason , the Council is particularly looking to discern the regional links between ongoing conflicts .
What are these links between conflicts ?
First , there is a dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea , which might be considered as one of the principle causes of instability in the whole region .
This is reflected in the following ways : the support of opposing warring factions in Somalia ; destabilisation efforts in each other 's countries - let me mention Ogaden , Oromo in Ethiopia in particular ; it is reflected also in support for the revival of the peace process in Sudan ; Eritrea has suspended its membership in the Intergovernmental Authority for Development ( IGAD ) .
And , last but not least , the conflict in Somalia has caused one of the most serious humanitarian situations that we face in the world today .
The increase in acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia is another serious consequence of this conflict .
Another serious issue is the competition for natural resources such as water and minerals in the Horn of Africa .
This phenomenon increases pastoralist conflicts in areas populated by different cultural and ethnic groups .
It also increases food insecurity and human insecurity in general , which contributes to the conflict and the migration .
There are also serious regional interdependencies .
Let me mention some of them .
There are the border conflicts , as mentioned before : the disputes between Ethiopia and Eritrea , Sudan and Ethiopia and Djibouti and Eritrea , which might be considered as sources of instability in the region .
I would also stress that improved regional cooperation would contribute to lowering tensions around national boundaries .
Food security is another interdependency . This is of course a major concern in the region .
Recurring droughts , as well as floods , have a devastating effect on the population .
Once again , regional cooperation could mitigate the effects of these natural events .
As you know , some argue that this problem is at the origin of the conflicts in Darfur , Somalia and many other areas of the Horn of Africa .
I am not sure that gives a full explanation , but I do believe that this question must be resolved in each of the countries and within the regional context in a fair and transparent manner .
Piracy was initially localised to a small part of the Somali coast .
The pretext of the pirates was to levy a fishing tax on a ship in Somali waters .
As you are certainly well aware , this activity has expanded significantly and now threatens the delivery of humanitarian aid to Somalia and maritime safety in the Gulf of Aden and well beyond , including ships travelling off the coast of Kenya and Tanzania .
There are also several other interdependencies which have a serious impact on Europe and on the countries of the Horn of Africa , such as terrorism and migration .
So what are the actions which the European Union undertakes ?
What is our engagement or involvement ?
The main political instrument at the disposal of the Council - which I have the honour to represent here today - is a political dialogue , not only with the individual countries but also with other regional stakeholders , such as the African Union , the Intergovernmental Authority on Development , the League of Arab States , and the United States and China as important countries .
Political dialogue is a mutual commitment in the Cotonou Agreement between the EU and each of the countries in that particular region .
This dialogue is principally pursued through the heads of the EU missions in the countries concerned .
It is a very important instrument to the Council , as it gives us a direct contact with the authorities of those countries .
It provides an opportunity to hear their point of view , but also to clearly explain our perceptions and raise concerns that we have on certain issues . This particularly concerns matters of governance and human rights .
Those are the main issues .
On top of this , the Council disposes of the instruments of the European Security and Defence Policy ( ESDP ) .
Since September 2008 , the Council has deployed this instrument to fight piracy off the Somali coast , first through the coordination cell EU NAVCO , based in Brussels and then since December 2008 through the maritime operation called EU NAVFOR Atalanta .
Finally , the EU acts through the financial instruments of the European Commission such as the African Peace Facility and Instrument of Stability .
I will let Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner elaborate further on that because that is the Commission 's responsibility .
Of course the Council is always looking , together with the European Commission , for ways to enhance the effectiveness and the visibility of EU action .
I look forward to hearing your proposals and recommendations on this particular issue .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission has over recent years already called for greater attention to be given by the European Union to the situation in the Horn of Africa .
Today in this debate I am replacing my colleague Louis Michel , who unfortunately cannot be here ; I take this matter on with great interest , both in its own right and also because it affects Europe directly - the need , for instance , to mobilise our navies to combat piracy , and this is only one recent example .
We therefore very strongly welcome the initiative of the parliamentary delegation which visited the region and their subsequent report and draft resolution , which we also support in principle .
The internal situation in each of the countries of the Horn cannot be understood in isolation from the regional dynamics .
We have to continue to encourage a global approach resting on economic development , governance and security if we want to advance regional stability , respect for the essential and fundamental elements of Cotonou and the fight against poverty .
Let me comment on the situation by country before concluding with remarks on the regional strategy for the Horn .
Firstly , let me say a word on Ethiopia / Eritrea .
Ethiopia occupies a strategic economic and political place in the region .
The Commission continues to support Ethiopia with its poverty alleviation efforts , where important progress has been registered .
Weak regional security and inter-community tensions affect the internal situation of the country , especially in the Ogaden , where access to the population still remains constrained .
The Commission will also continue to monitor the human rights situation and the democratisation process .
Considering the circumstances of the 2005 general elections , the Commission will closely monitor the preparation and proceeding of the 2010 elections , especially in the context of the recently approved NGO legislation and the re-arrest of the opposition leader , Ms Birtukan Medeksa .
The internal situation in Eritrea is partly determined by the impasse in the border conflict with Ethiopia .
The Commission remains seriously concerned about human rights violations and the precarious social and economic situation .
In our view , there is a strong argument for the continuance of a cooperation programme which aims at the improvement of the living conditions of the population .
The political dialogue initiated in 2008 provides a good platform for sustained engagement with the Eritrean authorities .
Let us be clear : we expect some positive and tangible steps in Eritrea as a result of this process .
As indicated in your draft resolution , the virtual demarcation of the border between Ethiopia and Eritrea - as decided by the Boundary Commission - will not lead to a full resolution of the problem if it is not accompanied by dialogue aiming at the normalisation of relations between the two countries .
The recent dispute between Eritrea and Djibouti is to be seen in a larger regional context and for which a global solution needs to be sought through local and regional actors .
We will continue to support such processes .
Now that Ethiopian troops are withdrawing from Somalia , the cooperation of both Ethiopia and Eritrea in the Somali peace process will be essential for it to be successful .
On the situation in Sudan , I fully share Parliament 's analysis .
Indeed , 2009 is a decisive year for the future of this country .
The persistence of violence in Darfur and the difficulties in completing the implementation of the North / South Comprehensive Peace Agreement ( CPA ) have the potential to destabilise the country and affect the whole region .
We should therefore maintain a strong dialogue with , and a strong pressure on , the Khartoum authorities to obtain their full cooperation , both on the CPA and also on Darfur and their processes .
These authorities , as well as the other Sudanese stakeholders , know only too well where their responsibilities lie and what they need to deliver .
In Darfur , military operations and violence must be ended and the political process fully resumed .
The deployment of the UNAMID must take place within the foreseen time .
The Sudanese authorities must respect their obligations as regards the facilitation of humanitarian aid and human rights activities .
On the CPA , it is crucial that the Government of Khartoum and of South Sudan settle their differences over critical issues such as sharing of oil revenues , boundary delimitation , and legislation in security and political matters .
Failing to do so could turn the planned elections of 2009 into a scenario of renewed violence and conflict .
In Somalia , the peace process is in a crucial phase .
The resignation of President Yusuf and the withdrawal of the Ethiopian army present a new period of uncertainty and risk .
But they also provide an opportunity to launch an inclusive political process .
On the political side , the European Union continues its activities in support of the Djibouti process , which should lead to more inclusiveness through the election of a new president and the formation of a government of national unity with an expanded parliament .
There is no plan B for the Djibouti process .
Without international and regional support that advances the emergence of favourable conditions for its implementation , the agreement will have little chance of success .
As regards security , the Commission remains committed to supporting the establishment of a system for the sound governance of the security sector .
Whatever the nature of the international force ( UN authorised stabilisation force , UN peacekeeping mission or only a strengthened AMISOM ) , its mandate will need to focus on the support for the implementation of the Djibouti Agreement .
The Commission has given a positive response to the demand for further financial support to the reinforcement of AMISOM .
Finally , on the Horn of Africa in general , I very much appreciate Parliament 's support for the Commission 's Horn of Africa initiative .
This initiative is based on the 2006 Horn strategy , which was adopted in the conviction that the conundrums in the region can only be dealt with globally .
In this spirit , the Commission supports your proposal to nominate a special representative for the Horn .
We have been establishing good working relations with IGAD , which supports the Horn of Africa initiative and which plays a key role in its implementation .
A second joint experts ' meeting on water , energy and transport , where concrete projects could be developed that might be presented to a possible donor conference , is foreseen for the near future .
The participation of Eritrea , which plays a key role in the regional dynamics , is essential for the success of the Horn of Africa strategy .
Commissioner Michel 's contacts with the heads of state and government of the region , including President Isaias , have allowed an opening in this regard and the new IGAD Executive Secretary is in the process of engaging with the Eritrean authorities , including on the reform and revitalisation process of IGAD .
Mr President , I was a little long but with so many countries , if you want to say something , you have to say at least a few words .
The introduction is covered by a special rule and there are no limits .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office , thank you very much for the opinion of the Council and the Commission on the Horn of Africa .
The importance of this region transcends purely geographical bounds .
The conflicts and structural problems there are compounded by the negative phenomena in other regions of Africa .
I was part of the European Parliament delegation on its recent visit , and I could see for myself how complex , comprehensive and interlinked the problems there are , and why our answer needs to be comprehensive .
In the draft resolution we have concentrated on three fundamental , but also fairly broad issues : regional security , food security and , in our notes on human rights , democracy and good governance .
Since my visit I am in no doubt that the fundamental condition for improving the situation is goodwill and dialogue between regional leaders .
The European Union 's policy of supporting regional institutions in the Horn of Africa is correct , but without active involvement of the key players , the policy will remain ineffective .
Some countries of the region use poor tactics , for example , you cannot appeal for dialogue with one neighbour and at the same time refuse dialogue with another .
This practice is illogical , and makes diplomatic success practically impossible .
Political leaders there need to accept the fact that exercising power is tied in with responsibility .
What we expect from the leaders in the Horn of Africa is not linked to some specifically local , European values .
What we expect is a minimum acceptance of universal values .
We are also convinced that fundamental rights and freedoms belong to everybody .
No developing country can work properly in the modern world if it rejects fundamental , universal values .
Accepting them is therefore not just a gesture towards the European Union , but an action that will further their own interests .
Concepts of development may vary , but values do not change , and we would like these values - common and universal - to become the daily bread in the Horn of Africa .
The Council and the Commission must draw their conclusions from the fact that , in this Parliament 's view , the governments of the countries of the Horn of Africa are not acting in accordance with their obligations under the terms of Article 9 of the Cotonou Agreement .
Human rights , democracy and good governance are empty words .
That is perfectly obvious to anyone who does not keep their eyes closed .
In Ethiopia , for example , which is the headquarters of the African Union , the people are oppressed under the cover of rhetoric that sounds good to donors , but which is no less crude and shameless .
I will describe two recent episodes ...
On 29 August , Ms Birtukan Midekssa , the leader of a party with a parliamentary seat , was again arrested and sentenced to life imprisonment for refusing to publicly state that she had requested the pardon that the Meles Zenawi Government used to release her in 2007 , along with many other political leaders of the opposition held since the elections of 2005 .
Second : the approval by the Ethiopian Parliament of the so-called NGO Act , which , in practice , criminalises all the work of independent NGOs .
There is no transition to democracy in Ethiopia , Commissioner , and I would be grateful if you would tell this to your colleague Louis Michel .
In Eritrea , the wrath of the government against anyone who tries to exercise the most basic human rights is even more shameless .
As for Somalia , which is currently the most serious situation in the whole Horn of Africa , the international community , including the European Union , has a criminal lack of interest in the fate of the people in a country where there has been no law and order for decades and where Ethiopian troops were able to occupy the land and commit crimes with impunity and where pirates and terrorist groups thrive .
The EU naval mission will not resolve anything if the European Union , the United States , the UN and the African Union continue to ignore the causes of the piracy , which are rooted and must be fought on land and not at sea .
The region will not have stability or progress without resolution of the tragic conflicts that continue to devastate Sudan , especially in the South and in Darfur , and where the rhetoric of the international community , the European Union included , needs to be translated into decisive action to protect the civilian populations who are being attacked and to end the impunity of the criminals .
In this regard , the possible confirmation of the prosecution of President Omar Bashir by the International Criminal Court will be a test of the credibility and effectiveness of both the European Union and the African Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the Horn of Africa is a dreadful region where internal and regional conflicts continue to undermine peace and security .
They create humanitarian disasters and paralyse the development of this strategically significant region .
Each war , each conflict accentuates the fragility of the states .
At the heart of most of these conflicts is the lack of leadership and democratic governments rightly put forward in the report of the EP delegation .
What this region needs is home-grown democratisation , respect for national and international rule of law and above all national reconciliation .
About Somalia , I would like to emphasise that the resignation of former president Yusuf and the withdrawal of Ethiopian forces creates a huge window of opportunity .
The time has come to pick up the pieces and bring about intra-Somali peace .
The Somali Parliament is a crucial factor for confidence-building and can make the peace process all-inclusive .
Furthermore , it is imperative that the EU supports the renewal and strengthening of an African Union Peace Force .
This force needs a decent UN mandate .
If not , Ugandan and Burundian forces will pull away from Mogadishu leaving a security gap behind .
I entirely agree with Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner .
There is a momentum for change now in Somalia that should be taken advantage of .
The power as well as the security vacuum must be filled .
If not , the stateless chaos known as Somalia will remain .

Mr President , the Horn of Africa is currently a real powder keg , not only due to the situation of total instability in Somalia and Sudan , but also in the three countries that Mr Kaczmarek , Mr Hutchinson and I had the pleasure of visiting .

The three countries to which the delegation 's visit was confined - Eritrea , Djibouti and Ethiopia - have in common poverty and therefore a very low standard of human rights .
As regards poverty , according to the figures given to our delegation , the Government of Ethiopia has acknowledged that six and a half million people are already affected by famine .
The United Nations puts this figure at over twelve million .
We are therefore facing a humanitarian crisis that is not being reported in the media , due to other current international crises , even though it is truly shocking .
The human rights situation also deserves our attention , given the existence of political prisoners - and that is the word for them : political prisoners - in all three countries .
The border dispute between Eritrea and Ethiopia is totally absurd , as also is the involvement of more than 200 000 soldiers in this dispute .
I cannot end my speech without congratulating Commissioner Michel on his actions in the area and for starting a political dialogue .
This dialogue must continue but it must also be made clear that we will be very firm : firm in defending human rights and firm towards the outrages being committed through the adoption of laws in relation to NGOs .
It must be borne in mind that , thanks to this political dialogue , we are proving that the European Union enjoys high prestige at international level .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Horn of Africa has recently moved back into focus in the EU .
After all , the EU 's combat mission Atalanta has been stationed there since Christmas .
In sending this mission , the EU has made the mistake of NATO , the United States , Russia and others there of superficially combating problems by military means , by means of warships .
Indeed , Mr Kouchner actually welcomed the opportunity for action , 10 years after Saint-Malo , with a maritime combat operation off Somalia .
The real causes of the problem are the unfair distribution of resources , for example owing to exploitation of fish stocks , including by fishing trawlers from the European Union .
Somalia is one of the countries whose virtually non-existent government the West is supporting by all means possible .
The Ethiopian occupying forces have now left Somalia , but more than 16 000 people have lost their lives since the invasion of these forces .
Dealings with the countries of the Horn of Africa are illustrated by the example of Djibouti , which has an authoritarian regime , yet all manner of Western countries have military bases there .
Assistance must be provided to the people of the region - not by means of warships , which serve only to protect Western trading routes , but in the form of humanitarian aid , for example .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Somalia is a failed State , with all the dreadful things this entails .
You have set out most excellently what needs to be done here , and my friend Mrs Gomes has also stated this very clearly .
Piracy is just one part - albeit an important one - of this problem , as piracy is very firmly established in the region .
A second aspect is the protection of EU maritime routes , which is in the European Union 's own interests and those of its citizens .
That is why we have the ESDP operation Atalanta , which is the first maritime operation under the ESDP .
The operation 's headquarters are in the United Kingdom , which is also new , and it is being led by a British naval officer , Rear Admiral Jones .
Its first task is to protect food aid and to make sure that this aid can actually reach Somalia , and its second is to combat piracy and take the appropriate action .
We had a conversation with the operation headquarters in Northwood , which made clear that they are missing several things , such as tankers and reconnaissance aircraft - manned and unmanned - and helicopters , as the surveillance needs to be carried out over a very large area .
We must all have a common interest in a successful Operation Atalanta .
This is necessary both to protect our maritime routes and to make a contribution - albeit possibly just a small one - to solving the problem of the failed State of Somalia .
( RO ) I would first of all like to congratulate my fellow Members for this fact-finding mission to one of the most perilous regions in the world and certainly one of the most disadvantaged .
I also think that the Horn of Africa is possibly the poorest region in the world .
Ethiopia has suffered a disaster as a result of the drought over the last few years .
It is a country where millions of people suffer from hunger , even during years where there is a rich harvest .
Sudan and the Darfur region , in particular , are also tragic locations on the world map due to a humanitarian disaster , which has been described by many experts as outright genocide , as a result of the slaughter of more than two million people , while four million are refugees from the civil war .
Somalia , Eritrea and Djibouti are three of the poorest countries where conflict is a permanent reality , just as you have actually highlighted , Commissioner , and my fellow Members before that .
The constant instability in the region is one of the causes of the problems which the Horn of Africa is facing during the process of economic , social and political development .
The success of the peace process in the region is closely linked to the involvement of regional and African structures , such as the Intergovernmental Authority on Development or the African Union .
The European Union must support the consolidation of these organisations , along with an increase in their ability to prevent and resolve conflicts .
Better regional integration would also facilitate a more open dialogue between the countries in the Horn of Africa on subjects of common interest , such as migration , arms trafficking , energy or natural resources , and would provide a basis for dialogues on controversial topics .
The European Union must , of course , get involved more when it comes to human rights violations .
According to the Cotonou Agreement , these countries need to reach an agreement with the European Union with regard to observing the rule of law , human rights and democratic principles .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , on the morning of Sunday 23 September 2001 , the Swedish citizen Dawit Isaak was taken from his home in Eritrea by the country 's authorities .
He was imprisoned without trial and , more than seven years later , has still not been formally charged .
His crime is stated as ' having reported independent news ' .
In this resolution , we have the first direct reference to Dawit Isaak .
This should increase the pressure on Eritrea .
It is unacceptable for an EU citizen , a Swedish journalist , to be imprisoned for years and to be harassed by a rogue regime like that in Asmara , a regime that receives aid from the EU , aid that , moreover , has increased significantly .
It is now time , Commissioner , for the European Union to act and lay down conditions for this aid .
The time for silent diplomacy is past .
Enough is enough .
The EU will not accept the trampling underfoot of fundamental human rights , the murder or imprisonment of journalists and critics of the regime , while the population is oppressed and starving .
The European Parliament is today demanding that Dawit Isaak and the other journalists imprisoned in Eritrea be released immediately .
This is a powerful step in the right direction .
Now the Commission and the Council must also lend force to these words .
It is therefore high time that the EU entered into negotiations and introduced sanctions .
( SV ) Mr President , like my fellow Member from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I would like to highlight the issue of the release of Dawit Isaak .
For seven years , the Swedish citizen Dawit Isaak has been imprisoned without trial in a prison cell in a terrible dictatorship .
I am pleased that we have included a passage on his immediate release in the resolution on the Horn of Africa .
We require the immediate release of Dawit Isaak , as well as all of the other imprisoned journalists .
No trial , and what was their crime ?
Well , it was working for democracy and for the freedom of speech .
The EU 's future aid to Eritrea must be linked to clear demands for the release of Dawit Isaak and the other journalists .
Conditional aid , together with sanctions , the freezing of Eritrean assets in Europe and the reporting of this violation of international law to the International Court of Justice are what we need today .
The Swedish Government has worked using silent diplomacy , it has been said , but , after seven years , still nothing has happened .
Now it is time to act .
Mr President , the Horn of Africa is pretty much an unmitigated disaster .
The region has been devastated by decades of war , famine , environmental degradation , corruption , mismanagement and political repression .
Human rights are abused as a matter of course .
Civil society is weak .
Alarmingly , the situation could easily deteriorate further .
Tensions between Ethiopia and Eritrea over disputed territory are still likely to flare up at any moment .
The failed state of Somalia remains infected by clan violence and Islamist extremism , which will worsen as Ethiopia now withdraws its troops and with the resignation of the recent President .
We have also debated the epidemic of piracy off the Somali coast .
There is , of course , always a temptation by the EU to suggest military action as a panacea to the chaos in the Horn of Africa .
Past experience suggests this would be a terrible mistake .
President Bill Clinton sent US troops to tame Somalia , but that was a disaster too .
The one oasis of optimism , in my view , is in the region of Somaliland , which was formerly a British Protectorate .
It was absorbed into the Somali Republic in 1960 after foolishly voluntarily relinquishing its brief period of independence , but split away again in the chaos following the death of Siad Barre in 1991 .
Ever since then , Somaliland has been the only cohesive and functional polity in Somalia .
The people of Somaliland benefit from a relatively benign government and progressive institutions .
They also possess symbols of statehood such as a separate currency and a flag .
Speaking personally , and not for my party or my political group , perhaps it is time for the international community , led by the African Union , to begin considering more seriously Somaliland 's quest for independence .
An independent Somaliland , supported by the West , could be a force for stability and progress in an otherwise hopeless and chaotic region .
Certainly , the people of Somaliland would be justified in asking why we here in the EU were so reluctant to recognise their de facto country , but were so quick to recognise the independence of Kosovo .
( RO ) The European Union really has every good reason to be concerned by the situation created in Somalia where a power vacuum has virtually formed which has every chance of being filled by Somali Islamic militia .
Apart from withdrawing the three thousand Ethiopian troops , the missions under the auspices of the African Union could also withdraw if they do not receive additional support during the subsequent period .
I could not describe the European mission patrolling the waters in the region as anything other than a resounding success , but this task only involves treating the effects of the ' disease ' , and not at all the disease itself .
Somalia must have a government capable of acting as a dialogue partner for the international institutions , European Union and all the other states willing to assume an active role in bringing stability to this region .
( RO ) The European Union has numerous responsibilities in Somalia and the Horn of Africa .
Instability , the lack of governance and security have made this region a source of concern for many reasons .
Above all , the unprecedented increase in the acts of piracy committed by groups given shelter in Somali units is affecting commercial routes in a region which is vital to European and global trade .
It concerns us to see that these groups are becoming increasingly more technologically advanced and capable of attacking ships located at ever greater distances from the shore .
This state of affairs is obviously due to the desperate situation which Somalia is in , specifically , the non-existence of a central government capable of controlling its territorial waters .
However , the international community equally bears responsibility with regard to these events .
Piracy , no matter on which seas it takes place and the safe havens which the perpetrators enjoy , is a violation of the written and unwritten laws of any country and intervention against this is justified , regardless of where it comes from .
The chances of the European Union and the international community changing the basic reality in Somalia are slight .
However , tackling one of its consequences , piracy , is much more within our grasp .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , firstly , allow me to react to two remarks made here and then draw some conclusions .
Olle Schmidt and Eva-Britt Svensson asked about the journalist , Dawit Isaak : yes , we are trying to do something in Eritrea to set him free .
Anna-Maria Gomes asked about the recent arrest of the opposition activist Mrs Bertukan .
The Council is certainly aware of this case , which dates back to the post-election riots in 2005 when she was arrested , together with other opposition activists , before being pardoned in 2007 .
She was re-arrested at the end of the year .
Since then the EU has been closely following the case , and the Council is ready to take the appropriate steps if the situation requires .
Then I would like to make five short concluding remarks .
First let me say that we really appreciate the input of the delegations that travelled to the region , in particular to Mr Hutchinson , Mr Kaczmarek and Mr Irujo Amezaga .


First I think I can assure you that , under the Czech presidency , there will be continuity .
So we certainly are not going to completely redefine the EU strategy towards the Horn of Africa .
We will rather try to pursue the policy established by our predecessor in the best possible manner .
One of the most important tasks will be the containment of piracy and , in this context , we strongly appreciate the effort of the French presidency that accomplished the difficult start of deploying the first EU naval mission .
Certainly , we are not a naval power in the Czech Republic so we appreciate here strong EU engagement .
My second remark is that the short-term Operation Atalanta has already prevented several acts of piracy from taking place and apprehended a number of pirates , so within a month of deployment the effectiveness of the operation has already become apparent .
Atalanta is a short-term measure to curb piracy .
However , it was a necessary short-term measure .
The third point is that , in order to find a long-term solution in Somalia , the Council lends its full support to the Djibouti process within the transitional Federal Government and the Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia , and there is no plan B to this process .
Ethiopia has begun its withdrawal from Somalia ; this is an important step in the implementation of the Djibouti process .
There are some concerns that there will be a security vacuum when Ethiopia leaves ; the EU therefore continues to give substantial support to the African Union Mission to Somalia , the AMISOM .
EUR 20 million have been allocated for the period of December 2008 to May 2009 .
My fourth point is regarding direct contacts : we foresee resuming political dialogue with the intergovernmental authority on development at ministerial level .
The authority on development proved its capacities during the engagement in Sudanese peace talks , which resulted in the signing of the comprehensive peace agreement in 2005 .
So the authority might become a key partner of the EU in bringing peace and stability to Somalia .
Last but not least , as regards the matter of more engagement , I would like to inform you that revision of the Horn of Africa strategy of the Commission will be initiated during our presidency , which is not in contradiction of my words on continuity .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me make a few comments on this short , but important , debate .
Firstly , on Somalia , I listened with great interest to all your comments and suggestions and I am encouraged to see that we agree , not only on the assessment of the situation , but also on the action to be taken .
We need the support of the entire international community , including the new US administration , but also key players in the Islamic world , for a sustainable , political solution in Somalia and to finally end the unspeakable suffering of the population .
Here the Commission will provide full political , but also strong financial , support to the Djibouti process .
I agree with Ana Maria Gomes that the countries of the Horn of Africa have serious human-rights and good-governance problems - many other colleagues have also said this .
We are very concerned about these tremendous challenges .
However , we consider that it would be difficult to make an across-the-board judgement regarding Article 9 of the Cotonou Agreement .
We must stand firm on human rights and good governance , fully utilising the policy instruments at our disposal , including a political dialogue with clear benchmarks .
On food aid and food security , this is one of the priorities of the European Parliament resolution .
In this context , I would like to emphasise that , in addition to the envelope of the EDF , there are now funds under the so-called food facility , which will be EUR 100 million from 2009 to 2011 .
Finally , we are also fully aware of the situation of the Swedish citizen , Dawit Isaak , who is still under arrest in Eritrea .
My colleague Louis Michel talked to President Isaias about this case during his last visit in June 2008 , and some further quiet diplomacy is going on in this particular case .
I can assure you that we remain committed to working towards the improvement of the human rights situation in Eritrea so that it is very dominant in our minds .
I have received a draft resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 15 January 2009 .
EU strategy towards Belarus ( debate )
The next item is the report of the Council and the Commission on the strategy of the European Union towards Belarus .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , the situation in Belarus and what we should do and how we can help will , I think , without doubt be at the centre of the Council 's attention during the Czech presidency .
Let me start here on a positive note .
We have noted with satisfaction the steps taken by Belarus in the past few weeks , including the registration of the ' For Freedom ' movement , the printing and distribution of independent newspapers like Narodnaya Volya or Nasha Niva , the round table on the regulation of internet with the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media and the announcement of the start of expert consultations with OSCE / ODIHR on improving electoral legislation .
These steps go towards fulfilling the criteria expressed by the EU as a condition for maintaining the suspension of the visa ban beyond the initial six-month period .
The EU has stressed the importance of moving on these issues in its contact with the Belarus administration .
Ahead of the sanction review - where we have to take a decision by early April - we will continue to use all political contacts , including bilateral contacts , to encourage Belarus to move forward on the problematic points which were identified in the Council conclusions of 13 October with further substantial steps .
As a further sign of encouragement , our presidency intends to hold another foreign minister troika with Belarus on the margin of the January General Affairs and External Relations Council .
We will also continue to monitor the general situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the country , with a special emphasis on the regulatory environment of NGOs and the media .
We are also closely discussing and exchanging views and information with the various opposition representatives and other persons in Belarus , people like Mr Alexander Milinkievich , Mr Kosolin and others .
Belarus , as we know , is included as one of the six Eastern Partnership countries , a move aimed at creating positive development trends in our eastern European neighbourhood .
The participation of Belarus will depend on its domestic development .
We plan to launch the Eastern Partnership at summit level in Prague in May and the decision of the day was also selected just when this six-month period ends and we can make an evaluation .
So the issue of whether Mr Lukashenko will be invited is one where no decision has been made yet .
We firmly believe that we need to be constructive with Minsk now ; let us say , that is a strategic imperative .
We of course remain realistic and do not expect any dramatic changes , but we believe that Mr Lukashenko 's search for balancing relations with Moscow can provide an opportunity .
But also we are a community of certain shared values and we need to keep the leverage in our hands .
It is in our joint interest to use this opportunity to further encourage the positive dynamics in Belarus in this respect .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it is a great pleasure for me to speak to you about Belarus because positive progress has been made , which we were very happy to see .
Belarus is very high on our agenda , but not solely because it is one of the countries hit hard by the current financial crisis in the region .
There is also a unique opportunity for us to really begin a new chapter in our relationship with Belarus .
We are now half-way through the six-month suspension of sanctions against Belarus that was the decided at the meeting of EU foreign ministers on 13 October 2008 .
As this suspension will end on 13 April 2009 , now is the time to make the first assessment of whether Belarus is moving in the right direction and whether we can therefore extend the suspension and take further positive action towards Belarus .
The 13 October General Affairs and External Relations Council was very clear that the positive progress which began with the release of the remaining political prisoners in August would have to continue for the suspension to be extended .
The areas in which we need to see further and sustained progress are : no further political arrests or imprisonments ; cooperation with the OSCE / ODIHR on reforms to electoral legislation ; progress on media freedom ; better operational conditions for NGOs and no harassment of civil society ; and serious progress on the freedom of assembly .
We have seen some progress in the last three months .
For example , the ban on two major independent newspapers has been lifted and they have now even resumed printing and distribution .
Secondly , ' For Freedom ' , Mr Milinkievich 's organisation , has been allowed registration and , thirdly , there will be consultations between Belarus and the ODIHR on 22 January on electoral reform .
This progress has been in direct response to requests made by the Commission in early November and we find it encouraging .
However , we still need more progress if we are to begin a new era in our relationship and if we are also to confirm the suspension .
We need to see progress on media freedom , including internet freedom and the accreditation of foreign journalists .
We also need to see easier registration procedures and working conditions for NGOs and the lifting of the restrictions on the freedom of NGO activists - like , for example , Mr Barazenka - and we need to see further evidence that peaceful demonstrations can take place freely and without participants fearing arrest .
Progress is , however , a two-way street .
If Belarus can make this serious progress , then I think it is also essential that we reciprocate with a significant package of measures .
The Commission has been working on proposals for such a package , which could include the following : an extension of the technical dialogues which began a year ago , on energy , transport and environment to other areas ; a symbolic increase in the ENPI allocation for Belarus to back these talks ; helping Belarus to adjust to the new economic challenges it is currently facing and extending eligibility for EIB and EBRD loans to Belarus ; intensifying contacts : on 26 January the troika will meet with Foreign Minister Martynov on the margins of the GAERC , where I intend to say clearly to Mr Martynov what exactly the EU expects from Belarus and what we have on offer ; and , naturally , intensification of civil society dialogue .

At this juncture , I believe all efforts should be pooled and meetings that MEPs could have in Minsk with Belarusian parliamentarians , for example , would also be most useful .
A further issue for reflection is the potential to open negotiations on visa facilitation and a readmission agreement .
On this issue , the ball is in the Council 's court , and it is clear that Belarus still has further progress to make .
But we , the Commission , stand ready to kick-start work and contribute to negotiations as soon as the ministers acknowledge that sufficient progress has been made .
Finally , we stand ready to develop the full range of our ENP and Eastern Partnership offer for Belarus .
This would comprise the unblocking of the PCA and a significant increase in our assistance .
After 13 April , should ministers assess that sufficient progress has been made , the decision will be made as to whether to confirm the suspension of sanctions .
Should Belarus 's progress be great enough to warrant this , we are indeed ready to reciprocate and I hope that we could then really open up a new chapter in relations with Belarus .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office , the main occasion for today 's debate is the first half of the six-month suspension of sanctions against Belarus , which happens to be this week .
Our half-way review of relations between that country and the European Union has been received with positive caution by this House , with appreciation for the changes that have taken place in Belarus .
Above all we would like to express our satisfaction that the ' For Freedom ' movement led by Aleksander Milinkievich has been legalised , and that the independent newspapers Narodnaya Volya and Nasha Niva have been legalised and allowed into the state distribution system .
At the same time , however , we still condemn the fact political prisoners freed over the past years have not had their full rights restored , and one protesting student was unlawfully arrested during his pre-trial period .
We would like to stress that essential conditions for permanently lifting and normalising European Union-Belarus relations are changes in electoral law , repeal of the restrictive media laws and changes to the criminal code to prevent its abuse against the democratic opposition and independent journalists .
In this context we would encourage the authorities in Belarus to work in close cooperation with the OSCE and the Belarus Journalists ' Association .
We appreciate the preliminary meetings that have been held regarding both these matters , but we urge permanent cooperation with foreign experts and representatives of civil society in Belarus .
In the resolution being debated today we also intend to urge the Belarus authorities to lift restrictions on the activities of political parties , non-governmental organisations and to legalise more independent media .
This , however , will not be a one-way street .
We also call upon the European Commission and the Council to be quicker in reducing the price of EU entry visas and to increase investments by the European Investment Bank in energy infrastructure , particularly transit infrastructure , in Belarus .
I would like to stress that the European Parliament will again urge the Commission to secure financial support for Biełsat TV , and the authorities in Belarus to recognise the Union of Poles in Belarus headed by Angelika Borys as the only lawful representative of the country 's largest ethnic minority .
You seem to be a busy man , but you managed to take the floor in the last minute .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( LT ) Good fences make good neighbours .
That is an old English saying .
Today , thinking about neighbouring countries , it would be more appropriate to say that low fences or no fences are better .
At the juncture of the 20th and 21st centuries , with increasing tendencies towards authoritarianism , Belarus became the odd sick man of Europe .
The country slid into self-isolation and isolation , as the fences surrounding it grew ever higher .
Due to human rights abuses there was no place in the European Council for a state at the centre of Europe .
Last year gave us hope that relations between the European Union and Belarus can change and that the fences I mentioned can be lowered .
Here mention has been made of the small steps which Minsk has taken in the right direction in terms of political prisoners , the registration of parties and the registration of newspapers .
We might also mention the future opening of a European Union representation .
I share the cautious optimism of both the Commission Member and the Minister and feel that the skies are clearing , but that there are still many clouds .
Here our colleague Mr Protasiewicz has already mentioned both media freedom and real conditions allowing the formation of political parties , and the country is generally also on the brink of great economic and social changes .
Reforms should look to the future and make the lives of ordinary people easier .
I think that the European Union should also go down the road of mutual understanding .
Firstly by destroying or at least lowering the financial fences of visa requirements , which prevent people from communicating so much .
Belarus has taken the decision to build a new nuclear power plant which will probably appear quite close to Lithuania 's capital Vilnius .
Several such power plants are planned for the region in Lithuania , Estonia and Poland .
There needs to be dialogue among all these and other states and constant consultations , so that we avoid misunderstandings , damage to the environment and disregard for the interests of other countries .
Brussels should watch carefully how Minsk implements the IAEA 's recommendations , conventions on nuclear security , and defend the interests of European Union countries .
I do not think that Belarus will make any real progress unless the wall between official institutions and people there is torn down .
The government should be interested in talking to and negotiating with the opposition , NGOs , unions and youth organisations .
In a few months the European Parliament will submit recommendations as to whether we should continue tearing down that fence , or build an even higher one .
If we fail to take advantage of this chance , people on both sides will be disillusioned .
The ball , as they say , is in Minsk 's court .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) The signals coming from Belarus are not always clear-cut .
Political prisoners have been freed , two independent newspapers have been allowed into the official distribution network and the ' For Freedom ' movement led by the opposition presidential candidate Alexander Milinkievich has been registered .
The Commissioner has mentioned this .
On the other hand , however , members of the opposition are being re-arrested , and many of the released prisoners have had their rights restricted .
There are dozens of newspapers waiting for authorisation like that granted to the two mentioned above , and numerous non-governmental organisations and political parties are constantly struggling to be registered or live under the threat of having their registration withdrawn .
Monks and nuns are expelled , and the death penalty still exists .
We cannot turn our backs on Belarus .
I do not , however , believe that the time has come to start dialogue between this parliament and that of Belarus .
What we need to do is significantly reduce and simplify the procedures for issuing visas to citizens of Belarus , although this should obviously not apply to those who have good reason to be kept out of the European Union .
We also need to provide effective support , including financial support , for institutions which are important to setting up and developing civil society , such as independent non-governmental organisations , political parties and an independent press .
We also need to raise the issue of worker 's rights in Belarus .
Today there is no permanent employment outside government structures - everybody works on one-year contracts only .
This gives the employer , and therefore the state , great clout over practically the whole of society .
The Eastern Partnership Initiative also opens new opportunities for the present authorities in Belarus .
However , the country 's modernisation and its alignment with European political standards must proceed in the context of dialogue between the authorities and the democratic opposition in Belarus .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam Commissioner , President , recently we have been passing resolutions on Belarus every three months .
It is not inflation , but evidence of proper monitoring of what is happening in this country which neighbours Poland , and therefore the European Union .
Is the progress of democratisation in Belarus satisfactory ?
No .
Is this cause to turn our backs on Minsk again ?
No .
We need to keep pressing for democratic freedoms and standards , freedom of expression , democratic values , while at the same time patiently giving Belarus the green light as a country and a society we would like to see draw closer and closer to the European Union .
Belarusians are Europeans , and Belarus is an integral part of the old continent , the culture of Belarus is part of European culture .
Today the noblest Belarusians are fighting for human rights , for democracy , for religious freedom .
But let us not push the less noble into the hands of Moscow .
That would be unimaginative and stupid , it would be irresponsible , it would be worse than a crime - it would be a delusion .
We have to do two things at the same time - to keep an eye on Lukashenko so that he does not persecute Catholic priests from Poland , for example , shut down newspapers or persecute members of the opposition , while at the same time supporting the Belarusian state as a state , to prevent it from being increasingly drawn into the Russian sphere of political , economic and military influence .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) I welcome the Czech presidency headed by vice-premier Alexander Vondra .
By registering the democratic opposition Movement for Freedom , led by Alexander Milinkevich , and releasing political prisoners , the Belarusian Government has sent out signals that it is becoming more open .
Now comes the test of whether a genuine will to change and to resume relations with the EU lies behind the readiness to engage in dialogue .
We want to see Belarus find its place in Europe ; we have been waiting a long time for this and are prepared to resume relations , but only on clear conditions , chief among which is respect for human rights .
This goes not only for freedom of the press and of expression , but also for the entire political , social and private life of every individual .
The electoral fraud and the attacks on the opposition have not been forgotten , and we are following developments very closely .
In October , we decided to suspend the entry ban for President Lukashenko .
For its part , Belarus needs to permit entry to European delegations , too , to enable debates with opposition members .
Experience has taught us that all dictatorships come to an end !
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , Belarus is the last European country with which the European Union does not have an agreement on mutual relations .
This anomaly could soon end , as indicated by the proposed strategy of the Council and the Commission on Belarus .
Moreover , the several months ' trial period is drawing to a close .
The Belarusian leadership may enable changes leading to greater democracy and freedom , and the European Union will offer cooperation and the normalisation of relations .
This should be the aim .
However , the art of diplomacy is to see things in a broader context and to package one 's requirements accordingly .
Almost every change in recent years has taken place in a global context .
Today we are experiencing a fundamental change in the situation .
The two decades of the experiment of US domination are coming to an end , to be replaced with a multipolar concept that may also lead to conflict .
What we can see going on around us are the events accompany a shift in the distribution of power .
New and resurgent centres are defining themselves in relation to their competitors and shaping their spheres of influence .
Belarus , together with Ukraine , Moldova and the Caucasus , form a zone which is the subject of a hard fight between Russia on the one hand , and the United States and the European Union on the other .
It would be absurd to deny this , even if the war is being waged under a banner of fine slogans such as freedom , democracy and human rights .
The true values at stake are energy , money and military strategy .
If the main global players , including the European Union , are willing to respect the newly emerging geopolitical ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Belarus was going to be immune to the worldwide financial crisis .
This overconfident prognosis is now costing Mr Lukashenko dearly at the beginning of 2009 .
His government is in critical financial trouble .
Minsk has been knocking on the door of the IMF , Moscow and even Washington for billions in credit .
The IMF 's condition was the devaluation of the Belarusian rouble by no less than 20.5 % on 2 January .
Today , the Belarusian citizens are visibly filled with fear , and understandably so , if one realises that the average monthly salary has suddenly dropped from USD 400 to USD 333 , the dollar being , alongside the euro , a much-desired currency in Minsk and far beyond today .
Might this decline in the Belarusian economic position put paid to the chance of a new domestic and foreign orientation of the Lukashenko Government ?
This is certainly not an imaginary risk , because , quite apart from the current financial problems , a cosmetic change of course on the part of Mr Lukashenko in the direction of the West is just as plausible .
In that case , the powerful president would simply replace his strategy of simulated integration with Russia with simulated rapprochement to the European Union .
The forthcoming gas negotiations with Russia could well give such simulation an extra boost .
The European Union should use a balanced strategy to resist an undesired political scenario of this kind in Minsk .
To this end , all European institutions need to contact all Belarusian institutions , including the state authorities , the opposition forces , civil society , and even the non-working population .
This is an inspiring European goal which hopes to develop , and build bridges in , contacts with all sections of Belarusian society .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that there are no longer any reasons for maintaining any kind of sanctions against Belarus .
There we see a country which is undoubtedly undergoing a crisis , like all the countries of Europe , and in any case it is a country which permits the right to property , a country which until a few months ago was experiencing a growth rate of 8 % and which did not prevent foreigners , including Europeans , from buying land or houses , even if this was through Belarusian companies .
Further , with regard to religious freedom , a little while ago Cardinal Bertone went to Belarus and relations of mutual respect were certainly forged between the state of Belarus and the Vatican .
Political liberties , above all , are important , and there has been talk of some prisoners , but in fact this relates to three political prisoners who have been released .
We are also talking about political elections , and certainly there is not the comprehensive freedom that we experience in western elections , but it is certainly true that television time and , in some cases , even contributions have been granted by the state to all the candidates .
We also know that in the next few weeks some newspapers - independent newspapers - will have the opportunity to start up and be distributed .
I think that it is strategically in Europe 's interests to open up to Belarus , precisely because Belarus is a very important element between Europe and Russia .
Let us remember that there is a strong Catholic minority , which brings it closer to neighbouring Poland and the rest of Europe and makes the country a strategic ally with regard to the rest of eastern Europe .
It is strange that today there is talk of Turkey 's entry into Europe , when Belarus has a much stronger and more significant partnership role with Europe .
( HU ) Mr President , it is difficult to move forward from the stalemate in relations between the European Union and Belarus .
The growing external pressures in recent times , the weakening friendship between Russia and Belarus , the fear engendered by the Russia-Georgia conflict and , not least of all , the world economic crisis are contributing in part to this situation .
The country led by Lukashenko is for the first time asking Europe for something : The release of political prisoners , the registration of a movement and the start of a dialogue with independent journalists indicates that Lukashenko is in his own way trying to open the doors to Europe .
Beyond these superficial steps , Minsk needs to offer still more in the way of a true rapprochement .
It is appropriate that the EU should make use of the current , albeit meagre , opportunities .
The European Union could be able for the first time to influence the political situation in Belarus and therefore the policy Brussels adopts is far from indifferent .
We need to maintain the critical approach and system of conditions now in place .
We need to pay close attention , because it is hard to imagine that Lukashenko and his administration could change radically .
The concrete steps taken and planned by the EU are important .
Our task is to support and help unite the NGOs and the opposition fighting for change .
We need to demand reforms in the area of legislation as well , and here I am thinking of the criminal code and of press and electoral legislation .
In the interests of the quality of the European Union 's Belarus policy and in order to safeguard the process of democratisation , the European Parliament must continue the monitoring by the Council and the Commission .
The countries of the region , including Ukraine , have also demonstrated that without clear criteria and their fulfilment no democratic development is possible , for anything else would be simply creating the illusion of democracy .
The proposed EU strategy is critical and constructive , and I therefore give it my unreserved support .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like above all to positively underline the fact that minister Alexandr Vondra is attending this evening 's debate in this House .
I believe it shows the importance that the Czech Presidency attaches to European Union foreign policy .
Today we are analysing European Union strategy towards Belarus and the strategy of openness pursued over the past few months .
I believe that the results of this strategy are positive , as the draft report of the European Parliament demonstrates .
As a result , a Permanent Representation of the European Commission has been set up in Minsk .
We are receiving positive signals regarding increasing freedom in Belarus , such as the registration of Alexander Milinkievich 's ' For Freedom ' movement and the publication and registration of the two independent newspapers Narodnaya Volya and Nasha Niva .
And there is the declaration by Belarusian Minister for Foreign Affairs Syarhei Martynau 's declaration of the country 's positive view towards the EU 's Eastern Partnership initiative .
I would also like to point out that the government of Belarus did not recognise the self-professed declarations of statehood by the governments of Southern Ossetia and Abkhazia .
These are positive signals which without doubt are also the result of the European Union 's attitude to Belarus .
That is clearly what our draft resolution is all about : we are still dealing with restrictions on human rights and personal freedoms in Belarus .
It is not a liberal democracy in the European meaning of the word .
I agree fully with the scenario presented today by Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner that a permanent lifting of sanctions could be possible if Belarus broadens the range of freedom , of citizens ' rights , and liberalises its economy .
The European Union 's increased presence in Belarus , in my view , guarantees greater liberalisation and democratisation there .
I would just like to point out to the honourable Member that a representative of the Council is always present at these debates , so this is not a special event , although we obviously appreciate the presence of Deputy Prime Minister Vondry .
( PL ) Mr President , EU-Belarus relations depend on both sides .
Good on both sides will bring dialogue , a real neighbourhood policy and an Eastern Partnership .
Partnership cannot be built on prohibitions and sanctions , which is why I am pleased to note the European Commission 's latest initiative aimed at improving relations with Belarus .
It must be said objectively that Belarus has also done a great deal towards rapprochement .
Evidence of this is the registration of the ' For Freedom ' movement , allowing opposition papers to be printed and distributed , and the country 's openness to the Eastern Partnership Initiative .
The European Union 's expectations go further , and there are clearly grounds for this , just as there are grounds for Belarus ' many expectations .
For example , if the authorities in Belarus are being asked to end the practice of requiring exit visas for its citizens , in particular children and students , why does the European Union not simplify and liberalise visa procedures in relation to the citizens of Belarus ?
These issues are particularly important to the residents of border regions , who have cultural and family ties ( ... )
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( NL ) Mr President , this evening , we are debating the EU 's policy in respect of Belarus , a policy in which democracy and respect for human rights take centre stage .
I should like to focus on one specific area , namely the travel ban for children , without , of course , prejudicing any of the other relevant aspects that have already been mentioned this evening .
You are probably aware that children , victims of the Chernobyl disaster , have been paying regular visits to the Netherlands and other EU countries for years , in order to recover from the effects of this disaster .
The children involved are , of course , children who were born long after that disaster struck - they are now about the same age as I was when that disaster struck 22 years ago - but they are still experiencing the effects on a daily basis , as is evident from the statistics for thyroid gland complaints , cancer , and suchlike .
Every year , some 30 000 Belarusian children are welcomed in 21 countries by host families , voluntary organisations and churches .
In October 2008 , it was reported that Belarus , via a decree , would stop these children 's trips and would prohibit these children to travel abroad , which would put a stop to the Christmas holidays , therefore .
Partly under pressure from the European Union , the Council of Europe and a number of Foreign Affairs Ministers , including our Dutch Minister Verhagen , this decree was temporarily suspended between 20 December and 20 January , enabling a number of children to come over on holiday after all , but no provisions have been made for the time after 20 January .
It is , therefore , high time we changed this temporary suspension into a structural , EU-wide solution so that Belarusian children and the European host families are no longer kept in the dark as to whether their trips can go ahead or not .
Ideally , we would like to legislate on behalf of all Member States in one fell swoop rather than , as is currently the case , via bilateral negotiations , 27 times over .
In our resolution , we would therefore urge the Czech Presidency to negotiate with the Belarusian authorities about an EU-wide solution .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , Belarus 's road to Europe must be one of dialogue and compromises .
The Belarus resolution passed last year emphasised the need for a firm and conditional , yet positive policy .
The advances that have been made in the areas of energy , the environment and transport are the result of that work .
There are , however , problems to which we must not turn a blind eye .
Democracy is vital .
As members of the European Parliament , we must not tolerate the persecution of Belarusian opposition leaders , the limitation of freedom of the press and freedom of speech and the violation of citizens ' fundamental rights .
No democratic country can function without a strong civil society .
Thus we must offer comprehensive support to organisations that aim to defend human rights , promote democracy and mobilise the country 's citizenry .
I commend the Belarusian authorities ' decision to register Mr Milinkevich 's citizens ' association For Freedom .
This is , however , only the beginning , as Naša Vjasna , which has a human rights agenda , and several other organisations devoted to the development of democracy also await registration .
Lastly I would like to mention visa arrangements .
A visa facilitation agreement must be concluded between the European Union and Belarus .
The road to Europe must be open .
An expensive visa and strict regulations do not punish the regime , but the population .
I have said this repeatedly , and will say it again today .
Let us reach out a European hand to welcome the Belarusian people .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Parliament has repeatedly addressed the issue of Belarus , the last dictatorship on the European continent .
Problems are still caused for Catholic priests wishing to conduct services , and the rights of ethnic minorities are not respected .
In particular , the democratically elected leadership of the Union of Poles in Belarus , headed by Angelika Borys , is not recognised .
Arrests and searches of the offices of opposition activists and human rights activists continue .
Independent journalists are still being persecuted .
Change is on its way , however , albeit very slowly .
The ' For Freedom ' movement has been registered , and two opposition newspapers have been allowed to be printed and distributed .
The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Belarus responded positively to the Eastern Partnership Initiative and expressed interest in becoming involved in it .
This gives us cautious hope of an improvement of the climate in mutual relations , and the fulfilment of the Commissioner 's proposal .
Mr President , given that external relations is one of the key priorities of the Czech presidency , I would ask the presidency of the Council to outline what moves it would consider taking to encourage the Belarusian Government to lift its international travel ban on children travelling to EU Member States for rest and recuperation programmes .
I urge the new Czech presidency to negotiate a pan-European agreement allowing Belarusian children affected by the Chernobyl disaster to travel to any Member State within the EU .
I have , with my colleagues , added paragraph 10 to the present European Parliament resolution to this effect .
In August of last year , the Belarusian Government announced it was outlawing overseas visits after one child refused to return home following a trip abroad .
The Irish Government managed to secure an exemption which allowed children to travel to Ireland this Christmas , but many other children still have to secure exit visas to leave Belarus in order to participate in rest and recuperation programmes .
Some 1 000 Irish families host Belarusian children in their homes every summer and at Christmas , which often includes medical assessment and in some cases treatment .
While I welcome the Belarusian authorities ' decision to temporarily lift the travel ban on a number of victims of the Chernobyl disaster , I would urge the presidency to keep the pressure on so that an EU-wide agreement can be secured in the near future , giving Belarusian children the freedom to travel to anywhere within the EU .
I have also raised the international travel ban with you , Commissioner , and in your response to my letter you said that representations had been made both through the European Commission delegation in Minsk and also most recently during the visit to Minsk in early November by the RELEX deputy director-general .
I would like to ask you if you have an update on EU advocacy efforts to have this oppressive ban lifted .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the gradual revival of relations with Belarus and our readiness for dialogue with its government are a step in the right direction .
I am also positive about the Czech Presidency 's announcement today of a meeting of the Council with a representative of Belarus at a diplomatic summit this month .
I am also pleased to see the attempts to include Belarus in the Eastern Partnership Initiative .
Decisions taken at EU level should be felt primarily by the citizens of Belarus , even if it is at the level of visa policy .
Given the present gas crisis in Europe , it must be underlined that Belarus has proved a particularly stable partner as regards the transit of gas supplies to the European Union .
Constructive dialogue and improved bilateral relations , which should be clearly based on the principles of democracy and respect for the rights of people , are in the interest of both sides .
- ( SK ) Even though positive progress has been made in Belarus , we must maintain very close communications with representatives of the Belarusian opposition and with our friend Alexander Milinkievich .
Europe should support economic reform in Belarus .
However , this support must be made conditional on specific terms and requirements .
These should include a requirement for greater media freedom .
The media must be free to operate within the law and publish their material in the country .
Greater freedom for the running of political parties and non-governmental organisations is vital for democracy .
Our debate today also shows that we all want a democratic Belarus to return to Europe , but without Lukashenko .
The EU has a great opportunity , if it becomes involved in the promotion of democratic values , to win Belarus over and to free it from the Russian embrace .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after years of complicated relations we are seeing some timid steps in the right direction , with the recognition of the movement led by Mr Milinkiewicz , the authorisation of various newspapers that are not pro-government , and the first signs of willingness to discuss the recommendations made by the OSCE / ODIHR .
The road still to be travelled is , however , not just long , but extremely long .
The hope is that a new passage can be initiated in relations between the EU and Belarus ; the tale of MEPs from our delegation having visas refused is quite embarrassing , and we hope that this is now just a bad memory .
Like Mr Burke , I call for a commitment on one point from the Commission and the Council at the next joint meetings : a clear , joint definition of the rules relating to stays for health purposes by Belarusian children with European families .
In recent years , Belarus has often , too often , dealt with this issue in a superficial or inflexible manner , literally giving a slap in the face to the host families and , unfortunately , also to the children and young people involved in the aid and solidarity projects .
( RO ) I welcome the declaration from the Council and the Commission and agree that Lukashenko 's authoritarian regime must be monitored closely .
At the same time , I feel that we need a long-term vision which envisages a future Belarus , post-Lukashenko , which is democratic and prosperous .
The European Union must apply an intelligent strategy with regard to the Belarusian people and society and not only with regard to the temporary government in Minsk .
History has proven that isolation and external sanctions help maintain dictatorships .
We should do the opposite : offer Belarusians the widest possible opportunity to study in the European Union , to travel and work here for short periods and to come into contact with European values and our economic and cultural achievements .
This is the only way in which we will whet the appetite of these people for our values and facilitate the transition process which the country will go through .
I would like to conclude by saying to Mr Fiore that the appearance of the candidates on television during the electoral campaign is of no significance because , as Stalin said , the only thing that matters is the person counting the votes .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , all of us at this plenary session would like Belarus to observe the principles of democracy , human rights and freedom of association , as well as freedom of expression , and to stop the violent persecution of its own citizens and ethnic minorities .
Unfortunately our list of demands is quite long , and it seems unlikely that they will be completely fulfilled in the near future .
However , we cannot stop fighting for the values on which the European Union is founded .
The policy of sanctions against Belarus started out as a fiasco .
Let us hope that a change in the EU 's political strategy towards Minsk will bring success .
However , this will not be easy due to the fact that the parliamentary elections in Autumn 2008 were falsified by Lukashenko .
The main way to democratising Belarus society is by education , free media and contacts between citizens of the EU and Belarus .
We should set up a special programme of grants for young people from Belarus to study in the European Union , which will reap great benefits in the future .
( RO ) We have before us three motions for a resolution , from 21 May , 9 October and 7 January .
Progress can be seen in terms of the declarations made by the European Union 's members .
However , I certainly consider and support any declaration capable of introducing more democracy in any country , all the more so if we are talking about a neighbouring state like Belarus .
I think that two very important things are needed , as my fellow Members have also mentioned before me , or we could do this simply to support mutual trust and transparency .
Firstly , we need to demonstrate maturity and make it easier for citizens from the state of Belarus to have access and come to the European Union to have contact with the European Union 's values , with what the European Union stands for , with the European Union 's politics , with everything that we represent .
Secondly , Belarus must become as soon as possible a state which does not have political detainees .
This is definitely a very simple gesture which President Lukashenko could make .
It is time to make a summary of the discussion .
I call on Deputy Prime Minister Vondra to sum up .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I will try to summarise this on behalf of the Council .
Firstly , I think we have had a really interesting debate on the substance , certainly bringing a lot of input into our common work .
I would like to stress that we in the Council appreciate the interest and active engagement of the European Parliament on Belarus .
I think it is particularly helpful in keeping up the pressure on human rights issues , on the one hand , and in not losing this kind of strategic approach on the other .
I would particularly like to thank the Polish Members of the European Parliament - be it Jacek Protasiewicz , Janusz Onyszkiewicz or Józef Pinior - for their contributions . I think we are listening carefully .
I will now make perhaps three points in conclusion .
Firstly , on visa fees , which many of you have mentioned .
This is a problem of which we are particularly aware .
Even when talking in our national capacities over the past year , we always had much to say about this .
Let me be clear here .
We see Belarus as being part of Europe and we are aware of the problems caused to the citizens of Belarus by the increase in visa fees .
To avoid negative consequences in terms of people-to-people contact , the Czech presidency will continue to encourage Member States to use the flexibility available in terms of the relevant provisions of the acquis .
The presidency will also encourage a more coherent application of the existing rules by the Member States .
If the current positive dynamics are maintained and strengthened with further substantive steps by Belarus regarding the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms , allowing for the country 's participation in the ENP and the future Eastern Partnership , a visa dialogue should eventually be envisaged .
On the Chernobyl children , a matter raised by some of you , I assure you that we will keep up the pressure .
We supported the moves made by the French presidency on this issue , including the démarche carried out on 3 December last year .
EU efforts have finally resulted in the temporary suspension of the Presidential Decree No 555 banning these trips .
This , as well as the bilateral agreements which were reached in early December between Ireland and Belarus , on future rest and recuperation for children affected by the Chernobyl disaster , were a welcome development .
We are aware that the general problem is far from being resolved .
The Czech presidency will follow the matter and will take any further necessary steps on behalf of the EU , if appropriate , and will continue to raise this issue in our contacts with the authorities in Minsk .
Finally , in the coming months with the sanctions review and in the context of the future Eastern Partnership , Belarus will remain high on our agenda .
Just as your resolution adopted on Belarus after the 28 September elections helped us to move forward , we hope that we can continue to receive your support during our term .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I have seen that a very broad majority has the same opinion that we have .
That means that we have offered the possibility for Belarus to come closer to the European Union through the European Neighbourhood Policy .
We have offered , in principle , a shadow action plan and also a possibility to join the Eastern Partnership at the right moment when , of course , the conditions will be right .
Having said this , let me just answer a few of those specific points that you have made .
One on the financial crisis : Belarus has sustained the effects of the financial crisis and the rising gas prices in 2007 and 2008 reasonably well so far , due to its very limited integration in the global economy and also the substantial loans from Russia , China and Venezuela .
Now however , as I think Mr Belder rightly said , it has had to ask the IMF for a standby loan of EUR 2.5 billion , including then devaluating its currency in order to counter the negative effects of the global crisis .
Since its economy and industry remain largely unreformed and unstructured , we expect the negative tendency to continue with negative social consequences as a result .
So you are right - this is an important factor .
On the nuclear power plant and the questions about security and safety , let me tell you that , in our technical dialogue on energy with Belarus , we pay special attention also to ensuring that this country respects international safety and security standards .
We could say that Belarus cooperates very actively with the IAEA in Vienna and has been remarkably open to providing the Commission with information on this process .
Having said this , I just would like also to come back to the question of the visa fees .
As I said in my first remark , you know that we would be ready to contribute to the negotiation as soon as the Council has also expressed the position to try to manage that , bringing all the Member States to the possibility of having a whole visa agreement as well as a re-admission agreement .
Following the visit of my deputy director-general , Mr Mingarelli , to Minsk I can tell you that for the moment there is nothing new on this particular item .
I just can say that visa fees and visas for children are specific to each and every country .
We are not yet at the point of having one general agreement .
That , again , would have to be negotiated by the Commission .
( PL ) I have received five motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 15 January 2009 .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , we have been talking lately of a political thaw in Belarus .
Alexander Milinkievich 's opposition movement ' For Freedom ' has finally been registered .
Belarus has expressed willingness to participate in the Eastern Partnership .
Even Washington has said that relations between the two countries have improved .
Has the time come to warm relations and break the ice with Belarus ?
I wish we could , but we must remember that President Lukashenko is a sharp , hard-boiled political player .
We have already dealt with a ' political thaw ' quite recently in Europe , and all I would like to point out is that these transformations have always resulted in disappointment .
What will be crucially important is how we play EU policy in the east in the coming months .
Lukashenko has clearly stated that he will not bow to pressure from the West , and in negotiations with Medvedev on reducing gas prices , he declared that Belarus will not be indebted to Russia .
It is obvious that Belarus is playing on two fronts .
We have to keep up cautious and considered negotiations so that we are not fooled by changes that may turn out to be temporary .
We need to be firm on matters of strategic importance to the EU by conducting a targeted policy of support for the development of a civil society and an opposition in Belarus , where opposition activists are still being prosecuted and foreign clerics expelled .
The EU cannot ignore the fact that the authorities in Belarus are continuing to violate citizens ' and human rights .
Commemorating 11 July as a day of remembrance for the victims of the massacre in Srebrenica ( debate )
The next item is the declaration of the Council and the Commission on commemorating 11 July as a day of remembrance for the victims of the massacre in Srebrenica .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , Srebrenica , as we all know , was a horrible crime .
The massacre of more than 8 000 Bosniaks in and around Srebrenica marks one of the darkest historical moments of Bosnia and Herzegovina , of the former Yugoslavia and also of Europe as a whole .
It is without a doubt the worst atrocity in Europe since the Second World War .
Looking back , much more could have been done , and earlier .
Srebrenica was a collective failure of the international community , the EU included .
That is a great shame and we deeply regret this fact .
It is our moral , human and political obligation that a Srebrenica never happens again .
Marking the 10th anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre , the Council expressed its renewed condemnation of the crimes committed and extended it s compassion for the victims and their families .
The Council , recalling the UN Security Council resolutions 1503 and 1534 , underlined that full and unrestricted cooperation with the ICTY remain an essential requirement for continuing progress towards the EU .
The transfer to The Hague of the remaining fugitive indictees who continue to elude international justice would be a fitting tribute to the victims of Srebrenica as well as a major stride towards permanent peace , stability and reconciliation .
Therefore , the Council remains determined that the perpetrators of crimes in Srebrenica and in Bosnia and Herzegovina in general , as well as elsewhere in the region of the Western Balkans , must be brought to justice .
At the same time , throughout history European integration has proved helpful to heal wounds and injustice of the past , so we need to concentrate on the future as well .
The EU as the integrating factor brought peace , stability , trust and prosperity to Europe in the second half of the last century .
Helping the Western Balkans on the path towards the EU therefore belongs to the priorities of the Czech presidency in the domain of external relations .
Reconciliation is vital for integration and reconciliation is difficult if justice is not served fully .
After 13 years it is time to bring the shameful Srebrenica episode to a closure .
Karadžić 's arrest has proved that there is no impunity for such monstrous crimes as those against humanity .
Still , Ratko Mladić needs to be brought to The Hague so that the families of the Srebrenica victims can be helped to deal with the past and embrace their future .
The EU will keep doing everything in its power to make this happen .
But also a lot more needs to be done so that Srebrenica turns from a sad historical memory to a place where life does offer prospects .
The international community 's engagement does not take place in a vacuum : it is actively combined with the local actions on the state level , as well as by both entities .
A lot of good endeavours have been carried out .
Srebrenica 's future can be best secured through economic development and job creation to improve economic and social conditions of the population of the Srebrinica region .
The Republika Srpska authorities , as well as the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers and the Federation , provided funding and investment for the Srebrenica region .
The allocated assets were aimed for Srebrenica recovery including construction , reconstruction , infrastructure development , business promotion , improvement of public services , projects with sustainable return and education .
All those local efforts were underpinned also with the donor conference for Srebrenica organised just over a year ago , in November 2007 .
This might be a good occasion for an appeal to provide more new investment for this city and its region .
It is of the utmost importance that Srebrenica is never forgotten and that a joint effort continues .
We all in the EU , the international community and the local authorities pursue working constructively together to improve living conditions in the Srebrenica area .
Only the prospect of a better life can help to reduce the political tension , creating a space for dialogue and consequently allowing the still grieving victims ' relatives to move on .
That would be the best possible tribute to the victims of Srebrenica .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , in July 1995 , close to 8 000 men and boys were murdered and disappeared in Srebrenica .
The highest courts of international law have called this massacre by its proper name : genocide .
While continuing our pursuit of justice against the perpetrators , I think it is right that we should remember the victims and express our compassion for their families .
I therefore join you today in supporting this initiative to recognise 11 July as the day of the commemoration of the Srebrenica genocide .
Srebrenica stands as a symbol of horror and inconsolable grief .
Remembrance is as painful as it is necessary .
It is necessary because we cannot , and we must not , forget .
It is necessary to counter the selective remembrance of those who remain in denial , until this day , about what really took place .
Recognition of what happened in July 1995 is fundamental to reconciliation within Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the regional process .
Proclaiming 11 July as the European commemorative day for the victims of Srebrenica should therefore be a further step towards reconciliation within Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region .
I think it would be an opportunity to send a message , not just of respect and memory , but also of hope for the future - a future within the European Union , built on reconciliation , allowing wounds to heal over time .
But recognition alone is not sufficient .
Justice is equally essential .
I think it is important that all perpetrators of those atrocities be brought to justice , be prosecuted and pay for the crimes that they have committed .
It is therefore unacceptable after so many years that General Ratko Mladić remains at large .
The Commission fully supports the work of the International Criminal Tribunal for Yugoslavia , the ICTY .
We welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina 's cooperation with the ICTY and its handling of cases transferred by the Tribunal to local jurisdiction .
We , as the Commission , use every opportunity to encourage the authorities to continue their efforts and ensure that all crimes are duly prosecuted .
In addition to the justice of the courts , we can offer a second form of justice for the victims , and that is a better future for their loved ones who survived .
This is at the heart of our EU 's efforts in the Western Balkans .
We want the countries of the region to move towards a common European future .
We want to see a prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina within a stable , regional context where borders matter less and trust among neighbours is restored .
We know this will be a long journey but , if the history of the European Union and its enlargement tells us anything , then it is that this journey is worthwhile for all concerned .
We cannot travel the road to the European Union for Bosnia and Herzegovina .
It will itself have to meet the conditions and overcome its internal challenges by its own means , but we can help .
We will help and we want this country to succeed as the triumph of the survivors over those who had other designs .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner .
War , concentration camps , genocide - never again !
After the horrors of the Second World War , no one in Europe could imagine that this could ever happen again .
Yet it could : in the mid-1990s , six years after the fall of the Berlin Wall , whilst Western and Central Europe were growing together in peace , it happened again in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
The mistakes of the international community - many years of looking the other way , of almost carefree dealings with the thugs there , of friendly handshakes with criminals such as Ratko Mladić - have strengthened acceptance of him and his accomplices : they got off scot-free when they followed the years of ethnic expulsions , of ethnic cleansing , with a massacre .
To this day , Ratko Mladić has not had to answer to the courts .
Who is hiding him ?
Who is helping him and thus placing themselves and him under an even greater burden of guilt ?
Many of the other perpetrators are also still at large , and some are even still living in Bosnia-Herzegovina among the bereaved families of the victims .
Therefore , we must insist that not only the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague , but also the local war-crimes tribunals in Bosnia-Herzegovina , be able to do their jobs properly .
The commemorative day we have proclaimed is intended as a shake-up , as a signal not to forget , and as a demonstration to the bereaved families that we mourn with them .
Indeed , perhaps this day can serve to arouse awareness of these terrible crimes even in those who still do not believe that it happened , as even video recordings prove , and then the foundations for the necessary reconciliation can be laid .
Without recognition of the direct and indirect responsibility for this massacre , there can be no peace .
We owe this at least , and the conviction of the perpetrators , to the victims and their families .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , each year in the United Kingdom when it comes to the commemoration of the wars of the 20th century , we use the words ' at the going down of the sun and in the morning , we will remember them ' .
These are very moving words for me and my generation , my parents who both served in the Second World War .
And even for those generations that follow us , this commemoration is not simply a fitting tribute for all those who served .
It is a reminder of the evils and of the human cost of war , a warning to those generations and a safeguard for peace and against conflict for future years .
That is the importance of commemoration and , as the Commissioner has said this evening , recognition is absolutely crucial for reconciliation for today 's generations .
We are all aware of the carnage that occurred in Srebrenica in 1995 .
Eight thousand Muslim men and boys were killed while seeking refuge in a safe area declared by the United Nations Security Council in Srebrenica .
Although it happened almost 14 years ago , it is only right and correct that we should commemorate the victims and be reminded of the events and the racial hatred which led to this terrible event .
Just last month , a group boasting over a thousand members was created on the networking site Facebook which openly glorified the genocide in Srebrenica .
The group which had a name which translates as ' Knife , Wire , Srebrenica ' promoted the killing of the men and boys of Srebrenica purely on the basis that they were Bosnian Muslims .
It also spoke about their respect for the acts of Ratko Mladić , yet another bit of proof if it was needed that the ongoing freedom of Mladić proves only to fuel hatred and give ammunition to those who seek to foster the tensions of the past .
Thanks to a public outcry , the Facebook site was quickly taken down but not before over a thousand members in a single month between December 2008 and January 2009 had signed up .
Commemorating the victims of Srebrenica sends a clear message to those individuals who glorify the acts of Ratko Mladić and Radovan Karadžić that we will not allow this to happen again , and that they are alone and isolated in their views .
A Bosnian court heard last month from psychologists about how survivors of the Srebrenica massacre are intensely traumatised .
The court heard that the problems for many survivors is that they can never have a chance to say goodbye to their relatives .
Whilst we cannot turn the clock back to allow these relatives a second chance , we can make sure that this genocide is not forgotten and that those responsible are brought to justice .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SL ) Our European Union was born out of the experience of the Second World War .
We have a common , documented , historical memory which has made it possible for us to build our common European future together .
Srebrenica is horrific testimony to the fact that in 1995 the horrors of the Second World War repeated themselves in Europe in the most appalling way .
Srebrenica is a symbol of ethnic cleansing .
Srebrenica is synonymous with the ruthless and inhumane killing of children and adults - it is synonymous with genocide .
However , Srebrenica also stands for the concealment of killings and the destruction of mass graves .
We have to build Srebrenica into our common historical memory and into the foundations of the European Union 's enlargement into the Western Balkans .
We must not tolerate discriminatory and exclusionist stereotypes about individual nations , we must battle with collective guilt .
Those responsible for the genocide in Srebrenica must be brought before the Hague Tribunal , they must stand trial and be sent to prison , and we must work together to build and make possible a European future for Srebrenica , for the local population and for the whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The very least we should do is try to empathise with the traumas and torment of those who have to live with a raw memory of a crime , who have to live without their loved ones .
I would like to thank the Conference of Presidents for unanimously supporting the proposal that we invite young Bosniaks and Serbs from Srebrenica to the European Parliament together every year , so that , in a setting away from Srebrenica , without the pressures and stresses of their home surroundings , they can think , plan and build a common and more beautiful future for Srebrenica and for the whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
This resolution ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the resolution speaks of the UN , and also of the European institutions , in very clear , critical terms .
The shortcomings in the decision-making mechanisms in the field of foreign and security policy were not conducive to preventing the terrible crimes in Srebrenica .
The lack of a single voice remains a shortcoming in the European Neighbourhood Policy to this day , as today 's discussion on the Gaza conflict has shown once more .
The massacre in Srebrenica must never be forgotten , which is why we welcome and support the initiative to proclaim 11 July the commemorative day for the victims of this genocide .
At the same time , however , there must be reconciliation on both sides , which can be done only by consistently reappraising the events .
It is totally unacceptable , therefore , that the guilty parties and those accused of this crime are still at large .
I believe that not only Mladić but also the other guilty parties must stand trial .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the town of Srebrenica is notorious the world over on account of the massacre of 8 000 Muslim men in 1995 .
The surviving women and children are right to keep reminding us of this .
Following my visit to Srebrenica in March 2007 , I asked the European Commission to contribute to sustainable income and employment through projects promoting tourism , as a result of which Srebrenica would have more to offer than its history and the major memorial site .
Srebrenica is also a symbol for the failure of optimistic notions about humanitarian interventions and safe havens .
It should have been made clear from the start that a foreign military presence could only offer false illusions .
It turned Srebrenica into an operating base against the Serbian environment , whilst it was inevitable that it would eventually be swallowed up by that self-same environment .
Without a Dutch army in Srebrenica , there would not have been a situation of war and there would have been no need for revenge on the part of the Serbs .
The victims are a reason not only to bring Messrs Mladic and Karadzic to justice , but also to think critically about the failure of military interventions and of all attempts to bring about state unity in an ethnically divided Bosnia .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ' A voice from Srebrenica , big tears rolled over his cheeks .
He hugged me , kissed me and said : " Please , mama , go ! ”
They seized him ; I refused to go , knelt down and pleaded with them : ” Please kill me instead !
You have taken my only child .
I do not want to go anywhere .
Kill me , and that will be the end for us . ” '
This is the moving account of a Bosnian lady who lost both her husband and her 12-year-old son during the Srebrenica massacre in July 1995 .
Her voice and those of her fellow-sufferers are haunting us today , partly because of the invaluable research of conscientious scientists , including the Amsterdam professor Selma Leydesdorff .
Certainly now that the European Union has offered the Western Balkans the prospect of joining the Union , the horrors of Srebrenica remain a symbol and a duty , first of all in both word and deed .
In other words , actual consideration for those who are left behind .
Srebrenica , July 1995 .
I was a foreign correspondent for a Dutch paper at the time , and closely watched the Bosnian scene of battle .
I cannot begin to tell you how ashamed and disheartened I felt about the international concept of a safe haven , certainly as a Dutch citizen .
' Kom vanavond met verhalen , hoe de oorlog is verdwenen , en herhaal ze honderd malen , alle malen zal ik wenen . '
[ Come this evening with stories , how the war has disappeared , and repeat them a hundred times , I will cry each time . ]
From now on , the words of this famous poet from my country 's culture of remembrance , the Second World War , will also accompany 11 July , when we commemorate the beloved victims of Srebrenica and Potocari .
( BG ) Thank you , Mr President .
This evening we have gathered to recall a terrible crime , appropriately called genocide , which actually represents a huge human tragedy in our most recent history .
But when I read the declaration which is being tabled , along with the resolution and draft resolution , I see that it reflects only half of the tragedy and half of the genocide .
It mentions the names of those who have become world famous : Ratko Mladić , Radovan Karadžić , Krstić and others .
But I do not see in it the names of the Muslims who also committed crimes in Srebrenica and during this horrendous conflict .
Where is the name of Naser Orić , who commanded the 28th Muslim division ?
Why is there no mention in this resolution of the massacre in the village of Kravica , a Christian village , on Christmas Day 1993 ?
Why are there no descriptions of the cases of dozens of Christian villages which were burned down in the Srebrenica region by Muslim fighters ?
We must all stop defending a unilateral position and applying double standards when assessing such horrifying events .
Anyone who claims that only Christians killed Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina and that the opposite did not happen is a hypocrite .
Has anyone taken the trouble to verify this ?
It was said that Srebrenica is overrun with mass graves , which is true .
But has anyone taken the trouble to check how many of these are Christian mass graves ?
Let us not forget that things happened on both sides there and we must not pretend that the Christians do not exist or do not have human rights , as if they are some kind of animals .
( SV ) Mr President , what is there time to say in two minutes when we are to talk about and describe what happened in Srebrenica , when we need to learn how to remember this , so that it never happens again ?
What have we yet to see and what is there still to say about Srebrenica ?
What can I , as the only Member of this Parliament who was born in Bosnia and who is a refugee from the war there , convey today from this rostrum , that I , as a Swedish Member , would not be able to convey if I had not had this experience of the war ?
Mine , Mr Stoyanov , is a real story from that time .
Perhaps the main thing that I can convey is the feeling of hope when I still believed that if only someone out there in Europe would see what was happening , the world would react , or the hopelessness when I realised that I had been left to my own misfortune and that no help was going to come .
I remember blood stains on the asphalt , the cries of hungry children , the empty expression of a ten-year old girl when she told of how she and her brothers and sisters first had to bury their dead parents and then move their bodies to another grave when the soldiers tried to eliminate the evidence of mass murder in a village near my town .
I remember my father 's face when we found out that my uncle and cousin were in a concentration camp .
I remember my own desperation when , one morning , I did not even have a single decilitre of milk to give to my one-year old son .
What I remember most clearly and will never forget , however , is the indescribable feeling of loneliness when you finally realise that your own misfortune , desperation and agony has been played out on an open stage , that the world had seen how we were suffering , but that no one had prevented it .
It is this feeling that I share with people from Srebrenica , Mr Stoyanov .
It is this feeling that I convey , along with all of the other victims of the war in the Balkans .
The fact that the European Parliament will , tomorrow , vote on a day of remembrance for the victims of Srebrenica is something that brings me a little peace .
This day of remembrance will not give the people of Srebrenica back their murdered family members , but , for all of us who have been victims of war , it will signify an acknowledgement that Europe has seen our suffering , that we are not alone and that Europe will remember so that it does not happen again .
I , personally , hope , and will work to ensure , that Srebrenica , together with Bosnia and all of the other Balkan States , will become members of the European family as quickly as possible .
This is the least we can expect after Europe 's shameful inability to prevent this genocide and the fact that Ratko Mladić is still at large .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her comments tonight in support of this initiative .
Last July , I had the privilege , the obligation and the humbling experience to attend , on behalf of the President of our Parliament , the memorial ceremony at Srebrenica .
It has marked me .
It is something I will never , ever forget .
Thousands of people gathered in the hot July sunshine : dignified , sad , a ceremony of memorial , of remembrance and , of course , of grief .
But we must remember because we , all of us as Europeans , have a sense of déjà vu about Potočari , a sense of complicity .
We all saw on our TV screens the scenes before the massacre , before the flight to Tulsa .
We have that helplessness and hopelessness that we perhaps shared .
We can never say ' never again ' , but we can say that we will remember , we will learn and we will help people to move forward .
That is what this European Day of Memorial should be about .
I will never forget what I experienced .
I will never forget the mothers , the daughters , the families that I met over that period .
I hope that we can deliver something lasting and positive to them for the future .
- ( SK ) I support the recognition of 11 July as the commemoration day for the Srebrenica genocide , when the international community failed to intervene in the conflict and protect the civilian population .
I think this is the best way to show our respect for the victims of the massacre .
In the course of several days of carnage following the fall of Srebrenica , more than 8 000 men and boys lost their lives .
Thousands of women , children and elderly people were deported and a large number of women were raped .
We must never forget the victims of brutalities committed during the war in the former Yugoslavia .
I believe that all countries of the Western Balkans will support the recognition of this day .
We must send a clear message to future generations so that they never again allow another Srebrenica to happen .
I firmly believe that further effort will be made to bring the remaining fugitives to justice so that the many families can have final confirmation of the fate of their fathers , sons , husbands and brothers .
- ( FR ) Mr President , overcoming the tensions of the past and making every possible effort to stabilise the Western Balkans can in fact depend only on the latter 's overcoming its own history .
This supremely symbolic act of proposing this European day of remembrance , on 11 July , is part of this process and pursues several objectives .
Firstly , it pursues the objective of paying tribute to all the victims of the atrocities committed in Srebrenica and to their families , and secondly , it pursues the objective of reminding all of the citizens and peoples of the need to be vigilant and of the fact that the powerlessness of States to act inevitably leads to such atrocities .
It also pursues the objective of pointing out that the European Union should provide itself with a true common defence and security policy , so that it can intervene in the name of the principles and of the values that unite us and that guide us .
Lastly , it pursues the objective of repeating to the countries of the Western Balkans that it is their natural destiny to join us soon , but that this implies their cooperating openly , at all times , with the International Criminal Tribunal , in order to bring war criminals to justice .
This is our message , this is Parliament 's message to the current and future generations , so that time does not behave like rust , eating into memories , but , rather , so that it brings memories back to life .
( SL ) I would like to resume my speech , because the victims ' relatives have asked me to express their gratitude to you today for the understanding and support which you have shown in passing this resolution .
Thanks to all of you who responded to the invitation to participate in today 's debate .
I would also like to take the same opportunity to end my speech by making two points .
This resolution is not focused on the past , although it does also concern the dead .
It is focused on the living and on a better future for them .
( RO ) The massacre at Srebrenica in July 1995 , along with all the atrocities committed during the war which accompanied the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia , are a black page in Europe 's history .
There is a tragic lesson from history which allows us to understand once again the need to develop the ability to take effective action in the European Union , in its external security and defence policy and especially in its European Neighbourhood Policy .
Why ?
Precisely so that we can combat issues such as the violation of human rights and the principles of international law , regional conflicts , nationalist extremism and ethnic separatism , which have all made possible the atrocities in Bosnia .
Europe needs a stronger , more expansive European Union , with a policy of prevention which will not allow such atrocities to ever happen again .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , let me conclude today 's debate on Srebrenica .
First of all , I want to assure you that the Council remains determined that the perpetrators of crimes in Srebrenica , in Bosnia and Herzegovina , as well as elsewhere in the region of the Western Balkans , must be brought to justice .
Our ESDP mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to provide support and assistance to the ICTY and relevant authorities .
Srebrenica is , and will remain , a sensitive and important factor in the political life of Bosnia and Herzegovina and also of the EU and wider international community .
Let me use this opportunity to call upon the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to refrain from abusing this painful and unspeakable historical experience for their political purposes .
They should , rather , engage proactively to lead their country towards a better future .
There is a need to continue joint efforts , not just in Srebrenica but in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole .
If Srebrenica happened because there was not enough European spirit , then we should do our utmost to help this country embark on the right path .
This means towards the EU .
The first big step towards Europe was already achieved with signing the SAA agreement as the beginning of a long accession process , but much more is needed , more courage and confidence , to strive for wholehearted reconciliation underpinned by tangible prospects of integration .
We all have the obligation to the dead not to make victims out of the living .
This is our obligation for generations to come .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , Mrs Ibrisagic , I was one of those people watching on television when these terrible things happened .
We all thought that safe havens would be safe havens .
So I was , like many others , terribly shocked when we heard what had happened - or slowly experienced the reality .
In the European Union , I think we have only learned by hard lessons what we have to do , and we then slowly started the Common foreign and security policy .
This was the first item , so to speak , and we have then gone on because we saw that this terrible massacre happened because we were not united .
Once again , I can only pay tribute to you for being here today and speaking so openly for reconciliation .
For those who live with that memory , it must be very difficult , but at the same time I think that the possibility of Bosnia and Herzegovina becoming a member of the European Union in the future is perhaps something that can aid reconciliation with all these terrible atrocities .
I have received six motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the resolution will take place tomorrow ( Thursday 15 January 2009 ) .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting closed at 11.35 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
Animal transport ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Mr Parish , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on animal transport - B6-0496 / 2008 ) .
author . - Mr President , I rise here today to ask this oral question on behalf not only of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development but also of the Animal Welfare Intergroup , because I believe that we have a very strong agriculture in the European Union .
However , in order to have a strong agriculture , we must also have a strong welfare policy , because I believe the future of European agriculture is very much of a high-quality product and one that has very good welfare standards .
We can use this to promote our products in a positive way , and this is why transport of animals is not only a motive but it is essential to have the right legislation in place .
In many ways , I want to concentrate this morning on the fact that we have legislation in place .
We can argue whether this is sufficient or not , but the main thing at the moment is to check this legislation and be absolutely sure that Member States are complying with it , because we know , for instance , that there are problems in some Member States between national governments putting the legislation in place and the regional governments having to implement it .
Then there are problems .
At the end of the day , it is the animals that suffer .
I could highlight many things , but one particular thing we have problems with in Europe is horse transport .
A lot of horses at the end of their careers land up in salami in Italy and they do not travel under the best conditions in any respect .
We have had many of these vehicles followed through our own Member States of the European Union where the rules have not been complied with , the lorries have not stopped at the right times , the vehicles have not been of the right type and they have not had proper air conditioning or proper water , and these things cannot be allowed to go on .
I often stand up and tell the Commission not to add costs , but in many ways , when animals are going to slaughter , if the cost of transport is greater because they have to do a good job , they have to have the right vehicles and they must not overcrowd those vehicles , then I say , well , so be it !
Because many times , instead of the animals for slaughter travelling long distances , they should be killed in the Member State and travel as chilled meat .
Therefore , we have much to do on this .
I also would say to you that Mr Kyprianou , the previous Commissioner for DG SANCO , also gave us the reassurance when he was Commissioner that not only would he implement the present legislation properly but also he would revisit the situation at the end of the term .
We are moving very fast now towards the end of this parliamentary session and the end of this present Commission and I would call on Ms Vassiliou , who has been a very good replacement for Mr Kyprianou , to honour that commitment , because animal transport is one of those things that we have to take incredibly seriously .
We have made these points many times before , but we are a civilised society and in many ways a civilised society is judged very much in the way it treats not only its people but also its animals .
Therefore , I cannot , as I have said , emphasise this enough .
My final points are on the oral question itself and that the Animal Transport Regulation has been in force since 2007 .
The Commission should , therefore , have received the first annual reports from the Member States on the enforcement of the regulation .
Can the Commission give an account of which Member States have forwarded their reports ?
Has the Commission already carried out a preliminary analysis of the reports which would allow some statements to be made on the shortcomings and difficulties , but also on the major achievements , in the enforcement of legislation ?
Will the Commission consequently prepare a report on enforcement processes of the regulation in the Member States ?
Such an analysis would be essential in the context of planning a revision of the Animal Transport Regulation .
Therefore , Commissioner , I would like answers to these questions .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I quite agree with the opinion of Mr Parish that the way we treat animals , including livestock , is a question which undoubtedly involves both ethics and civilisation .
The Commission is aware that the transportation of animals for commercial purposes may cause serious suffering to animals .
Such suffering is inflicted particularly on so-called low-value animals such as animals for slaughter .
The enforcement of laws on long distance transport is not satisfactory .
In recent months the Commission has obtained reports on cases of cruelty to animals .
The Commission continues to support the best available options for improving the situation .
The ultimate aim is a better enforcement of EU laws and thus , healthier animals and decent living conditions for the relevant animals .
A study carried out by the joint research centre concluded that new and more effective control systems , such as monitoring transport with the help of satellite positioning systems , would help to improve the situation and enable a more transparent implementation of the rules .
The use of these new technologies would also help to reduce the administrative burden on intra-state authorities and organisations .
Before this mandate expires , the Commission is also considering proposing new standards based on the results of scientific research relating to transportation times , numbers of loaded animals and numbers of loaded animals in vehicles .
The Commission is assessing the implementation of EU law based on reports provided by the Member States under existing EU regulations .
The information contained in these reports is combined with the results of on-the-spot checks performed by veterinary experts in the Member States .
The results of these checks performed by Commission experts are published on the Commission 's website .
An assessment is also under way in respect of data from reports published by international non-governmental organisations active in this area .
Most Member States have already submitted reports on animal transportation in 2007 to the Commission .
At the end of 2008 , reports were still outstanding from Cyprus , Lithuania , Malta , Bulgaria and Luxembourg .
They were reminded by the Commission of their obligation and the situation will be monitored closely .
However , Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2005 does not require the Commission to produce a report on progress with enforcing the regulation in the Member States .
The Commission agrees that enforceability is a key aspect of any proposed law .
The Commission is consequently paying close attention to an analysis of the Member State reports and a possible future amendment of the Community 's regulations in this area .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , let us first of all look at the background to this .
The eight-hour mandatory time limit for animals in transport was agreed in December 2004 and entered into force in January 2007 across all 27 Member States , with special derogations applying to longer journeys where it could be demonstrated that vehicle standards had been upgraded , providing animals with access to water , temperature control , adequate ventilation , and where frequent rest periods were incorporated into the journey time .
Special derogations were also permitted for remote rural areas and islands , like Orkney and Shetland in my own constituency , for instance , where longer journey times are unavoidable .
In these cases , however , special bedded units with access to water have been designed so that the animals can be transported in relative comfort .
In addition , a complete transport ban was introduced on certain animals such as calves under 10 days old and lambs less than one week old .
I report with some satisfaction that these transport rules have been strictly observed , particularly in countries like Scotland , where we continue to maintain some of the highest levels of best practice in the whole of the EU .
But I am concerned at reports that , as Neil Parish has told us , these rules are not being similarly observed in other parts of the EU , particularly in some of the southern Mediterranean Member States and in some of the new East European accession states and particularly , again as Neil Parish stressed , where the transport of horses for slaughter is concerned .
Animal welfare NGOs are still producing evidence of horrific abuse , with horses and sometimes other livestock being transported over vast distances in searing heat , with no access to water or proper ventilation , with no rest periods , packed into overcrowded trucks .
As their journeys progress , these animals become increasingly exhausted and dehydrated , some succumb to heat stress and can be seen desperately panting and gasping for air and , in the worst cases , many die .
This practice has to be stopped and strict adherence to the regulation must be observed in all Member States .
I support the terms of Neil Parish 's oral question today , which seeks to check on the level of compliance with these measures .
I hope that the Commission can now provide us with this information and reassure us that steps are being taken to ensure the rigorous implementation of the eight-hour transportation limit for animals , with the appropriate derogations that I mentioned , and to stop the cruel breach of the existing EU regulations that still goes on .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for some European countries , depending on their geographical location - as Mr Stevenson indicated - as well as their land area and the size of their trade flows , the transport of animals is a subject of particular importance .
Commissioner , I would like to refer to two specific issues .
Firstly , it still seems clear to me that the Commission encounters difficulties in conducting an analysis of the situation throughout Community territory .
Although , by virtue of the current regulation , Member States should - as we have seen - produce a report each year of the inspections conducted in the previous year , the regulation does not lay down a minimum number of inspections and neither does there appear to be uniformity in relation to the statistical basis .
This prevents a comparison of the data reported by the various countries .
Commissioner , I think that for the benefit of all concerned , this situation should be rectified as soon as possible .
However , a second matter also concerns me .
In your speech , you described animals being transported for slaughter as of low value .
Commissioner , I absolutely disagree with you .
Personally , I consider them to be of high economic value and I am sure that the industry agrees with me .
As this is the case , and this meat has a high economic value , correct transport conditions are essential whatever the final destination - even if it is the slaughterhouse - and whatever the distance travelled .
In other words , it is a significant - in fact the major - concern that these animals are transported under favourable conditions .
I would ask you , therefore , to take these considerations into account in the proposed changes to the regulation upon which the Commission is working .
We know that , as well as new technologies , the reform will address changes in respect of the maximum transport time - as has been said here - and the maximum and minimum temperatures for transporting animals .
I ask you again Commissioner , and I ask the Commission , that , before amending such fundamental features , a solid scientific basis for the changes proposed should be sought and found .
Furthermore , I would ask you that , as long as we do not have this solid scientific basis , which is currently lacking for some of the issues , we should refrain from surreptitiously introducing the proposed amendments to the prevailing regulations in reports that have nothing to do with transport - I am talking about the protection of animals at the time of slaughter , a report upon which we are now working .
I think that in matters of such importance and significance , we should all - Commission and Parliament - put our cards on the table .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to say that I am a little disappointed that after four years , we still have not seen a proposal from the Commission as to how we can tighten up the legislation on animal transport .
There have been good intentions and constructive cooperation between Mr Kyprianou , and now also Mrs Vassiliou , and Parliament .
However , when will we have a proposal ?
This is something I would very much like to know .
It is also important that we achieve proper enforcement of the legislation .
It is important to ensure that we actually restrict the transport time for slaughter animals to eight hours .
However , we should go further still .
We should not simply talk about a time limit .
Research has shown that one hour can be too much if the animal is not strong enough to be transported , and longer journeys can be fine if the animal is strong and healthy and is transported under good conditions .
We will probably continue to transport breeding animals over long distances and , in this connection , Parliament has , of course , proposed a pilot project for rest stations , where the animals have to rest after 24 hours .
I would like to know how this rest station project is progressing .
The intention is , of course , to bring together operators of control stations , veterinary authorities , researchers and animal welfare organisations to allow them jointly to define good practice in this area .
It is difficult to get such a project off the ground but it is worth the attempt because it is important for our knowledge and research on animal welfare during transport to also be reflected in legislation and in practice .
Mr President , Mr Parish rightly reminded us of something to which we have referred many times in this chamber , namely the fact that the way in which we treat animals reflects on us - on how ' cultured ' and civilised we are .
There is a lot of cruelty to animals during transport .
Certain improvements have been made , by introducing higher standards for transporting animals , but these measures still fall short of the mark .
In my opinion , the appropriate solution , and one which was first proposed a long time ago , would be to limit to the travel time for animals to eight hours , and the total time that animals spend in transit and at the slaughterhouse to twelve hours .
We aim to put forward this proposal within the framework of the current work on the Regulation on the protection of animals at the time of slaughter .
Honourable ladies and gentlemen ! Arguing for humane measures is one thing , but there is also another argument , namely a financial one ( which is more appealing to certain people ) .
The point is that these long-distance transports increase costs which are , ultimately , passed on to the consumer .
We should estimate these costs and use them as an argument to finally , after years of debate , place restrictions on animal transports and alleviate the suffering of animals .
Mr President , a civilisation 's level of development can be judged by how it treats the most defenceless living creatures found in that civilisation .
Judging by how we treat our animals , we are still barbarians .
I remember when Sweden joined the EU what is soon to be fifteen years ago .
Many of the discussions before we joined were about animal transport .
This was an area in which we were to improve the situation .
Then came the first directive in 2005 .
Yet the conditions for the animals did not improve and we were instead told , at that point , that the monitoring would work from now on , that GPS systems would be introduced from now on , that the drivers would be trained from now on and that the lorries would work better from now on .
Five countries have not even bothered to submit a report .
I demand that the Commission fines these countries immediately .
As regards the other 22 countries , how many checks have they carried out ?
How have they complied with the rules ?
Is it working ?
The answer in many cases is unfortunately not .
Then Mr Kyprianou promised us that he would come back here before the end of his mandate if it was necessary - it is necessary - and if there is public opinion - and there is public opinion !
Many of the new Member States are , in fact , small and there is perhaps no need for a 24-hour journey followed by another 24-hour journey .
We will have a new slaughter directive which allows mobile slaughterhouses and which will reduce the need for travelling .
We need to revisit the conditions for animals during transport .
How many of us would appreciate having four cows or ten sheep in their double bed for 24 hours ?
That is how densely packed the animals are at present .
Or imagine , the chickens on the top level in the lorry are not , in fact , totally prohibited from letting their faeces drop down onto those below .
Who would want to be transported under such conditions ?
I invite all of the EU 's agricultural ministers to come with me on a journey from Stockholm to Brussels under the same conditions as the animals .
I wonder how many will accept that invitation .
Perhaps they would rather amend the legislation .
We talk about costs .
The highest cost in this regard is the cost to the environment as a result of the long journeys .
There is also a cost in terms of the animals ' suffering in connection with the long journeys .
However , these long journeys also result in poorer quality meat .
They result in a very real reduction in value .
An animal that is stressed will produce a much poorer quality meat , and the suffering thus works its way right down the whole chain .
Think of the farmer who has put a lot of effort and money into producing a good animal that is then spoilt in the last part of its life .
No , we need a new proposal before the elections .
I do not understand how we are to be able to conduct an election campaign if we do not at least have a proposal from the Commission that demonstrates that we will now - finally - improve conditions for animals .
Mr President , the starting point for this discussion is , of course , the fact that animals are sentient beings .
Animals have the ability to feel pain , stress and suffering in precisely the same way as we do .
We must take account of this when we lay down legislation .
This is not currently being done .
More and more animals are being transported within the EU .
This is a direct consequence of the internal market .
The internal market leads to specialisation .
Animals are reared in one place , they are slaughtered in another place and the meat is transported to a third place .
Member States are not even permitted to prohibit animal transport for the sake of animal welfare .
That really is unacceptable .
A Swedish study established just how many animals in total were transported across the borders within the EU .
For the EU-15 , it was determined that 22 million quadrupedal animals , such as pigs , horses and cows , as well as 500 billion poultry , were transported each year in all directions between the Member States of the EU .
This was when the EU comprised 15 Member States .
You can only imagine what the figures will be with 27 Member States .
They will , of course , be very much higher .
I would like to ask the Commission when we will have the new Animal Transport Directive .
Mr Kyprianou did , of course , promise that we would have a new directive during this parliamentary term .
Is the Commission able to give us the promise that we in the European Parliament are after , namely a maximum limit of eight hours for animal transport ?
I would also like to ask Mr Špidla a couple of questions .
You say that five Member States have not submitted reports , a state of affairs which is , of course , quite shocking .
What do you in the Commission do with these reports from the Member States ?
Do you analyse them in any way ?
We in Parliament would like an analysis , a report from the Commission , in which you summarise everything and clearly indicate measures that will enable the conditions under which animals are transported to be changed .
So , when will we have the new directive with an eight-hour limit , and can we have an analysis of the reports from the Member States ?
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , it is fascinating as always .
No sense of irony again in this Chamber .
One of the biggest problems that we have , particularly in the United Kingdom , is the monstrously stupid avalanche of rules and regulations that came to slaughterhouses 10 years ago which managed to close over 1 000 abattoirs in the United Kingdom and gave rise to much longer journey times for animals .
My brother-in-law is a butcher .
He owns an abattoir in Yorkshire and at one stage - and this got into the Private Eye magazine - there was a visiting vet supervising a vet supervising a meat inspector supervising two slaughtermen !
That is the sort of nonsense that you get when you are dealing with this organisation 's rules and regulations .
The problem is journey times .
Now from Bridlington in my constituency , pigs , sheep and cattle are being transported right the way across England to Manchester because of all these closures of slaughterhouses .
That is what we need to address .
I am also talking about the transportation of horses .
My colleague , Nigel Farage , tells me that there are countries in the European Union which actually regard horses as food !
As an Englishman , I find it absolutely incredible that people would eat their horses .
An Englishman would no more eat his horse than he would his dog or his children , but then I suppose that just shows the enormous cultural divide that there is between us and the other countries of this Union .
( Laughter )
Mr President , following that may not be easy !
Let me say that I have no difficulty whatsoever with efficient and proper rules governing animal welfare , but I am becoming concerned that we are getting ourselves onto a treadmill , where we are going to so tighten the noose around our agricultural industry that its practical functioning will be rendered impossible .
I do see signs of such a development emerging from the Commission consultation on reviewing the maximum travelling times and stock densities in transporting animals .
The Commission , let us recall , failed to get its way in the 2005 Regulation .
However , less than two years after it came into effect , it is trying again with an attempt to remove the repeatability of the eight-hour limit .
I must say that , for my constituency of Northern Ireland , it would be ruinous , because to export animals - which we do - we are required to undertake a sea journey and if only one period of eight hours is allowed , that would be utterly inadequate and utterly unacceptable .
I would remind the House that such onerous conditions would not compare at all with the huge distances that animals are transported in South America , from whence we happily import !
So , yet again , we would be in the business of punishing our own farmers , while caring nothing about what affects the imports we receive .
I have to say that we have to get to a point of getting rid of this obsession of cutting off our nose to spite our face .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is another subject on which the discussion very quickly reveals that strong emotions are involved , on the one hand , but also stark realities on the other .
I should like to express my particular thanks to the Chairman of our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr Parish , for this question .
It is an important one - not in order to convey emotions , but to ask the Commission the following quite specific questions .
What has happened ?
How can these developments be verified ?
Do you have any proof , and if so , what ?
What figures do you have ?
You mentioned a couple of figures , Commissioner , but I firmly believe that discrepancies exist between Member States that go way beyond the fact that some Member States have submitted reports and others have not .
What is the situation with regard to implementation ?
How are the long journeys monitored ?
How are they monitored in the individual Member States ?
Another major problem area requiring urgent discussion is the problems that have arisen as a result of our defining agriculture as merely an economic field and equating things we should possibly be regarding as different .
For example , what additional professional training in transport matters should trained farmers be undergoing ?
How should this be organised , and who would provide such training ?
Where must farmers show this in order to obtain their qualifications ?
To reiterate : farmers are trained to deal with animals , whereas hauliers employ drivers who have possibly never dealt with animals in their whole lives .
These are two things that cannot be equated , but to an extent we have been doing so .
The second circumstance that causes major problems is the following .
When farmers transport their own calves , they can do so for up to 50 km .
Permit me to say at this point that we must indeed give further consideration , as a matter of urgency , to how we can help smaller abattoirs operate economically and thus reduce the need for further journeys .
So , then , farmers are permitted to transport their own animals for 50 km but face problems if they take a neighbour 's animal along .
That , too , requires some thought .
Is the limit set correctly at 50 km , or should we perhaps be seeking the cause of these developments in the abattoirs , too ?
If farmers transport a horse for leisure purposes , there is no problem , and this Regulation does not apply , but if they transport it to market , the Regulation does apply , and they must meet the requirements .
These questions should be discussed and answered in further debates .

( PT ) The question of animal transport and welfare is one that , as Mr Parish and others have stated very well , has to be seen essentially from a perspective of civilisation .
Limiting animal suffering as far as possible is an ethical imperative that forms part of our cultural heritage , in spite of the apparent paradox that we are seeking to protect their welfare at a time that , for many , will be their last journey .
On the other hand , it must not be forgotten that the price to pay for the implementation of the demanding and financially costly rules in force are problems that distort competition and have a strong impact on the rural development of some regions of the European Union .
Regions and Member States that do not have the capacity to supply certain species from their own markets and are more distant from the centres of production , as is the case with my own country , now have greater difficulties of competitiveness in their industries linked to slaughter and processing , whereas regions and Member States with surpluses are experiencing increased advantages because it has become easier for them to sell products that are already processed , with the inherent advantages in terms of employment and added value .
Once this legislation has been in force for two years , it is fully justifiable that the Commission should supply an assessment that is as extensive as possible , not only on the specific issues of the strict implementation of the regulations concerning transport , but also on the economic and social consequences for the regions and Member States with a low production capacity for some animal species that are important for human consumption .
I think , therefore , that the Commission should respond to these questions as quickly , objectively and fully as possible .
( SL ) A large amount of live animal transport passes through Slovenia , mainly originating in Eastern Europe and destined for Italy .
In the experience of our veterinary authorities , the applicable European legislation is fairly comprehensive , but somewhat unwieldy and complicated to implement .
The biggest problem in Slovenia concerns inspections , because , now that internal European borders have been abolished , it is difficult to check whether or not lorry drivers are actually stopping at the pre-determined staging posts .
I should point out that , because of the size of its territory , Slovenia is not required to have its own staging posts and that it has put arrangements in place with Hungary and Italy instead .
We urgently need a uniform solution and one which is uniformly implemented .
Bearing in mind the disastrous situation as regards the transportation of animals over long distances on European roads , the review of the 2005 Regulation should be used as an opportunity to raise standards in animal welfare .
Transport is closely linked to the treatment of animals before slaughter , and I agree with those of my fellow members who have taken the view that there are no grounds for permitting transports of a duration in excess of eight hours .
I am , therefore , arguing in favour of the determination of a strict upper transportation limit , but I also support the proposal for the introduction of mobile abattoirs .
( PL ) Mr President , the Regulation on the protection of animals during transport is extremely important , and this kind of information is vital .
At this juncture , it should be stressed that a large proportion of the imported meat consumed by the citizens of the European Union is not covered by similar regulations .
This Regulation is one of the more reasonable regulations on the breeding and slaughter of animals .
I realise that large food corporations often fail to respect labour rights , let alone treat animals in an appropriate way .
It is precisely in large companies that the worst kinds of animal abuse take place .
This problem rarely affects small or medium-sized businesses .
The only solution is to ensure stricter police control , as well as border controls , and to release the names of companies which violate animal rights to the public , so that consumers might avoid them .
Mr President , it is very important that animals are transported to ensure safety and to prevent avoidable suffering .
I use this term because animals , as a rule , find any motorised transport frightening .
It is important to minimise that where possible .
When regulating for this safety and prevention of suffering , we tend to look at time and distance .
This is natural , but it is simplistic in the case of Ireland , which , I remind you , is an island and also a major animal exporter .
Time limits and distance when crossing the waters that separate us from the continent and from our markets cannot be the absolute .
We heard a recommendation of eight hours , but it takes more than eight hours to get an animal boarded and across water .
There is no possibility of taking an animal out to graze in the middle of the Channel .
So I would recommend to you that we look at the conditions under which the animals are transported , particularly in the case of Ireland , rather than just time and distance .
( FR ) Mr President , although the Animal Transport Regulation has been in force since January 2007 , Member States do not appear to be systematically complying with this regulation , since they are failing to submit the annual reports requested .
A comprehensive analysis is therefore problematic since a large amount of the necessary information with regard to the resources allocated for the undertaking of inspections is missing .
As a member of animal welfare associations and the Intergroup on the Welfare and Conservation of Animals , I am particularly interested in this issue .
Associations fought relentlessly for decades up until 2007 when directives were finally established in this area in which Member States can now be seen to be displaying a certain degree of laxity .
I would even go so far as to say unwillingness because in short , as we know , carrying out checks and inspections is not all that difficult .
We know where the abattoirs are , we know where the animals are reared , and we know the routes along which the animals are transported , so where is the problem ?
I think that it is important , in this day and age when the public are quite rightly taking a growing interest in animal welfare on the farm , at the slaughterhouse and during transport , that Member States respect these views .
Since I have been given the opportunity to speak , I should like to add that , with regard to transport , irrespective of the length of journeys made , it is essential that local climate conditions are taken into consideration .
A journey lasting several hours made in the Netherlands in spring is very different from a journey of the same length made in the middle of summer in a country such as Greece .
Should we not make night-time transport obligatory in the latter case ?
I should be grateful if you would consider this proposal in the future .
Mr President , in terms of legislation , we are looking at a relatively new regulation on the protection of animals during transport , because it only came into operation in January 2007 .
While I think we would all hope that everybody was compliant from day one with the many demands of this regulation , it would be quite miraculous were that the case , because it is very detailed and makes huge demands - and rightly so - on Member States and operators .
I welcome today 's oral question by Neil Parish , Chair of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , because we want to see whether this regulation works .
However , we need , first of all , to know that it is being implemented , because we care about how animals are moved around the European Union .
For countries like Ireland with a huge livestock sector , there has been an enormous amount of work done to implement this from day one , both within the sector itself and on the part of those who monitor - the Department of Agriculture and other authorities .
Licensed operators have invested large amounts of money to upgrade their transporters and to meet the training and competence requirements of this regulation .
In fact , I note that , just this month in Ireland , a number of training courses are under way for drivers of vehicles transporting cattle , sheep , goats , pigs , horses and poultry - a point raised by Ms Jeggle - and perhaps other Member States need to do the same .
It is interesting that the regulation applies only to the transport of animals undertaken in connection with an economic activity .
I have a concern that we ignore the welfare of domestic pets , because I have seen examples of people who think that they know how to look after animals doing very badly on that front and yet , very often , these are the same people who insist on particular rules for farming and for economic activity .
That is an area we need to look at .
I believe that , in general , established transporters of animals are licensed and authorised and comply with best welfare standards - because it is in their vital interests to do so : they need to transport animals to arrive in good condition so that they meet the needs of those who are purchasing .
The problem is with the unregulated sector , where some people are untouched by these rules , and that is what we need to focus on .
Who are the people who are outside the box , and how can we catch them and put them out of business ?
Let me say in relation to time limits and the eight-hour rule that the reason why Europe had a real problem in getting this regulation into place was because many Member States , including Ireland , know that we need to transport our animals for longer durations , but we also know how to look after them in so doing .
So I would disagree with those who want to reduce the time duration , but I agree that we need to make sure that welfare is a priority .
On horses , I often say to myself that I wish I were a thoroughbred , because they travel first class .
Obviously , people look after animals with a high economic value , and in the economic downturn we are going through , I worry about the welfare of horses , full stop .
I would say : no more rules .
We have perhaps too many already that are choking the sector that is complying with them .
But let us apply the rules to everybody , and let us get those who are not meeting the rules out of the system .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Parish on bringing this forward .
Despite our political differences , and notwithstanding his very obvious deficiencies as a human being , I think he is actually very sound on this and I support him .
We need this regulation to be a success and we need it to be universally in force , but I have a number of reservations and I disagree with some colleagues who spoke this morning .
Mr Stevenson said that longer journeys were unavoidable - I say : not so .
Mrs Jensen spoke of 24-hours transport - not necessarily .
Mr Allister , the agricultural industry has to ask questions itself .
As a civilised society , we need to look at the whole question , the whole purpose , the whole idea of transporting animals long distances and then killing them .
If I were a meat eater , I would be asking how can the suffering en route which we know about , the dehydration , the stress and - to our Irish colleagues North and South - the sea journeys , possibly improve the quality of the product at the end ?
To my mind , it makes no economic sense .
It does not make humanitarian sense .
This is why I favour a complete ban on the transport of animals , which , I believe , would support rural economies .
It would encourage local producers , yes , small- and medium-sized enterprises as someone spoke of , and it would enable consumption of food as near the point of production as possible .
In the absence of that , and I know it is not going to happen in the near future , I think we need proper realistic enforcement of what we have at the moment , the regulation , and I urge the Commission to use all the agencies across Europe - police forces on motorways if necessary - to stop and check lorries to see whether they are carrying out the full requirements of this legislation .
Mr President , has the Commission considered the human health implications of poor implementation of animal welfare regulations ?
Transport , especially transport over long distances with a lack of space , produces stress , and stress means more susceptibility to disease .
This is particularly true for horses , where scientific studies show that transport makes horses become shedders .
That means they excrete a lot more than they would normally , which greatly increases the likelihood of the spread of disease .
Many transported animals are going to slaughter - 320 million of them in the EU each year - so that means there is a greatly increased risk of diseases like salmonella entering the food chain .
Given the very poor level of implementation of current rules and the stress involved in long journeys , even with proper rest stops , especially for horses , does the Commission plan to come forward , where necessary and on the basis of scientific evidence , with a finite absolute journey time limit ?
That would be in the interests of animal welfare and of human health .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the problem of animal transports is very important and it is a good thing that Parliament is addressing the issue again .
However , what is less positive is the fact we are failing to implement the regulation effectively .
I welcome the fact that , during the course of our debates today , we are continuing to focus on the transport of horses .
This is welcome news not only because I breed horses , but also because standards are definitely not being upheld in this area .
I would like to take this opportunity to say that horses can understand humans .
However , although horses always understand us , we cannot always understand them .
Horses , like people , feel apprehension , fear , and are able to trust humans .
I remember an incident where a seriously ill horse in a clinic would not let the vets do anything to him in my daughter 's absence .
As soon as my daughter arrived , they were able do what they wanted to him .
He quite simply trusted her .
Just as we human beings do not always trust doctors , that horse did not trust the vets , but he did trust a familiar person .
I therefore think that humans also fail to understand horses when they are scared , or when they try to defend themselves .
Instead , people treat this behaviour as disobedience .
The owner beats the horse .
The horse , for his part , knows why his owner is upset and knows how to yield to him .
That is why I am obliged to all the MEPs who are also able to approach this problem from the point of view of what is good , to view it as an issue involving a living creature , and to view it with a certain amount of humanity .
( NL ) Mr President , we are once again discussing the transport of animals in this House , and we will once again reach a two-fold conclusion .
Firstly , current legislation is lagging far behind Parliament 's ambitions as set out in the report of my predecessor Albert Jan Maat , who , to my mind , was right to draw a distinction between animals intended for slaughter and other cattle .
Indeed , steps have been taken in the area of training drivers , better transport conditions and the use of GPS , but these are certainly not enough .
Secondly , monitoring remains the Achilles ' heel of this legislation .
Monitoring by Europe leaves something to be desired and is still very much organised at national level .
There is an urgent need , therefore , for agreements on handling complaints and gathering evidence across borders .
I should also like to see the Food and Veterinary Office step up its monitoring efforts .
My amendment to make more funds available for this in the budgetary procedure has been rejected by , inter alia , the European Commission .
Even now , the European Commission refers to national reports which it will be assessing on paper .
Would the European Commission prefer to wash its hands of this matter than to guarantee actual European-wide monitoring , ad hoc inspections by European inspectors and European supervision ?
Other improvements that need to be made to current legislation are : more and better-equipped resting places within the European Union and beyond , more specific climate conditions for the different animal species and , finally , we have to start working on the compulsory use of satellite systems , with access by authorised personnel to a central database .
Despite an incomplete European overview of the actual implementation of this legislation , we do , of course , pick up certain rumours , from Austria for example , where a local inspector reportedly sees many empty lorries drive in the direction of Poland and the Czech Republic , for example , but he does not see the full vehicles returning , heading towards southern Europe .
Does this mean that , once these lorries are full , they decide to make a detour around Austria , perhaps to avoid the stricter monitoring rules that are in place there in comparison with the surrounding countries ?
For me , that is an indication that the legislation is being applied very differently by the Member States .
Another problem is the role of the vets who need to sign for transport .
Commissioner , in some cases , these vets have become nothing but stamp machines .
Surely nobody in their right mind could sign off a transport schedule for horses from Romania to southern Italy that was due to last 24 hours ?
The last 500 km of this transport would , according to the transport schedule , take 2.5 hours .
This makes you wonder whether these animals were to be transported in a Ferrari .
Finally , young animals , particularly puppies , for example , are now being ferried across the whole of Europe without there being any legislation in place .
I would therefore like to urge the European Commission to look into this .
We have done our homework in this House ; we are now looking forward to the Commission proposals that we expect before the forthcoming elections for this House .
Mr President , like some other colleagues , I am going to concentrate on the transport of horses .
There is now overwhelming evidence showing that EU rules meant to protect the welfare of horses during long-distance transport are being flouted , resulting in inhumane conditions and needless suffering .
In some cases , horses are packed like sardines into steel lorries , where temperatures can be over 40 ° C. In some cases , those horses are transported for thousands of miles without food or water , causing injury or even death .
Does the Commission have any information as to how many transgressions of Regulation ( EC ) No 1 / 2005 have been taken to court by Member States since it came into effect on 5 January 2007 and whether the EU regulations on harmonised GPS monitoring of vehicles will be enforced ?
Is there any way individuals can get access to data extracted from traces on movement of animals within Member States ?
I know the Commission can access that , but individuals cannot .
I would like answers to those three specific questions please .
Mr President , it gives me pleasure to speak on this most important debate this morning and I would emphasise how very important to the North West of England the transportation of live animals is .
As the Chair of the Committee on Agriculture said , we would much rather have these animals slaughtered and then transported after they have died for processing away from the base if the movement of the meat is needed ; but in the North West , we have a lot of horses , a lot of sheep and a lot of cattle - lots of movements of animals .
I was a national Member of Parliament for 18 years .
This was a continuous problem , raised time and again with me by my constituents .
I submit that things have not really improved over the last 10 or 20 years .
I am delighted that this question has been tabled .
The first year was 2007 and reports had to be in by June 2008 , but I submit that we are behind programme .
I have listened to what the Commissioner has said - that he will have a look at the advantage of satellite monitoring .
That is a good idea .
But I put it to the Commissioner that there are many detailed checks engrained in the Regulation , quite rightly - things like the fitness for transport of the animals , transport practices , means of transport , sea containers , integral journey times , resting periods , space allowances - which are all matters that cannot be viewed by satellite .
They need detailed inspections , and lessons need to be learned .
I would have hoped that in his final remarks , there would be a date by which he hopes to wind up and submit his proposals and conclusions at this early time in the implementation of the Regulation because , the sooner something is done to improve the situation , the better .
It is appalling that these long journey times have to be faced by animals in their last few days of life .
Consumers want to see , as they want to with free-range hens and eggs , that we are being humane in our treatment , and they will pay an added price for the meat because they want to see us caring for these animals that are so precious and necessary for our food needs .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , my thanks go to Mr Parish for this debate .

Guaranteeing the welfare of animals is something that is very important .
The Commission needs to ensure that the Animal Transport Regulation is implemented and monitored consistently throughout the EU .
EU legislation on the transport of animals is strict .
Recurrent serious problems with animal transport are due to gross breaches of the law .
The current regulations on the time limit for animals in transport and their derogations are adequate if they are properly monitored and if , at the same time , top quality transport fleets are maintained .
These need to have proper ventilation , temperature control , a drinking water system and a satellite navigation system .
In addition , drivers have to be trained , and there need to be guidelines drawn up on the proper conditions for animal transport , as is now being done in many Member States .
I think it is important that the present Animal Transport Regulation is properly implemented everywhere in the EU and that the experiences gained from it are taken account of prior to any drafting of new regulations .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a community can work together constructively only if everyone abides by the laws and rules .
Farmers , in particular , attach the highest priority to ensuring that animals are transported in such a way that , after slaughter , the meat that reaches consumers is of the best quality and affected as little as possible by stress .
Black sheep must be named and shamed , as these violations are unacceptable and bring the whole industry into disrepute .
We have to successfully reduce the transport of live animals for slaughter .
I hope that we can arrive at a comprehensible state of affairs in this regard at long last , and also that there is a scientific basis .
Commissioner , I wish to reiterate my call for third-country imports failing to comply with the rules to be treated and punished in exactly the same way as animal shipments within the EU .
Mr President , this debate has shown that there are , at the very least , huge doubts as to whether the current legislation is working , whether it is properly enforced across all Member States , and even whether it can be properly enforced .
Is it possible to enforce this legislation when there is international transport of animals ?
We will have to examine whether we have to go back to the idea of a strict eight-hour limit with no derogations and without exceptions - except perhaps for sea transport from islands but , otherwise , no derogations at all .
Colleagues may be interested to know that there is a new website campaigning precisely for this , with a petition being gathered .
It is : www.8hours.eu.
Many Members and others listening to this debate may be interested in visiting this website .
( PL ) Mr President , much has been said today on the subject of humane treatment , and to what extent we are a civilised society .
I agree that , in general , our debates and the points we are making are a step in the right direction .
This debate is very necessary .
I would just like to point out that , although the direction we have taken is quite justified and correct , we should not place any artificial or unnecessary burdens on farmers and businesses , something which I am certain we can avoid .
I simply appeal to the Commission and to us all , at the European Parliament , to ensure that we do not lead this good project into certain unnecessary difficulties .
Since , today , we are firmly stressing these entirely justified solutions , I would also appeal to you to avoid adopting a selective approach later on .
All of us , namely all the countries in the Community , in the European Union , need to treat them equally .
Today , for example , I am concerned about the ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Animal experiments represent an important stage in biological and medical research .
As part of this activity , however , particular attention must be focused on the care given to the animals used for scientific or other experimental purposes .
Indeed , the European Union must give an example on how to house and care for these animals .
European Commission Directive 86 / 609 is more than 20 years old and regulates these aspects only in a vague , open-minded fashion .
According to the statistics , approximately 235 million animals have been used in experiments throughout the whole of Europe during this period , with more than 12 million being killed every year in the laboratories of the European Union .
Providing care involves a whole set of material and other conditions which must be guaranteed for the animals being used .
Every aspect , from the trade in animals , transportation and surgery to killing and destroying the life of an animal , must be carried out in strict compliance with international and national provisions relating to the species , the category of animal and circumstances in order to prevent them , as far as possible , experiencing any physical and mental suffering .
This care requires ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) The new Member States , and I will specifically refer to my country , Romania , need , as has already been expressed here , support in reinforcing the powers of the authorities responsible for verifying the application of the Regulation we are debating today concerning animal transport .
From this point of view , it is still very difficult for the veterinary authorities in Romania to inspect animal transport without calling on the police , which is the only authority competent to stop means of transport in transit .
The second issue specific to Romania is the continuation , obviously on a much smaller scale , of transhumance , a practice which should be treated , in my view , as a separate issue in itself and preserved as far as possible .
The third and last issue I want to talk about is the concern we should have about the powers associated with the inspections and reports which we are discussing .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I am strongly of the opinion that the quality of the vehicle and skills of the driver are as important as , if not more important than , the length of journeys .
Two hours in a banger or clapped-out vehicle driven at excessive speed , especially when cornering , have far more serious welfare implications than eight or ten hours in a comfortable , properly equipped modern lorry , driven with care and consideration for the animal occupants .
The welfare of horses for slaughter continues to be a serious concern , and there is on-going evidence of some Member States ignoring - perhaps choosing to ignore - the legislation in this area .
Commissioner , have you received last June 's annual report from Ireland ?
Which countries have failed to file the report ?
Will these reports be available on the internet ?
And do you have details of the number of proceedings being brought in each Member State ?
Please give me answers to those four questions .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union places great value on the proper treatment of animals during the entire period of breeding , from birth to the slaughterhouse .
As we know , the quality of the meat depends on the way the animals are treated during breeding and during transport .
Animal protection standards during transport need to be established for specific animal species , on the basis of scientific evidence .
We therefore need to review this Regulation .
Due to trade needs , animals are transported over specified distances which are often too long , and which require a significant amount of time to cover .
It is therefore important to respect prescribed principles and standards .
That is why the question regarding how , and whether , EU legislation on the transport of animals is implemented , was entirely justified .
We should assess the situation in specific Member States .
We should remember that this all has an impact on costs and on productive competitiveness .
The citizens of the European Union are very sensitive ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I shall be very brief because I am the author of this question .
Could I just say to the Commissioner before he sums up , that of the three questions here , he has answered the first one inasmuch as he mentioned the Member States that have not yet produced a report .
What I really want to know is : has the Commission already carried out a preliminary analysis of the reports and what is happening ? Also , is the Commission going to bring forward a report on the Regulation in the future ?
That is what we need urgently .
We also need to have best practice because Slovenia , for instance , follows the vehicles through their country .
Many countries are doing good work and others are doing bad work , to put it bluntly .
Is the Commission going to do a proper analysis of all this , and when is it going to come forward with it ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Roman law defines an animal as an object .
I recall a military regulation which stipulated that a single wagon could carry 8 horses or 48 men .
This indicates that during the course of civilisation , it has begun to be understood that there is a greater affinity between human beings and animals than between human beings and objects .
In my opinion , the development of civilisation has led us to understand that animals are not objects , that they are living beings which have intrinsic rights and we have expressed this view in our laws .
I think it can be said that European regulations have now been formulated and that they undoubtedly represent progress for civilisation .
On the other hand , the debate has clearly shown that they are not applied consistently and that reasons could be found for further improvements in their structure .
The Commission agrees with these general statements and in its activities will also seek to improve the system for implementing checks and monitoring the situation .
We are thus now in the process of drawing up new regulations that will try to take into account the latest scientific findings from a broad range of areas because , as this debate has also shown clearly , this is a complex problem .
It is not a simple matter , it is not enough to say ' good , let us take one or two measures , and the matter will be resolved ' .
In my opinion , the debate also showed clearly that the idea of protecting livestock and animals generally constitutes an idea which is not based just on practical considerations relating to consumer protection .
We are inclined to take certain protective measures even though they have no real significance for consumers and bring no real benefit , simply because this is a very significant ethical matter .
I would like to try and answer some specific questions .
A whole series of questions have been asked and we are , of course , ready to respond to individual MEPs in more detail over the questions I do not touch on now .
One of the questions concerned the countries which have not submitted reports and I have mentioned these in my introductory speech .
As this is such an important matter , however , I will mention that these countries were Cyprus , Lithuania , Malta , Bulgaria and Luxembourg .
This question therefore did not apply to Ireland , which has fulfilled its obligations .
Other questions related to access to information .
I would like to mention that it is theoretically possible to publish the various national reports but the regulation allows Member States to refuse on the grounds of confidentiality .
However , no Member State has done so .
In the event of a request to publish a report , the Commission will then ask the Member States whether they wish to apply the confidentiality rule .
As I do not expect this to happen , the report can then be published in full and , in my opinion , this would stimulate further debate .
The annual reports are studied by the Commission 's own experts and , at the same time , they are supplemented with the findings obtained by Commission officials on the ground , thus creating a basis for further comments on compliance with the terms of the regulation and for further ideas on the development of the EU 's legal and organisational system in this area .
Concerning the question of a further draft directive for the amendment of the legal system , I have already stated that the Commission is working on such drafts and is attempting to apply the most up-to-date scientific knowledge .
A question was put forward as to how many infraction proceedings are currently under way .
Currently , there are two infraction proceedings under way and two or three claims have been made against Andalusia or rather Spain .
A total of six Member States were inspected in detail in 2008 .
These are some more specific facts relating to the questions that have been raised .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like once more to thank you for a debate which has been comprehensive and which has shown clearly that the positions of the Commission and of the Parliament are very close .
In my opinion , this is a promising sign for further progress in this exceptionally sensitive area .
The debate is closed .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Mr President , once again it seems the laws we pass here are not being implemented across all Member States .
The Animal Transport Regulation has been in force for 2 years now , yet there are still massive breaches of animal rights , particularly in the transportation and slaughter of horses .
I would ask the Commission what they are doing to ensure that horses are slaughtered in their countries of origin , without having to undergo long and distressing journeys to consuming countries .
A major concern for me and the people I represent is that these animals travel in inhumane , crowded , filthy conditions , with limited food and water .
This is unnecessary .
While we cannot stop the meat being consumed , if animals are to be slaughtered , they must be slaughtered in their countries of origin and transported to other countries as carcasses .
Furthermore , consumers must be told if the meat they are eating is not local but comes from hundreds of miles away .
Mr President , for the welfare of these horses , all the efforts we have made here in this Parliament for the rights of transported animals must not continue to be ignored .
Mediterranean diet ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Mr Parish , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Mediterranean diet , a diet which , incidentally , the President of this plenary sitting adheres to in a reasonably strict manner with more than acceptable results .
author . - Mr President , I am delighted that you follow the Mediterranean diet and see it is very successful for you !
What this morning has shown me here , as the Chair of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , is that we have a very varied range of subjects to talk about .
One minute we are talking about animal transport - a very important subject - and now we are talking about another very important subject : the Mediterranean diet .
One of the jobs that has come to me , as Chair of the Committee on Agriculture , and which we are particularly trying to get to grips with , is that , on the occasion of the Council of Ministers held in Brussels on 16 July 2007 , the Commission reiterated its full support for the nomination of the Mediterranean diet as Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO .
This nomination will be examined in 2009 - in fact , it now has been - by the responsible UNESCO committee .
Is the Commission planning to set up a specific and coordinated strategy to support this nomination , because we are moving on very fast now ?
I represent , as I said , the Committee on Agriculture here , but I probably represent all Members when we talk about diet , because one of the great things about Europe is its diversity and culture and part of that diversity and culture is , of course , our food .
The Mediterranean diet is a very good one .
What is the Mediterranean diet ?
I am sure we could talk a great deal about that this morning , but it is generally a diet rich in oily fish , olive oils , fruit and vegetables .
It is without doubt a very tasty diet , and you can see by the size of me that I am a very big fan of it .
It is also a healthy diet : it is a rich source of essential fatty acids and antioxidants , a combination that can help improve cholesterol levels and protect heart health .
Recent medical research has also suggested it may help cut the risk of conditions such as dementia .
When you go to Mediterranean countries , you can see that people enjoy it , and not only those who live there but also many of us who travel to Mediterranean countries , especially when we want some sunshine and also some very good food .
It is something that we need to take seriously in a world where everything seems to be uniform .
We see the new generations being bombarded by the fast-food chains - I will not name them all here today - which are spreading throughout the European Union .
We should remember that , yes , there is a role for a fast-food chain , but it would be a terrible thing if , in years to come , all we found when we travelled through Europe was fast food .
Travelling through parts of America - especially on the west coast - there seems to be nothing but fast-food chains , and that is the last thing we want here in the European Union .
As I said , we need to support Mediterranean food , and it is a very good idea for culture and diversity .
I think that in the future , we will have to look at other forms of diet across the European Union , because what I want to say to you quite clearly this morning is that while I am a great supporter of the Mediterranean diet , I do not come here as the Chair of the Committee on Agriculture just to support the Mediterranean diet , because there are other diets across Europe that are equally as good but have different qualities and different food .
So this is the start of many things to come and , as I said , I really want to know from the Commission how it intends to actively support this bid throughout this year , because we are looking forward to an award for the Mediterranean diet and we are also looking forward to having some very good Mediterranean food in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by emphasising the importance of a healthy diet for the prevention of disease .
As MEPs , you will know that the White Paper entitled ' A Strategy for Europe on nutrition , overweight and obesity-related health issues ' , which was adopted by the European Commission on 30 May 2007 , brings together all of the Community policies that can contribute towards improving eating habits and preventing obesity .
It mainly involves measures in the areas of public health , catering , transport , regional policy , sport , education and statistics , as well as agricultural policy .
One of the best examples is the Commission initiative comprising a pan-European programme to supply fruit and vegetables to schools .
The aim of the programme is to help make it easier for our children to get a healthy start in life .
It will be launched at the start of the 2009 / 2010 school year with an annual budget of EUR 90 million for purchasing and supplying fresh fruit and vegetables to schools .
As concerns the specific question raised by one MEP on the request to have the Mediterranean diet included on the world cultural heritage list of UNESCO , the Commissioner 's predecessor , Markos Kyprianou , raised this topic at a Council agriculture meeting in July 2007 .
The Commission welcomes this initiative , as it can help to encourage healthy eating habits throughout the EU .
The European Commission , of course , has no formal powers to support such a request within the framework of UNESCO , since it is not a member of UNESCO and it cannot therefore participate in the decision-making process .
I hope , nevertheless , that the participating states succeed in their application to UNESCO and that they will receive proper support for this from the other EU Member States .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the Commission for its repeated express support with regard to the nomination of the Mediterranean diet as Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO .
Having heard the Commissioner 's response , it is important to remember that the diet is a cultural asset and that the concept of diet is much broader than just the type of food one eats .
Of course , as Mr Parish said , the Mediterranean diet , as a type of food , has a very important role in a healthy lifestyle including in the prevention of illnesses related to incorrect diet or the lack of physical exercise .
However , the concept of the Mediterranean diet goes further than that , and in this respect my comments complement his .
It encompasses a specific way of life , a way of sharing food and enjoying it in company that is linked to a certain type of landscape and territory as well as to societies that , over the centuries , have developed culture , art , traditions and festivals around the concept of the Mediterranean diet .
Having clarified what the Mediterranean diet means to me and the majority of the people involved in this field and the reason behind the nomination , and with the confirmation of the Commission 's willingness to cooperate , let us consider , Commissioner , that , although the Commission is not a member of UNESCO - as we already know - nor does it participate in its decision-making processes - as we are also aware - the Commission can support the nomination with indirect actions which would doubtless have a positive effect on the perceptions of those involved in the voting procedure .
Among the options , I would suggest a formal statement of support by the European Commission for the nomination , as other international organisations such as the FAO , the World Health Organisation and the scientific and academic communities are making such statements of support .
With regard to the future management plan , of course we think that the Commission should become involved , by supporting or joining in with specific transnational actions that may be proposed .
This has been the year of intercultural dialogue and one of the states contributing to the nomination is a Mediterranean neighbour of ours , the Kingdom of Morocco .
All this is particularly important considering , as you said , the Commission 's interest in promoting healthy diets and lifestyles for Europeans .
The Commission could also help in seeking support and collaboration and could undertake diplomatic efforts , given the respect afforded the Commission , especially in Mediterranean countries outside the EU , as well as outside the Mediterranean area and the European Union .
Of course , Commissioner , the Commission could show itself to be available to organise or collaborate on potential activities that may come about in these months in some fields of work .

Mr President , many thanks to Mr Parish for his question , and thank you also to the Commissioner for his answer .
Europe has many things that are envied around the world : our fashion , our lifestyle , our social-security systems - and , increasingly , our diet .
We in Europe would do well to draw attention to the healthiest diet , namely the Mediterranean diet .
To clarify the definition : the Mediterranean diet has its origins in the dietary patterns typical of large parts of Greece , including the island of Crete , and of southern Italy - hence its name .
Its main component - as the Commissioner has already said - is olive oil .
This is yet another reason - and I address this not only to Commissioner Špidla but also to the whole of the Commission - to accord this original European product even greater protection .
The Mediterranean diet still consists of high-fibre bread , large amounts of fruit and vegetables - which is why we welcome the Commission 's School Fruit Scheme - fish , dairy products in moderation , and wine too .
It has been scientifically proven - this conclusion was reached in a September 2008 edition of the British Medical Journal - that the Mediterranean diet helps to reduce the incidence of cardiovascular diseases , of type 2 diabetes - the contemporary European epidemic - and of cancer , and to decrease the effects of Alzheimer 's disease and Parkinson 's disease .
This is illustrated by a visit to graveyards in Crete , the island my father hails from : seeing the age people live to there really brings this home to you .
Therefore , we must do our utmost to increase the number of devotees of the Mediterranean diet in Europe and beyond , and its inclusion on the World Heritage List is an important step in this regard .
I wish to thank the Commission for its efforts .
However , we must also realise that , if China and India adopt the American diet , as they are increasingly doing , the adverse effects will be threefold .
Firstly , the health of the world 's population will decline .
Secondly , there will be an increase in intensive livestock farming , with all its adverse effects on the environment , and the third effect concerns methane production , as most of the meat will be beef .
Cattle produce methane , and that is bad for the global climate .
This is why it is so important to take this particular step .
Thank you again , Mr Parish .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the decision by the European Union to support the recognition of the Mediterranean diet as Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO reminds us , above all , of the right to protection of the identities of peoples in their close relationship with their lands .
However , the institutional commitment displayed by Italy , Spain , Greece and Morocco cannot be limited solely to achieving this prestigious recognition .
I think that we must reconstruct the link , nowadays increasingly weak and fragile , between agricultural produce and food for everyday consumption ; that is to say , we must encourage consumers to be knowledgeable about the principles of a healthy diet and the seasonality of produce .
Produce must return to being natural and free from additives and chemical preservatives .
The international scientific community assures us that the consumption of such produce significantly reduces mortality rates .
I am thinking , for example , of extra-virgin olive oil , wine and fruit and , in particular , Sicilian blood oranges , unique in the world for their pigment that is rich in antioxidants .
In conclusion , I hope this objective can be shared with other Mediterranean countries and , as a specific strategy is required , only the Commission can take a lead role and act as interpreter in this .
Initiatives that seek to promote and safeguard the cultures of people , particularly in relation to food , are to be welcomed .
An example is the nomination of the Mediterranean diet as Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity , which is to be examined by the responsible committee within UNESCO in 2009 .
The realisation of such an objective may contribute to preserving , raising awareness of , and promoting a diet that predominates in the Mediterranean countries and which has been shown to be healthy by various nutritionists and other specialists .
This diet is based , as has been mentioned here already , on traditional products of the Mediterranean region , such as fruit and vegetables , olive oil , fish , cereals , nuts , aromatic herbs , dairy products , sheep and goat meat and wine .
However , the number of people who maintain these healthy dietary habits has been falling .
Thus , among other consequential and necessary political initiatives , we consider that effective measures must be taken to support traditional Mediterranean production , particularly within the framework of common agricultural policy and common fisheries policy .
Such measures should be directed at small-scale agriculture and family agriculture , as well as the fishermen of these regions , to guarantee their production .
The measures should give added value to traditional and artisanal products and encourage the development of local markets .
Essentially , measures are needed to counter the growing decline of agricultural activity and the reduction in the population who , with their knowledge , carry on and safeguard the production of these traditional quality products .
All of these issues and measures come within the remit of the European Commission .
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is not common for a single topic to combine , at the same time and in a positive way , the three very important issues of health , culture and economics .
The Mediterranean diet achieves this in full .
From the health perspective , it appears there are no remaining scientific doubts about the advantages to human health of a diet based on fresh and natural food .
As already mentioned here , this includes cereals , rice , legumes , nuts , fruit and vegetables , frequent consumption of fish , olive oil as the main dietary fat and moderate consumption of wine .
From a cultural point of view , the systems of production and the processing and consumption of these products are associated with ancestral techniques and traditions that go back further than Greco-Roman culture and that , in many respects , are still present in the practices , customs and techniques of the communities of the Mediterranean basin .
From the perspective of the economy , the activities connected , in particular , to the agriculture , fishing and rural tourism sectors , which are so important in preventing depopulation and maintaining the vitality of the rural and coastal zones , continue to have a very considerable socio-economic impact .
At the same time , and curiously in the case of agriculture , they represent the most competitive forms of production in the European Union , and have always benefited from the least financial support under the common agricultural policy .
For all of these reasons , the initiative of the Spanish authorities to have the Mediterranean diet recognised by UNESCO as Cultural Heritage of Humanity deserves to be warmly welcomed , and I think it is the duty and obligation of the European Union to do what it can to influence this decision , because it is not in the specific interests of one country or group of countries ; it is in the interests of the whole Union .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , obesity is becoming a serious and , I would say , major problem throughout Europe , particularly among the young .
According to the experts , if we want to look after the health of our children , the best way to achieve this is to return to the traditions of Mediterranean cuisine on a daily basis , the only life insurance that financial crises can never affect .
The approach of Alfonso Iaccarino , a well-known Italian chef and member of the expert committee on the recognition of the Mediterranean diet as Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity , is to return to natural , simple foods and to tradition , diversity and quality in cooking .
The Mediterranean diet is not just a lot of bread and pasta , it also involves movement , physical activity and lifestyle .
The Mediterranean diet , based on extra-virgin olive oil and good wine , has an excellent effect on health : olive oil reduces blood cholesterol levels and wine , in moderation , has an antioxidant effect .
The Mediterranean diet has helped Italians break the record for longevity in Europe and Italy leads the ranking for best body mass index , which is the relationship between height and weight .
In conclusion : the Italian Senate recently unanimously approved a paper in favour of the recognition of the Mediterranean diet as heritage of humanity .
I hope that the European Parliament is of the same opinion and that the Commission acts accordingly .
( The President cut off the speaker )

( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to express my thanks to the Chairman of Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr Parish , for having sponsored this question after the valuable expert hearing held by the Committee .
It is undeniable that Mediterranean food is part of the historical and cultural heritage of our continent .
The healthy basis of the diet is also undeniable .
The Commission 's White Paper on obesity identified the Mediterranean diet as an excellent natural medicine .
The health benefits have been scientifically demonstrated and have an excellent reputation abroad , in particular , in the United States .
This has meant that the concept has been broadened to the point of distorting its original nature .
Recognition by UNESCO would encourage a definition to protect this particular diet .
I would say to Mr Parish that , in relation to specific diets in European gastronomic culture , we are currently talking about Mediterranean food , but this is certainly not the only specific diet in the very rich European gastronomy .
Commissioner , you have maintained your predecessor 's commitment to recognising the importance of this initiative , and I thank you for that .
You have stressed that you do not have decision-making powers with respect to the UNESCO procedure .
However , I think that you could issue a statement and undertake diplomatic efforts ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are well aware of the concept that the Mediterranean diet , as confirmed by many studies , can help in the battle against obesity and cardiovascular disease and , in general , is very positive for human health in many different ways .
However , the point here is not to try to impose the Mediterranean diet throughout the EU or attempt to favour it over other diets that are better adapted to non-Mediterranean climates and regions .
We do , however , have the task of protecting it and defining its content and characteristics in order to defend it from external imitation and contamination that could damage its image and value .
Thus , the diet should be valued in the same way as all the other expressions of European culture that deserve to be protected and promoted globally .
Attempts have been made around the world to imitate the model and , for this reason , it is important to define the particular nature of the diet and protect it to avoid a wholly European heritage being lost in the sea of globalisation .
( PL ) The Mediterranean diet also deserves to be protected and promoted for other reasons .
Today , in a world that is dominated by supermarket food and fast food , Mediterranean cuisine is a commendable exception , as it is popular and healthy .
It was not invented by nutritionists , but is the product of many centuries of tradition , passed down through generations .
Over half of the population of the European Union are overweight .
As many as 15 % are obese .
I am also affected by this problem .
These statistics are alarming .
We should take action to combat this negative trend .
One of the ways of addressing the problem is through promoting healthy eating habits , and the Mediterranean diet certainly falls into this category .
Scientific research has shown that it contributes to lowering the risk of cardio-vascular disease , especially ischaemic heart disease and various cancers , and also has a positive impact on the average lifespan .
Mr President , diet is known to be an important contributor to good health .
There is now indisputable scientific evidence that the Mediterranean diet - based on the traditional dietary intake of citizens of the southern parts of Europe , such as Crete and Cyprus - leads to a longer and healthier life , whereas the American-influenced junk food diet - such as industrially processed hamburgers , chips and sweets - leaders to a shorter life and one more affected by disease .
Good diet is especially important in children .
So , will the Commission do more - far more - in order to make sure that Member States effectively promote the Mediterranean diet in schools and even ban the use of diets proven to cause damage to children 's health in such institutions ?
By the way , Mr Commissioner , I did not quite understand why the EU is not a member of UNESCO ?
Should it not be ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , it is better to eat a healthy diet and avoid illness , than to undergo even the most effective modern medical treatment .
Medical treatment , including complicated surgery required by patients with excessively high cholesterol levels , is also more expensive than simple , traditional foods .
This approach is sensible , as it is based on good , tried and tested traditions .
The Mediterranean diet brings us health and the joy of living , and also prevents excessive weight gain .
I welcome the fact that UNESCO has placed the Mediterranean diet on its world heritage list .
( FR ) Mr President , I am pleased that it is a Briton , Mr Parish , who has tabled this text .
It just goes to show you that two thousand years ago , those Roman soldiers did the right thing in going to Great Britain with their amphora of olive oil and wine .
Well then , two consequences inevitably flow from this .
That it is rather odd from a symbolic point of view to establish the Food Authority in Helsinki , and that it is unreasonable for the European Commission not to revisit the following issues : firstly , to re-establish aid for almond trees , then to stop the attacks on olive trees , particularly in Andalusia and throughout Europe ; to stop the attacks on blue fin tuna fishermen in the Mediterranean and the attacks on the European vineyards where vines are being torn up .
I , myself , would like to suggest to the Commissioner and Mr Barroso that they organise a huge banquet in Portugal and serve lamb 's milk cheese and Samos wine .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Ladies and gentlemen , based on the strategy set out in the White Paper , the Commission supports all proposals and all processes which encourage healthy eating habits .
The Commission actively backs these initiatives .
However , it cannot support just a narrowly defined set of eating habits as there are significant differences between individual Member States and between individual regions , as well as differences between , for example , individual Mediterranean countries .
Of course , this does not , in any way , invalidate what I have said in my introduction about the Commission supporting the proposal to recognise the Mediterranean diet as part of Cultural Heritage of Humanity .
We are making progress in this direction and it is of course clear that even though we are not a member of UNESCO , there are surely ways of supporting this proposal .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to respond to one speech in particular with which I profoundly disagree .
I see no reason why we should reconsider the location of the agency in Finland .
I have no doubt that people grouped around the agency there are fully able to defend and fulfil the mandate given to the agency .
In my opinion , the location was decided correctly and reasonably .
I do not know if there are great differences between Member States or groups , but what is certain is that , in the debate we have had here , no difference could be noted ; from Germany to Poland , from the United Kingdom to Portugal , Spain or Cyprus , I believe there has been considerable unanimity in support for the initiative .
Thank you very much everyone .
We will suspend the session for a few minutes .
We have managed to finish the debate on time and , above all , in the calm atmosphere required so that we can all listen to each other .
This is a good start to the year in our plenary sittings .
The sitting will resume at 12 noon for the votes .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I unfortunately have to inform you that we have just learned that the headquarters of the United Nations agency responsible for assisting refugees in Gaza has just been hit by shells fired from Israeli tanks .
Three people have been injured and the UN has decided to shut down all its operations .
Bearing in mind the vote that is going to take place shortly , I think it important that each of you be aware of this fact .
( Applause )
Many thanks for that information , Mr Wurtz .
If it is true , it makes the vote that we are about to hold all the more pressing .
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
Restoring NTDTV Television broadcasts to China via Eutelsat ( written declaration )
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you on behalf of those who supported this initiative .
I would like to thank the more than 440 members who added their signatures .
This Parliament requests Eutelsat to restore NTDTV broadcasts in China : the freedom to obtain information and knowledge is a basic human right .
This Parliament is demonstrating , as it has done over the Sakharov Prize , Hu Jia and the invitation to the Dalai Lama , that when we criticise China or the EU over human rights , we do this to promote the freedom of the Chinese people .
1 .
Budgetary control of EU funds in Afghanistan (
2 .
Equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion , and working conditions (
3 .
Situation in the Middle East / Gaza Strip ( vote )
- Before the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , I am obliged to you for giving me the floor .
With your permission and that of my fellow Members , I should like to make two comments , the first on the resolution being put to the vote , and the second a personal statement regarding a Member of this House .
On the subject of the resolution , my group discussed this again yesterday evening .
The discussion was very in-depth and very passionate , but also very thoughtful .
I believe that , this morning , as we prepare to vote , we are all shaken by what Mr Wurtz has just told us .
When armed hostilities escalate such that international institutions are no longer secure , the situation is extremely serious .
An appeal must be made to Israel in particular , in this case , to respect the bodies of the international community , as failure to do so puts the humanitarian infrastructure at risk , which is certainly not consistent with international law .
We have decided to support this resolution , however , as - following yesterday 's lengthy discussion - we believe that it is right and vital to adopt it now , and that it is necessary for us , for the European Parliament as an institution , to send out such signals .
One thing is quite certain , however , and that is that when violence escalates such that it does not even spare schools and kindergartens , it is a matter not for regret , but for condemnation in the strongest terms . Although this is not contained in the resolution ,
( Loud applause )
we do want to emphasise it here , as we believe that this reflects the feelings of many of our fellow Members , including those from other groups .
Allow me to say a few words today about a colleague who , throughout his political career , has made a particular contribution to peace in the world and in the European Union .
This is the last plenary sitting my colleague Mr Rocard will be attending .
For us in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , but I believe for us all ...
( Standing ovation )
Many thanks , Mr Schulz .
Since I was unable to take part in yesterday 's reception owing to the visit by the President of the Council , Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolánek , I wish to say the following to Mr Rocard .
Mr Rocard , I should like to express my friendship and my deep respect for you , and to wish you happiness and success in all your future plans .
I hope that we shall continue to see each other frequently , and I wish to thank you for the great contribution you have made to European integration .
You have my sincere thanks , Mr Rocard !
( Loud applause )
- Before the vote - concerns paragraph 3 :
( DE ) Mr President , in agreement with my group and also the other groups , I wish to propose the following amendment :
To replace ' a special responsibility ' with ' an important role ' , so that it would read : ' which implies an important role for Egypt ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish to inform you that , in my capacity as President of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly ( EMPA ) , I shall now attempt to bring about a similar resolution in the EMPA Bureau , as this House has just decided .
( Applause )
4 .
Situation in the Horn of Africa ( vote )
- Before the vote :
( PT ) I would like to propose a new paragraph before paragraph 1 that states as follows :
' Notes that the current situation in the countries of the Horn of Africa is not in conformity with the essential elements of cooperation stated in Article 9 of the Cotonou Agreement ; ' .
This is a sentence that was already in the report that our three colleagues , who visited the region , recently gave to us .
5 .
EU strategy towards Belarus ( vote )
Before the vote - concerns paragraph 9 :
We propose to delete the last sentence of paragraph 9 , which reads : ' calls on the Belarusian authorities to end their practice of issuing exit visas to their citizens , in particular , children and students ' .
We want to delete this because the authorities have already abolished this system of exit visas , so it is obsolete .
6 .
Commemorating 11 July as a day of remembrance for the victims of the massacre in Srebrenica ( vote )
Before the vote - concerns paragraph 3 :
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , everyone has agreed to an addition to paragraph 3 .
We should like to add the following phrase to this paragraph , which concerns the work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague :
' reiterates in that regard that increased attention needs to be paid to war crime trials at domestic level ; ' .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , the field of equal pay and gender equality has been perhaps the supreme example in the European Union of judicial activism , of the Treaty saying one thing and then the European Court interpreting that in an expansive and creative way .
The Treaty of Rome has one sentence on the subject which you would have thought is very easily understood : ' Men and women shall be given equal pay for equal work ' .
But in a series of contentious judgments - Defrenne v. Sabena , Barber v. Guardian Royal Exchange , and others - the definition has been progressively widened , first so as to include holiday entitlements and pensions and so on , and then so as to include work of equivalent value .
It is not at all clear how an employer is supposed to assess work of equivalent value , whether he is required , for example , to factor in the availability of suitably qualified applicants .
My point is not really to do with gender equality , it is to do with the fairness of Member States thinking that they have signed one Treaty , and then finding that it is interpreted in the courts by judges who give it a meaning that it could not possibly have been intended to have .
Before we open the door to massive new extensions through the Treaty of Lisbon , we should put it to a referendum .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
( NL ) Mr President , I cannot identify with Mrs Riera Madurell 's report , and not because I am opposed to the principle of gender equality .
Quite the contrary , of course , but the problem with this report , and all similar reports , in fact , in this politically correct House , is its patronising tone .
How could one possibly applaud the reversal of the burden of proof , for example , even though it is a key principle of the rule of law that people should be proven guilty instead of innocent ?
Why are businesses saddled with the annual obligation to submit a business plan for gender equality ?
This is very patronising , burdening businesses , as it does , with bureaucratic nonsense simply to hammer home a number of principles that are universally accepted but are not always easy to implement in practice .
How can we force a business to recruit equal numbers of men and women instead of simply looking at who is most suited for the job ?
( LT ) I voted for the resolution on the situation in the Gaza Strip , as many of the things which are important to the residents of Lithuania who delegated me to this Parliament are included in this resolution .
Most importantly , an immediate and permanent cease-fire .
The statistics broadcasted yesterday by the world 's news agencies are appalling - more than 1 000 dead , hundreds of injured , maimed , crying children .
This cannot continue .
As a member of the European Parliament 's Subcommittee on Human Rights , human rights violations and the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip are particularly important to me .
There should be no obstacles to humanitarian aid .
Aid must be given to those who have been allocated it and who need it most - civilians .
I welcome this European Parliament resolution .
It was greatly needed .
The European Parliament is never silent and must not be silent when people are dying .
Mr President , it seems rather futile to welcome this motion for a resolution on Gaza which , of course , I do , because thus far , words have not been heard above the noise and din of rocket fire , bullets and the cries of men , women and children who have been wounded and who have died in the region .
But it may be that today , there will be further movements towards a cease-fire in the region , which would be most welcome .
In that respect , we support the efforts of Egypt to broker a cease-fire .
While Egypt and the Arab leaders may bring influence to bear on Hamas , when it comes to Israel , I think it is the US which carries that influence , although I hope that this motion for a resolution , which was resoundingly supported in Parliament today , will add further to the pressure for immediate and effective humanitarian aid , for a cease-fire and for a lasting peace in the region .
Mr President , firstly I was delighted to see that no action was taken against Members who decided to demonstrate during this vote with their ' Stop the war ' placards and their Palestinian flags .
I hope we have now set the precedent that , unlike those who demonstrated for a referendum , we accept the right to make a peaceful point in a suitable manner as part of the democratic process .
Like everybody else in this Chamber , I am , of course , horrified by what has been happening in the Middle East .
The losers are not one side or the other but people of good will throughout the region .
There are Gazan families peaceably trying to bring up their children , who are horrified at the hell unleashed on them by the rocket launches .
There are Israelis who understand that one day an independent Palestine will be their neighbour and that actions of this kind are unlikely to make it a benign neighbour .
In the current circumstances , however , nobody wants to listen to such voices .
I would just say that I am puzzled by the resolution 's insistence on proportionality .
I am not sure what proportionality means .
Would critics of the Israeli Government be happier if it had rained an equivalent number of rockets randomly on Gazan villages ?
I see your gavel raised so I will simply say that I hope that the cease-fire is quickly negotiated and that we can get back to talking and to finding a peaceful resolution .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to thank the President-in Office of the Council , Czech Minister for Foreign Affairs , Karel Schwarzenberg , and the External Relations and European Neighbourhood Policy Commissioner , Benita Ferrero-Waldner , for participating in our debate yesterday , and also my fellow Members for today 's vote , which was almost unanimous .
The EU is indeed much more united than people say .
If we remain so , we can achieve something in the Middle East , and so we must continue in this direction .
The components are clear : ' yes ' to the right of Israel to exist , ' no ' to war and bloodshed , ' no ' to Hamas ' rocket fire , ' no ' to Hamas ' terrorism and , crucially , ' yes ' to negotiations on the bones of contention , including the problem of the settlers , as this , alongside the unacceptable terrorism on the part of Hamas , is at the heart of the matter .
The fundamental components are on the table , therefore , and so the task of the EU is to drive things forward with energy and determination instead of degenerating into a disunited talking shop , which - unfortunately - we have been in recent years in the matter of Middle East policy .
( FI ) Mr President , I believe that all of us in the European Union and the European Parliament want peace for that region - peace and a cease-fire .
Moreover , for a cease-fire to come about , we need to make a tremendous effort to ensure that the terrorist organisation , Hamas , is completely disarmed .
In my opinion , more could have been made in this motion for a resolution of the nature of Hamas as a terrorist organisation , but I know that when a compromise like this is being put together between the various parties , it can be difficult to bring off .
In any case , we as Europeans need to remain impartial and objective and , above all , we must always uphold the principles of democracy , human rights and freedom of speech and oppose terror in all circumstances .
That is most important of all .
We must also remember that all of this began with a terror attack , and now we have to root out the terror element .
Mr President , I am pleased that our Parliament was able to adopt this resolution by such an impressive vote , with no votes against .
We , and I personally , supported this resolution because the European Parliament has to have a clear position and to find common ground , even if the resolution adopted today does not correspond fully to the position of the Socialist Group .
Let me reiterate that the Socialist Group expresses its deepest outrage at the violence in the Gaza Strip , the consequences of the disproportionate use of force by the Israeli Army and the military escalation that is causing many hundreds of victims - most of them civilians , including many children - and that we strongly regret that civilian and UN targets have been hit .
We stress again that any upgrading of political relations between the EU and Israel must be strongly conditioned on respect for international humanitarian law , on real commitment to a comprehensive peace settlement , on an end to the humanitarian crisis in Gaza and the Occupied Palestinian Territory and on respect for full implementation of the EC-PLO Interim Association Agreement .
( FR ) Mr President , I should quite simply like to make a clarification , since in an oral explanation of vote , one of my fellow Members said several things and claimed that the resolution contains things which it does not contain .
There is no obligation on employers to produce plans .
We have removed all these obligations , all these requests from the report as it had been adopted by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
We tabled a common resolution and I hope that my fellow Member is not opposed to the highlighting of the need to encourage social dialogue between social partners , in order for the principle of equality to be applied , or to Member States being invited to encourage employers to regularly provide their employees and their representatives with information relating to compliance with the principle of equality .
Everything that was criticised therefore no longer appears in the resolution adopted and I wanted to make this clear .
( LT ) I voted for our resolution on the European Union 's strategy towards Belarus .
I believe that the document reflects perfectly the changes which have taken place in this country over the past six months which need to be assessed .
Of course , the first cuckoo does not necessarily indicate the arrival of spring , but Belarus is a great and important state , a neighbour of the European Union , and undoubtedly we are delighted by any positive changes .
The release of political prisoners , the repeal of certain restrictions on press freedom and dialogue with the European Union on energy , environmental and other matters are positive changes .
Today I would like to express my conviction that the time has come for a European Parliament delegation to visit Belarus , and this resolution speaks clearly on this important matter .
I hope that the time is nearing when Belarus will be able to take advantage of the positive opportunities offered by the European Neighbourhood Policy .
Only let us not stop half-way : this applies both to Belarus and the European Union .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against the resolution even though it contained balanced and acceptable elements .
I think there are no longer sufficient reasons to retain the system of sanctions in dealings with Belarus .
In terms of economic , political and religious freedom , it is a country that has almost entirely complied with the tenets of liberty in which we believe .
I think it is necessary , instead , to initiate genuine , proper relations with Belarus in order to integrate this country into Europe , above all , in an era in which we find ourselves needing to open relations with Russia .
Belarus could be an excellent bridge between Europe and Russia and I think that , rather than threatening sanctions , a genuine , profitable relationship should be initiated with this country .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . ( LT ) I voted for the report on financial control of EU budget funds allocated to Afghanistan and European Parliament resolutions on this matter prepared by my colleague , Véronique Mathieu .
It is an exhaustive , well prepared document , in which no less than three European Parliament Committees gave their opinions , including the Committee on Budgets , whose opinion I prepared .
Once again , I would like to draw attention to the most important things upon which the results of our aid to Afghanistan depend .
These include , above all , the coordination of financial support , not just between EU Member States and the European Commission , but among the Member States themselves , as well as coordination with other donors .
Secondly , I would like to stress the importance of priorities .
I am convinced that the development of infrastructure , support for alternative sources of livelihood , which would help reduce poverty and replace opium production with other alternative activities , and finally health and educational bodies , should be on the EU 's list of priorities .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues are fully supportive of EU and international efforts to promote peace , democracy and prosperity for the people of Afghanistan .
The future stability of Afghanistan is of crucial concern to the security of EU Member States and wider afield .
We support funding for development and the promotion of good governance in Afghanistan , but equally believe this funding must be effectively monitored .
Transparency in the use of taxpayers ' money is of great concern and any evidence of misappropriation or misuse must be dealt with properly .
We wish to make clear that our support for this report in no way implies recognition of the Treaty of Lisbon , which is mentioned in Recital 11 of the report .
We oppose the Treaty of Lisbon in principle .
I voted in favour of the report presented by Véronique Mathieu on the budgetary control of EU funds in Afghanistan .
It is a well-considered report of great significance because the success of the financial , political , civil and military efforts to stabilise Afghanistan is especially important to the EU and the whole democratic world .
Romania is contributing to these international efforts in Afghanistan with 721 soldiers as part of the ISAF mission ( under the auspices of NATO ) and 57 soldiers involved in the Enduring Freedom operation ( coalition type mission ) .
During these missions , several Romanian soldiers have been killed or injured , causing grief to their families and Romanian society .
We do not want their sacrifice to be in vain .
What we want is for Romania 's financial , military and human contribution to the European and international effort to result in long-term stability in Afghanistan and the elimination of terrorist hot spots .
I voted in favour of the report as the Commission needs to increase the resources allocated to the fight against drug trafficking .
The aid granted by the EU during the 2004-2007 period is made up of direct and indirect aid .
Between 2002 and 2007 , direct Community aid accounted for 70 % ( EUR 970 million ) of the total Community aid , while indirect Community aid , managed by international organisations , accounted for 30 % of Community aid ( EUR 422 million ) .

However , the lack of coordination at international level between the donor countries needs to be recognised .
This situation also exists between different European Union Member States and the Commission at a time when they could play a unifying role .
As a direct consequence of this , the cost / efficiency ratio is much lower than it should be and there is the conviction that the Afghan population could have benefited to a much greater extent from the international and Community funds allocated to this country .
in writing . - ( NL ) The EU is one of the largest donors of development and humanitarian aid to Afghanistan .
Between 2002 and 2007 , the European Commission assigned a total of EUR 1 400 000 000 in aid to that country .
This is an excellent report , because it is based on correct propositions and makes a number of sound recommendations .
For example , controls of EU funds must be extended and more drastic efforts must be made to address the rampant corruption in that country .
( In fact , does this not apply to all developing countries that receive our aid ? )
The European Parliament also argues in favour of more development support and an extension of the Commission 's delegation in Kabul to carry out the necessary verifications , audits and inspections .
As Afghanistan will make or break the fight against international terrorism , additional budgetary efforts are more than welcome .
The content of the report on budgetary control of EU funds in Afghanistan once again shows that interventionism by the West in these regions has changed nothing .
Our presence only prolongs the war and the resulting suffering , rather than eliminating them .
To talk of democracy and the equality of the sexes in a country where customs sometimes border on barbarism , is typical of the blissful ignorance of ultra-Europeans who still prefer to get involved in international issues rather than dealing with Europe 's problems .
The ethnic groups in Afghanistan , where wars have raged for centuries , will never accept any foreign occupation , no matter how ' humanitarian ' .
It only strengthens the positions of the Taliban and other extremist factions , rather than enabling a strong and capable legitimate power to emerge and stabilise the country .
Europeans must withdraw as quickly as possible from the Afghan wasps ' nest .
Mr President , I am voting in favour of adopting the report on the Implementation of Community Funds in Afghanistan .
Mrs Mathieu is quite right to point out that Afghanistan 's social indicators are dramatically low .
There is continuing conflict or war , as well as tribal and international clashes , drug trading and corruption .
As a result , Afghanistan needs international aid .
I would like to express my support for aid to Afghanistan .
I welcome the long-term commitment to action aimed at providing support to this country and I think that the priorities described in the Commission 's Country Strategy Paper 2007-2013 satisfy the requirements of Afghan society .
The European Union is one of the main donors in Afghanistan , contributing to stabilising and improving security in the area , with tangible effects such as the rise in life expectancy .
The EU needs to continue the support being given to Afghanistan .
However , it cannot ignore the wasteful expenditure of the money allocated from the Community budget , which ultimately comes out of the taxpayer 's pocket .
This is why I consider that this report is welcome as an instrument for streamlining the allocation of EU assistance in Afghanistan and for maximising the funds ' financial impact .
In this sense , coordinating and controlling the development assistance funds granted to Afghanistan are three elements which are instrumental in helping to achieve the purposes this money is intended for .
The report being proposed summarises a number of problems involved with granting EU funds to Afghanistan and suggests a number of viable recommendations .
I would like to express my support for this report and I hope that it will be followed by the implementation of a series of specific measures aimed at increasing the impact from the use of EU funds and ensuring tighter control on spending them .
While also bearing in mind the current economic situation in most of our countries , I believe that it is the EP 's duty , as an entity with budgetary functions in the European Union , to guarantee maximum efficiency in using public money .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Mathieu on budgetary control of EU funds in Afghanistan .
The report presents very clear conclusions on the results achieved by Community aid from the time of signing of the agreement until the present : although they could have been more far-reaching , these results have been positive and noteworthy .
I refer , in particular , to the reduction in the rate of infant mortality , the improvement in access to basic healthcare and the significant increase in the number of children attending school .
I also join the rapporteur in considering that there should be increased efforts to improve coordination between Community and international donors in order to avoid duplication and possible sources of corruption in the country .
Furthermore , more than ever , it is essential that , where financial assistance is offered to a country severely affected by social and political problems , the system of control is effective ; otherwise , the risk is that , rather than improving the situation , it will be made worse .
For this reason , I hope that the system of control , in particular ex-ante , is improved and more fully enforced than it has been up to now .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues are fully supportive of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in all aspects of life , including access to employment , vocational training and promotion , and working conditions .
However , we believe these matters are primarily ones for Member States to pursue and not for the European Union .
We have therefore decided to abstain on this report .
in writing . - UKIP fully supports equality for men and women .
However , the UK already has equality legislation and can change and improve it as and when required to by our Parliament and people .
Further legislation and bureaucracy imposed by the EU is therefore unnecessary .
Furthermore , the EU is undemocratic and not a safe guardian of anyone 's rights , including those of women .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against this politically correct report - the umpteenth one - that is being put to us in this Parliament for approval .
First of all , I should like to point out that as gender equality in the EU has been in place for many years , this report is totally unnecessary .
Moreover , I object to the reversal of the burden of proof , applauded in this report ( paragraph 20 ) , which does not befit any country under the rule of law , while total omnipotence is granted to organisations that are asked to carry out this directive ( paragraph 19 ) .
The fact that Member States will be obliged to require businesses to develop annual business plans for gender equality and to guarantee a balanced gender distribution on corporate boards of management is diametrically opposed to the freedom of running a business .
For businesses facing difficulties caused by the international financial crisis , the additional paperwork that this requirement entails could well prove devastating .
In a free market of healthy businesses , quality , be this male or female , will always prevail , as we have seen many times before .
During this current economic crisis , women are among those most affected by unemployment or salary cuts .
At European level , we need Member States to implement the provisions of Directive 2002 / 73 / EC and the European Commission to monitor these actions and update the European Parliament on a regular basis .
As Mrs Madurell 's report also indicates , one of the biggest problems in combating gender discrimination on the labour market is also the lack of information about the rights which the victims of discrimination have .
The responsibility for this is shared equally among the Member States , European institutions , such as the European Institute for Gender Equality , and employers .
Civil society organisations also have an important role to play in this .
They can use information campaigns and monitoring reports to make up for the lack of activity at national or European level .
The Commission is obliged to monitor that Member States take measures aimed at establishing a work-life balance , reducing the pay gap between women and men , as well as providing women with access to management posts .
In Romania , it was the regulations adopted at European level which helped us to put in place an institutional system guaranteeing that ' rights for men also mean rights for women ' .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Riera Madurell report on transposition and application of Directive 2002 / 73 / EC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion , and working conditions , as I consider it important to apply the principle of equal treatment for men and women in the matters covered by this directive .
Among the various faults in the transposition of the directive , I would emphasise the fact that the legislation of various Member States does not make specific reference to gender discrimination .
As the rapporteur mentions , the wage gap remains high , with women earning wages that , on average , are 15 % lower than men 's .
This gap narrowed by just 1 % between 2000 and 2006 .
In the context of the Lisbon Strategy , it is essential that this status quo should change , and therefore I agree with the rapporteur on the importance of recommending that the European Commission actively monitor the transposition of the Directive and the compliance of the national legislations with it .
I voted in favour of Mrs Madurell 's report on equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion .
Equal treatment , irrespective of gender , race , religion , etc. is a fundamental human right .
Of course , we cannot forget the natural biological differences which exist between men and women .
In my opinion , the automatic application of a 50 / 50 gender balance policy across the board is not really a sign that we are concerned about gender equality .
In the case of difficult physical jobs such as mining , work in a steelworks , etc . , this approach merely leads to ridiculous situations , just as it does in the case of nurses or teachers .
Equally , we cannot force girls to take up technical studies . In order to maintain a fifty-fifty balance .
Fundamental issues include access to education at all levels , filling managerial roles ( including those in political institutions ) , implementing the principle of ' equal pay for equal work ' , adequate access to social security and benefits , as well as medical treatment ( taking into account maternity leave ) .
Trade unions should play an important role in this field .
It is an important issue at local , regional and national level , as well as at the level of the European Union institutions .
I would like to take this opportunity to draw your attention to court rulings which discriminate against men by nearly always automatically granting women custody of the children in divorce cases .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Riera Madurell on the transposition of the Directive on equal treatment .
In my opinion , it is high time that women were treated as equal to men in all , not just some , respects .
It cannot be said - not by a long chalk - that equal opportunities exist in access to careers or day-to-day working life .
As regards the income gap between the sexes , in some Member States , this is closing extremely hesitantly , whereas in others it is even widening again .
The implementation of this directive is particularly important to me because of these obvious injustices and particularly because , as a family person , I value and respect women greatly .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality is concerned about enforcement of the Directive on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion , and working conditions
In the absence of a report from the European Commission , our committee conducted its own survey amongst national parliaments and equality organisations .
Letters of formal notice have been sent to 22 Member States .
Some definitions have been incorrectly transposed in 15 Member States .
As of 5 October 2008 , nine Member States had yet to notify the Commission of measures taken to transpose the directive .
Our own-initiative report is an alarm bell and a warning to Member States .
Unfortunately , exaggerated declarations and claims were passed in committee .
I had therefore tabled an alternative resolution .
We have managed to agree on a common resolution , which I voted for , while awaiting the implementation report , which we will receive in the first half of 2009 .
This will enable a thorough analysis to be conducted , so that the consequent actions necessary to ensure compliance with the Treaty and legislation in the area of equal treatment and opportunities for men and women can be determined .
in writing . - ( SV ) Discrimination and harassment have no place in a liberal society .
This report reminds us of the horrifying fact that many Member States still have a long way to go to make men and women equal in life and work .
However , the responsibility for fighting injustices on the labour market , for example , does not rest with the EU institutions but is , and should remain , a matter for responsible citizens and their political and union representatives in the Member States .
I am absolutely opposed to those wordings that seek to use these injustices as arguments for increasing supranationalism at the expense of the self-determination of the Member States .
Increasing the distance between those who govern and those who are governed is not the way to a liberal society founded on the principle of the equality of all people .
The primary aim of the report is , however , to illustrate how discrimination and harassment can still destroy people 's chances in life and prospects of empowerment .
This is so important that I have chosen , despite everything , to vote in favour of the alternative proposal for a resolution .
I voted in favour of the report on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion , and working conditions .
Although gender equality is a fundamental right in the European Union , official statistics show , however , that differences still exist in terms of employment rate , especially in those countries which have recently joined the European Union .
Bearing in mind that equal treatment for women and men is still a structural problem , the Lisbon European Council of March 2000 assigned the European Union the target of raising the employment rate of women to over 60 % by 2010 , which needs to be monitored closely in the new Member States .
I believe that it is vital for us to implement the European directive to ensure that discrimination against women on the labour market is eliminated , at a time when additional efforts are required to change the attitude towards this issue , especially in rural areas .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that the request the report is making to the Commission to closely monitor the transposition of Directive 2002 / 73 / EC and compliance with the legislation adopted after the implementation process is legitimate and necessary .
In adopting this report , the European Parliament has provided Member States with a useful instrument for consolidating Member States ' national legislation concerning equal treatment for men and women on the labour market .
However , based on the statistics supplied , there is still a 28.4 % difference in employment rates between men and women , highlighting that gender inequality on the labour market is still a problem that needs to be dealt with .
This is why I believe that Member States must make every effort necessary to implement the strategies intended to promote gender equality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I declare my vote in favour of the report by Mrs Riera Madurell on equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion , and working conditions .
I agree with my fellow Member in considering that the principle of equality in the employment market is still far from being enforced in practice , despite the efforts of the European Union to increase the percentage of women at work under the Lisbon objectives .
I concur with the rapporteur 's opinions with regard to the transposition of Directive 2002 / 73 / EC by Member States and on the need for all of them to implement the instruments that this Directive provides in order to reinforce national legislation on the equal treatment of men and women in the employment market : gender equality in employment is not only a worthy principle in ethical terms but is , and will be , the foundation for the sustainable , durable , economic development of the European Union as a whole .
in writing . - Equality between men and women is a fundamental principle of the European Union .
There is still much to be done to achieve this principle and I hope that we will make this a political priority in all areas of our work in the European Parliament .
It should not be just the Committee on Women 's Rights which raises these issues .
In spite of the fact that gender equality is a fundamental right , gender inequality on the labour market , in terms of salaries , employment rates and quality of employment , remains a serious structural problem .
Unfortunately , we see that a higher level of education does not always lead to smaller differences between the salaries of male and female workers .
Mrs Madurell 's report reveals the Member States ' shortcomings in terms of the transposition and implementation of Directive 2002 / 73 / EC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion , and working conditions .
Above all , the rapporteur stresses that many Member States have not correctly transposed the definition of discrimination into their legal systems .
In many countries , the only binding definition is a general one , which does not mention gender discrimination .
In other countries , no reference is made to sexual harassment , or it is only included in a general definition of harassment ( in Poland , sexual harassment is defined in Section 6 , Article 183a of the Labour Code ) , which makes it much more difficult for injured parties to pursue their rights .
Grassroots initiatives , which aim to raise awareness in society , as well as those which aim to help victims of discrimination , are extremely important in the fight against discrimination .
In order to distinguish the position of the Partito Radicale from those who express reasons opposed to ours in this Chamber , we drew lots for those of us who would abstain and those who , instead , would not participate in the vote .
The solution that the EU is promoting for a long-term , structural peace in the Near East , reiterated today here in Strasbourg by President Pöttering , is for two sovereign , independent states .
The founders of Europe had an opposite belief : in order to achieve peace , absolute national sovereignty has to be renounced .
This is what the Ventotene Manifesto said .
Today , we must listen to the vast majority of Israeli citizens who seek the accession of Israel to the EU and are disregarded by the Israeli , and also European , ruling classes .
The ' inclusive ' Europe of the post-war period , open to accessions and a point of reference for neighbouring states , has been a factor for peace , even if in an inadequate manner .
The ' exclusive ' Europe of nation states , which aspires to having European ' borders ' and ' Judaeo-Christian roots ' , is a Europe that leads to wars , in the Near East as well as in the Balkans and Caucasus , and that produces tensions , as in the Urals , Turkey and the Maghreb .
As the Non-violent Radical Party , we consider that the structural solution for peace is called European federalism , a United States of Europe that opens the doors to Turkey , to Israel and , prospectively , to democratic states that renounce their own absolute sovereignty .
in writing . - I unconditionally condemn the indiscriminate and brutal killing of civilians in Gaza , as I do the callous and indefensible killing of Israeli civilians by Hamas rockets .
I voted for the European Parliament Resolution on Gaza because it explicitly supports the UN Security Council resolution calling for an immediate cease-fire .
It also draws attention to the decision by Parliament in December to defer the upgrading of EU relations with Israel .
While the language of the resolution is weaker than I would have wished , nevertheless a resolution carried by an overwhelming vote of the parliament is more likely to influence the decisions of Israel and Hamas than individual Political Group resolutions .
I oppose the upgrading of EU relations with Israel and believe the trade agreement with Israel should be suspended until it complies with Human Rights norms and engages in constructive and substantive negotiations with its neighbours to implement the Two-State solution to the conflict .
All Member States should now agree to cancel their earlier decision to upgrade relations with Israel as a means of bringing them to the table with realistic proposals .
I opted to abstain on the motion for a resolution on the situation in the Middle East / Gaza , for the sole reason that I do not consider a resolution of the European Parliament to be justifiable at the moment .
I think that discussion of the matter , without a vote , would be a more effective way of involving the European Parliament in this issue .
in writing . - ( NL ) Une fois n 'est pas coutume , this is a very even-handed resolution that deserves all our support because it clearly asks both parties in the conflict not to resort to violence .
Nevertheless , we should not harbour any illusions about the impact Europe , and a fortiori , the European Parliament , can have on how the situation in the Middle East develops .
Before we can look for a solution , Hamas must stop its rocket attacks on Israel .
At the same time , Israel must scale down its disproportionate levels of violence , to which innocent children and citizens fall victim .
Despite my support for this resolution , I would remind this House that the terrorist organisation Hamas remains the main cause of the escalation .
in writing . - I voted for the joint resolution even although it was less rigorous in its condemnation of Israel 's action in Gaza than I would have liked .
Hamas random rocket attacks cannot be supported , yet it was not entirely the responsibility of Hamas that the cease-fire ended .
The Israeli action is entirely disproportionate and its targeting of innocent civilians - men , women and children - is a form of collective punishment that is in contravention of international humanitarian law .
The attacks on UN offices and its aid provision seem deliberately aimed at cutting off aid to the needy and removing independent observers of Israel 's barbaric actions .
in writing . - ( DE ) I think it is right and proper that the European Parliament is speaking with one voice .
We must direct our endeavours towards making clear to both Israel and Hamas that we oppose any form of violent hostilities and demand absolute respect for peacekeeping forces and aid agencies .
in writing . - ( PT ) In spite of calling for a cease-fire , which is an urgent issue , with which we are in agreement , the resolution approved by Parliament on the extremely serious situation in the Gaza Strip is highly inadequate , containing even negative aspects , particularly when compared with the resolution of the Human Rights Council of the UN ( UNHRC ) of 12 January .
In Parliament 's resolution :
Despite the brutal aggression , crimes and violations of the most basic human rights , there is not one word of condemnation of Israel .
It reaffirms its ambiguity , concealing the fact that in Palestine there is a coloniser and a colonised , an aggressor and a victim , an oppressor and an oppressed , an exploiter and an exploited , and covering up Israel 's responsibilities .
It whitewashes the responsibilities of the EU , which is complicit in the impunity of Israel .
Consider the recent decision to strengthen bilateral relations with this country or the shameful abstention by the countries of the EU on the resolution adopted by the UNHRC .
Furthermore , in a situation that is as serious as the current one , it does not criticise Israel 's violation of the UN resolutions , the end of the occupation , the illegal settlements , the segregation wall , the murders , the detentions , the innumerable humiliations inflicted on the Palestinian people , or even its inalienable right to a state , with the 1967 borders , with its capital in East Jerusalem .
in writing . - ( SV ) We welcome the fact that the resolution demands an immediate stop to Israel 's killing of the inhabitants of Gaza .
However , we regret the fact that the resolution does not demand the suspension of the Association Agreement with Israel and an end to the upgrading of relations with Israel .
These are obvious demands that should be made of a country that so blatantly violates the undertakings it has made , namely to respect human rights and international law .
We also question the claim that Israel 's assault was initiated as a response to rocket fire from Hamas .
Israel has constantly broken the cease-fire , including on 4 November last year when Israeli troops crossed into the Gaza Strip and killed six Palestinians , as well as the collective punishment of the Palestinian people by means of embargoes , shutting off the electricity , extending settlements , building walls , kidnapping leading Palestinian politicians , and so on .
In spite of this , we welcome the joint resolution and the demand for Israel to cease its killing immediately .
President Pöttering has been hasty in asserting that there were no votes against .
I voted against this resolution .
Although I admit it contains very positive elements , especially use of the term ' the collective punishment ' of the people of Gaza , I consider it to be insufficient .
The only practical thing that this Parliament can do is to seek the freezing of the association agreement with Israel ; anything else is just talk - positive and attractive - but just talk .
In politics , fine words do not count for anything : action is needed and NOTHING will change in Gaza after this resolution .
If we had been talking about any other state than Israel , the resolution would have been much more forceful .
I believe that Israel has the right to exist in peace , but it is not the case that anything goes , and Israel has to know that .
Moreover , the only thing that this offensive will achieve is to intensify the conflict .
This is not a good day for this Parliament because it has chosen talk instead of action .
The text tabled by all the groups in this assembly , which is intended to represent the interests of European peoples , does indeed contain some excellent recommendations , such as a call for the fighting to stop , but it does not make any reference to the importing of this conflict into Europe .
As well as their concomitant violence , two images from the demonstrations against the Israeli intervention were particularly shocking .
One was of the demonstrators , the majority of whom were immigrants , brandishing Palestinian , Algerian , Hamas and Hezbollah flags , and banners with inscriptions in Arabic .
The other was of the French extreme-left leaders , Besancenot from the Revolutionary Communist League , and Buffet from the Communist Party , marching with the imams .
These images illustrate two worrying developments : the gradual takeover of the immigrant masses from the Muslim world by Islamist associations and the collusion between Islamist movements and the extreme communist left , two revolutionary movements who seek to destroy our civilisation .
Now more than ever , the safeguarding of the identity and freedom of the European people demands that such demonstrations be banned and a policy implemented to reverse migratory flows .
In view of the seriousness of the situation in Gaza , the European Parliament could not remain silent .
I have therefore given my support to this resolution which calls for an immediate and permanent cease-fire , including the ending of military action on the part of Israel in the Gaza Strip and an end to the firing of rockets by Hamas on Israel .
However , I am sorry that no firm and unreserved condemnation has been included of the attacks by the Israeli army , which have already left more than 1 000 people dead , mainly civilians .
Although I agree with what Martin Schulz , Chairman of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , said before the vote when he reiterated that these attacks are inadmissible , I would have preferred this indignation to have been expressed in writing .
Similarly , although the motion asks the Israeli authorities to guarantee uninterrupted delivery of humanitarian aid and free access by the international press to Gaza , it does not , as I would have wished , go as far as to make the upgrading of EU relations with Israel conditional on compliance by the State of Israel with humanitarian law .
Europe has a major role to play in the resolution of this conflict , but an agreement for lasting peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians can only be achieved , in my opinion , with the creation of a viable Palestinian State , recognising and recognised by Israel .
The common resolution on Gaza does have positive aspects , such as the request for an immediate cease-fire , recognition of the 1 000 deaths caused by the Israeli army , including women and children , as well as recognition that the embargo on Gaza by Israel represents a breach of international humanitarian law .
Despite this , I was not able to vote in favour because the resolution affords Hamas the same degree of responsibility as Israel .
It does not recognise that it was the Israeli army that broke the truce of 4 November with its land incursion and various aerial attacks , but rather lays the blame on Hamas for the breakdown of the cease-fire .
The resolution is clearly insufficient by not asking the Commission and Council for vigorous measures .
The EU should freeze the current EU-Israel Association Agreement for violation of its Article 2 , which states that respect for human rights is a conditioning factor of the Agreement .
Furthermore , the common resolution does not demand an end to the Israeli blockade of Gaza nor does it demand that the 27 EU Member States cancel all arms exports to Israel .
This resolution has managed to bring the main political groups in the European Parliament together to make a declaration which is absolutely necessary , given the current humanitarian and security situation in the Middle East .
Regardless of the developments which led to the outbreak of this conflict , it is already having adverse effects of significant proportions on the civilians in the area and on the United Nations ' presence in Gaza .
I , too , along with my other fellow Members , believe that we are at the point where sustainable results can only be achieved through dialogue , which is only possible with a cease-fire agreement .
Furthermore , Romania 's consistent positions on this subject feature to an influential extent in this document .
I am pleased to have the opportunity to vote in favour of a document which expresses both the point of view of the European political family I belong to and that of my country .
I welcome the adoption of the resolution on the situation in the Gaza Strip .
It is imperative that the European Parliament express its views on the crisis .
It is the duty of Parliament to condemn this humanitarian disaster , laying claim as it does to moral leadership on respect for human rights .
It is precisely because of this that Parliament can no longer remain silent .
That is why I voted in favour of this resolution .
Nevertheless , Parliament could have sent out a stronger signal ; the resolution remains too weak on some points .
It is important that we call for a lasting cease-fire and condemn the suffering of the civilian population .
It is also our duty to suggest practical solutions for ending the war and to call on the EU to commit itself to these in its role within the Quartet .
As the United States is currently in a state of paralysis on account of its change of president , the EU must further increase its sense of duty .
A pause in the negotiations on enhancing relations with Israel is called for in view of such excessive military action .
Unfortunately , there is no mention of this in the resolution .
If Israel does not want to negotiate directly with Hamas , it is up to the EU to work to ensure that others talk to Hamas .
The continuation of the military offensive is costing too many lives .
Lip service is insufficient in the face of such a severe humanitarian crisis .
The joint resolution turns a blind eye to the causes of Israel 's aggressive and barbaric war , considering it to be a response to the rocket attacks by Hamas .
Everyone knows that the war was pre-planned and the causes lie in the Israeli occupation and Israel 's refusal to apply the UN Resolutions on an independent Palestinian state with its capital in East Jerusalem .
It is the result of Israel 's aggressive policy , supported by the USA and the EU , of illegal settlements and its refusal to return to the 1967 borders .
Although it talks of stopping the war , the resolution sits on the fence , calls for no measures by the EU , not even that the new preferential relations should be frozen in order to exert pressure on Israel .
It does not condemn Israel 's aggressive policy ; on the contrary , it intervenes in the Palestinians ' internal problems .
The forces which have signed it are calling for and agree to a stronger role for the EU , which has to do with its imperialist ambitions in the region .
They are strengthening the US / NATO plan for the ' broader Middle East ' with which the EU has agreed and the aim of which is for the imperialists to subjugate the entire region .
It is for these reasons that the Communist Party of Greece did not vote for the joint resolution by the political groups and calls for the anti-imperialist fight to be reinforced , noting that there is no such thing as good and bad imperialism .
I refused to vote for the joint resolution by the European Parliament on the situation in the Gaza Strip because , although it has positive points , it does not roundly condemn the military over-reaction leading to humanitarian disaster .
The shock and regret expressed by the European Parliament on the attacks on civilians and impeded access to humanitarian assistance do not suffice .
Europe must stand up to its responsibilities and demand a definitive end to Israeli aggression and start making an effort to find a viable long-term solution .
Unfortunately , this strong political will is missing from the compromise resolution adopted by the European Parliament .
The right of Israel to exist in peace and security is inalienable .
The right of the Palestinians to live in a free territory , administered by itself , in peace , democracy and respect for human rights is also inalienable .
Any solution for the region has to guarantee that the threats to these rights are set aside .
The confrontation in Gaza reveals , through the opposite situation on the West Bank , that the relationship between the parties , although tense and conflictive , is possible , if both are willing to accept the existence of the other .
That is not the case with Hamas , which uses the territory that it took control of to pursue its declared objective : to prevent the existence of Israel .
These circumstances , however , do not make the deaths in Gaza any less tragic .
Hamas , we know , without any consideration for the life of the Palestinians , uses the population as human shields against the attacks by Israel and their deaths as weapons of propaganda .
Israel , determined to legitimately guarantee its security , continues with the fighting in spite of this tragic result .
The process is inevitable if the international community , including Arab countries , does not promote the viability of one side and the security of the other as the objective of the peace process in the Middle East .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I declare myself in favour of the motion for a resolution on the tragic situation in the Gaza Strip .
I fully share the concerns that the conflict is not yet nearing a conclusion in spite of the desire for a cessation of hostilities expressed by the entire international community .
I join my colleagues in expressing my profound regret for the suffering of the civilian population in Gaza and I believe that the only possible solution , not only in this territory , but throughout the Holy Land , is dialogue , negotiation and diplomacy , and never war , which can only exacerbate hatred .
The European Union can and must play a prominent role in this process , both in achieving a cease-fire as well as in opening channels for humanitarian purposes .
For this reason , I am voting in favour of the motion for a resolution and I hope that the efforts for reconciliation result in concrete progress towards peace as soon as possible .
The conflict between Israel and Gaza has simply gone on too long .
When deaths are now being counted in their thousands , it is our overriding duty to ensure the fighting stops immediately .
The policy of isolation of Gaza has failed , radicalising the population who have been its first victim .
No military solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is possible .
The only possible settlement is a lasting and comprehensive peace settlement between the parties .
That is why we are asking for an international conference , instigated by the Quartet and with the participation of all the stakeholders in the region , to be organised as soon as possible , on the basis of the Arab League Initiative , the previous agreement between the Israelis and Palestinians .
Meanwhile , we think that any upgrading of political relations between the EU and Israel must be strictly conditional upon respect for international humanitarian law .
We therefore remained opposed to the vote in support of Israel 's increased participation in Community programmes .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the situation in the Gaza Strip for an immediate cease-fire in this area .
I believe that , regardless of the positions held by the conflicting parties , dialogue is the only way to resolve any problems for the common good .
in writing . - ( SV ) The resolution that the European Parliament voted through today concerning the situation in Gaza contained no condemnation of the terrorist organisation Hamas , which broke the cease-fire in December and uses civilians as human shields .
Despite the fact that this was absent from the resolution , I considered it important to vote in favour of a call for a cease-fire in the region , which was why I voted in favour of the resolution .
in writing . - The situation in the Gaza Strip is deplorable .
Hundreds of innocent civilians have been killed and thousands presently face death on a daily basis .
Yes , I accept Israel should be allowed to live in peace .
Yes , rocket attacks across the border are unacceptable and should stop .
But the response by Israel is totally disproportionate and cannot be supported .
The Israelis have failed to respect the international community .
They have shelled the UN compound , they have attacked schools and children .
This is totally unacceptable and must stop .
We must have a cease-fire immediately .
I will vote in favour of this resolution because the European Parliament needs to have its voice heard so that innocent Palestinians trapped in Gaza will not be forgotten .
Israel : you have the right to live in peace .
You do not have the right to practise wanton destruction and to be the delivery body of death and destruction on innocent civilians .
Your actions mean that you have become the aggressor , not the victim .
I have approved the compromise that is before us , even though it lacks the punch and boldness that I would have liked to have seen .
I am dismayed and angry about the large-scale , disproportionate offensive by the Israeli air force and ground troops in a densely populated area .
I feel solidarity with and concern for the fate and safety of the 1.5 million Palestinians held in Gaza , for whom it is impossible to leave the Gaza strip , and for the humanitarian situation of the Palestinians on the West Bank who , despite cooperation from the Palestinian National Authority , see no improvement in their living conditions .
It is unfortunate that the compromise does not mention the problematic upgrade of relations between the EU and Israel .
I would urge the Council to freeze the upgrade of relations with Israel until a complete and permanent cease-fire has been agreed by all sides and Israel grants unrestricted access for humanitarian aid .
Relations between the EU and Israel can only be upgraded if human rights and international humanitarian law are respected , the humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip and the occupied Palestinian territories are brought to an end and an all-out effort is made for a comprehensive peace deal and for the complete implementation of the EC-PLO interim association agreement .
in writing . - I support the resolution on Gaza and support calls for an immediate cease-fire .
Thank you , Mr President . I vote in favour .
The situation in the Horn of Africa continues to be extremely concerning .
The interweaving of problems and conflicts is such that the EU must pay constant attention in order to avoid a dramatic deterioration of the situation .
I believe , as does my group , that the situation in the Horn of Africa requires an urgent , comprehensive approach .
As has been said , the main difficulties arise from the numerous conflicts between the various countries of the region .
For this reason , it is absolutely essential to work on security and its many interrelationships , such as how changes of government should be monitored ; those governments should be urged to make a proactive commitment to improve human rights .
The Horn of Africa is currently suffering from cumulative scourges :
war , both civil and regional ,
the absence of democracy and freedom ,
famine and the food crisis .
The acts of piracy , reminiscent of another age , are only the latest product of this chaos .
Faced with these tragedies that are tearing apart the region and spreading bloodshed , we do not have to remain silent or claim impotence .
It is now , more than ever , when the international community is showing signs of being fatigued by a seemingly never-ending crisis , that the EU must take a leading role .
By launching Operation ' Atalante ' to protect vulnerable ships and the delivery of food aid to Somali refugees , the Union has demonstrated that it can find real and effective solutions when confronted with an emergency .
However , it also has to find responses to the general political crisis in the region .
It must construct the ' EU regional political partnership for peace , security and development in the Horn of Africa ' which the Committee on Development launched when it adopted its report in April 2007 .
Let us not allow the Horn of Africa to become an area of lawlessness where no development takes place .
in writing . - ( SV ) Since it is my firm belief that the European Parliament should not involve itself in foreign policy , I have voted against the resolution in its entirety .
This does not mean , per se , that I consider everything in the resolution to be wrong or undesirable .
On the contrary , the report also includes positive elements that I would have wholeheartedly supported if it had been a statement by the Swedish Government , for example .
Such an example is provided by the case of the Swedish-Eritrean journalist Dawit Isaak , who has been imprisoned without trial since 2001 .
The chances of the EU and the international community changing the basic reality in Somalia are slight .
However , tackling one of its consequences , piracy , is much more within our grasp .
We must not forget that piracy is primarily a means of generating an income for the groups living in the south and middle of Somalia .
This income is used in turn to fuel the conflicts being waged within the country and region .
A stronger naval presence in the region may have a positive influence on the security environment in Somalia and , consequently , in the region as a whole .
The EU must therefore support the moderate elements in the Somali leadership , who are firmly committed to stability and peace in the region .
Combating piracy is an option available to the European Union , which has the necessary military capability and can contribute not only to restoring the safety of a vital transit route , but also to establishing stability and peace in the region .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting in favour of the motion for a resolution on the situation in the Horn of Africa .
The delicate situation in this African region means that European institutions must take a decisive stance .
For this reason , I approve of calling on the Council to appoint a special EU representative or envoy for the Horn of Africa region .
Ethiopia , Eritrea , Somalia and Djibouti must co-operate if they want to overcome the current stalemate .
That is why the Eritrean Government must reconsider its current withdrawal from participating in IGAD .
That is why Djibouti must do its best to ensure the better legal protection of trade union rights .
That is why Ethiopia must rescind the proclamation on the registration and regularisation of civil organisations and charitable institutions .
That is why Somalia needs to put an end to one of the worst humanitarian and security crises in the world .
It appears that finally , although still in a tentative manner , the Lukashenko regime is sending out signals that it is opening up to the international community .
Let us take note of this and quickly work towards a shared process to improve relations with this country , which is so close to our borders .
However , we cannot give an inch on our demands with regard to respect for human rights and guarantees of freedom of expression and information .
The images of the repression of several attempted peaceful democratic demonstrations by the opposition are still vivid .
I would furthermore ask for a greater effort in agreeing common rules on the sensitive subject of visits by Belarusian children to host families in the EU during the summer months .
Every year , the Belarusian Government changes its strategy on this matter , often leading to very difficult situations that have a negative effect , in particular , on the children themselves , who are already disadvantaged in other ways .
The current progress is welcome , but the road to be followed is still very long : we hope that Mr Lukashenko , after many false starts , wants to move down this road , at least in part , together .
in writing . - Belarus remains largely ostracised by the European Union due to President Lukashenko 's authoritarian rule .
In the past five years , the European Parliament has twice awarded the Sakharov Prize to Belarusian dissidents , and others have been shortlisted .
This represents an explicit recognition that human rights and political freedoms are suppressed in Belarus .
Nevertheless , there are signs that Mr Lukashenko is slowly warming to the West .
Naturally , the situation in Belarus still remains serious , but we need to recognise that one way of coaxing Belarus towards the European Union is to recognise and respond to Mr Lukashenko 's overtures .
In short , it is a carrot-and-stick situation .
As someone with a deep interest in the former Soviet republics in Central Asia , I see parallels between that region and Belarus .
This resolution does not hold back on criticism of Mr Lukashenko , but it sets out a kind of road map for him to normalise relations with the EU .
We should not be under any illusions about Belarus and we should not hesitate to break off dialogue if the situation deteriorates .
But this resolution offers some hope that relations can improve over time , and for that reason I voted to support it .
in writing . - ( NL ) I have voted in favour of this resolution .
The European Parliament welcomes the fact that the restrictions on the freedom of the press have been relaxed somewhat in Belarus and that a few political prisoners have been released .
It has also been pointed out , though , that other dissidents are still behind bars .
In order to improve relations , this resolution argues that Belarus should become a country without political prisoners , that the government should guarantee the free expression of opinion , and so on .
Legislation should also be changed and Belarusians should be given freedom of movement .
Even though everyone is in favour of this , I should like to put the following to you .
Should the European Parliament not open these resolutions up to countries with which Europe does maintain cordial relations ?
China springs to mind , where the human rights situation is at least as dramatic as in Belarus .
Or is it perhaps commercial considerations that stop us from doing this ?
The resolution continues an on-going and productive dialogue with the government in Minsk and is indicative of the concerns of the European Parliament and the citizens it represents about the situation on human rights and about developments in Belarus in general .
The Belarusian authorities have made some progress , which is commendable , but we hope that they will initiate a process of democratisation and not simply make some temporary cosmetic gesture .
This resolution is sufficiently firm , but also finely nuanced so that it expresses our satisfaction on the first issue as well as our concern about the second .
Current events in the region highlight once again the importance of transparency in the business of government and of the democratic responsibility of governments to the citizens they represent .
The democratic values which have been adopted are linked to stability and development for both societies and markets , including the energy markets .
This resolution is a step forward in reaffirming these values .
Relations between the European Union and Belarus depend on both parties .
If there is common good will , then dialogue will be possible , as will a suitable neighbourhood policy and an Eastern Partnership .
Partnerships cannot be built on prohibitions and orders , which is why I welcome the European Commission 's recent initiative to improve relations with Belarus .
Objectively speaking , we must admit that Belarus has also done a lot to foster understanding .
Examples of this include registration of the ' For Freedom ' movement , permission for the publication and distribution of opposition newspapers , and openness to the Eastern Partnership initiative .
The European Union has greater expectations .
There are , of course , good reasons for this . However , there are also good reasons for many of Belarus ' expectations .
There is a need for symmetry and understanding between the partners in many fields .
For example , since we are calling on the Belarusian authorities to stop issuing exit visas to their citizens , especially children and students , why does the European Union not take steps to simplify and liberalise visa procedures for the citizens of Belarus ?
These problems are particularly important to those of us who live in border regions , which are linked by both cultural and family ties .
In addition to cultural matters and the issue of nationality , the economy and trans-border cooperation are also important .
Here , too , the Commission and the Council could , and should , do more .
The current context and the future of relations with Belarus present a challenge to the foreign policy of the European Union .
Some gestures from Minsk justify a resumption of some relations .
However , it is clear that the energy factor , in the current context , plays a significant role in driving this process .
This is understandable .
Realism is an integral part of foreign policy .
However , realism cannot , need not and should not be divorced from values and strategy .
The promotion of democracy in Belarus is a question both of values and of strategy .
This perception of the medium- and long-term European interest must be central in this new phase of the relationship .
Otherwise , we will produce a future dependency in which values come second to short-term strategies , with reduced success .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to communicate my vote in favour of the motion for a resolution concerning the attitude of the European Union in dealings with Belarus .
I am pleased that the Belarusian Foreign Minister has confirmed that his country intends to participate in the Eastern Partnership with other Eastern European countries .
It is , however , necessary for Belarus to closely observe international safety standards and requirements in constructing a new nuclear power station and to conform to the Convention on Nuclear Safety .
Finally , I am saddened by the fact that Belarus remains the only country in Europe to retain the death penalty .
If the future enlargement of the Union is to be considered , this barbaric punishment must be abolished .
I voted in favour of the EU resolution on Belarus as I feel that any move capable of introducing more democracy in any country in the world is a positive step .
The process of democratisation in Belarus will promote respect for the rights and freedoms of this country 's citizens .
This resolution is welcome because I hope that , through this measure , an ever-growing number of Belarusian citizens will have easier access to visas for European Union states so that they can learn from us about our values and tradition .
I also hope that very soon , Belarus will no longer have political detainees or people held under house arrest .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues fully support the need for the democratic opposition in Belarus to be involved in the process of gradual re-engagement between the EU and Belarus .
Currently President Lukashenko , who is the local strongman running an authoritarian regime , is making overtures to the EU and distancing himself from Moscow , a process which we should encourage by improving our political relations with Minsk .
We also support the calls for the Government of Belarus to uphold and respect human rights , which is an important part of the process of improving relations between the EU and Belarus .
For these reasons , and to stress the importance we place on a democratic future for Belarus , we have decided to support this joint resolution .
We also wish to make clear that , with regard to paragraph 16 of this joint resolution , the death penalty issue is a matter of conscience for British Conservative MEPs .
I voted in favour .
Srebrenica is a wound that has left a deep scar on the history of Europe .
Those who survived still recount how , between April 1992 and April 1993 , thousands of refugees , in an attempt to save themselves from Bosnian Serb incursions , hid in cellars , garages and even houses abandoned by the Serbs ; how they only had roots to eat ; how they were infested with fleas ; how , frozen during the long winter of 1992 , they warmed themselves by burning tyres and plastic bottles ; and how the bodies of those who died of starvation and exposure were eaten by dogs .
Seventeen years after the massacre , hundreds of bodies have yet to be identified .
Thus , I believe that establishing a day of commemoration would ensure that we do not forget , would express solidarity with the family members of the victims of this nonsensical massacre and would revive , in a more decisive manner , our policies for a Europe of peace , social justice and freedom , in the certainty that a respect for equality can only be achieved through the acknowledgment of differences .
in writing . - This resolution tragically reminds us that ' Man 's inhumanity to man ' is not something that ended after the Holocaust of World War II .
It continued in Europe with Srebrenica and it continues today in Gaza !
I endorse the annual day of commemoration for the genocide in Srebrenica , precisely because the intervention of the EU and its Member States had created a false sense of security , as a result of which the residents were unable to flee in time .
Those in favour of military interventions will not enjoy hearing this criticism .
During last night 's speech , I was silenced in mid-flow by the President , perhaps on account of the irritation felt about the content of my speech .
The last bit , that was hardly audible because the President was hammering away with his gavel , fits in with this report .
Srebrenica is also a symbol for the failure of optimistic notions about humanitarian interventions and safe havens .
It should have been made clear from the start that a foreign military presence could only offer false illusions .
It turned Srebrenica into an operating base against the Serbian environment , whilst it was inevitable that it would eventually be swallowed up by that self-same environment .
Without a Dutch army in Srebrenica , there would not have been a situation of war and there would not have been a need for revenge on the part of the Serbs .
The victims are not only the reason for bringing Mladić and Karadžić to justice , but also for thinking about the failure of military interventions and of all attempts to bring unity to an ethnically divided Bosnia .
The joint resolution by the European Parliament on Srebrenica is an attempt to distort history and to conceal or shift responsibility for the crimes by the American and European imperialists , the dismemberment of the country and the barbaric war unleashed against it by NATO , with the EU 's help , to the victims in former Yugoslavia .
At the same time , it attempts to increase the standing of the despised American-inspired Special Court in The Hague , before which the imperialists want to try their victims and which has already been used to physically eliminate the Yugoslavian leader Slobodan Milosevic .
Calling the events in Srebrenica the biggest post-war crime and the proposal to recognise a day to commemorate it in the Member States of the EU , while there are still serious questions as to what actually happened there , is a gross misrepresentation of history , because in fact , the biggest post-war crime to date in Europe has been the slaughter of the people of Yugoslavia by the American and European imperialists .
The Communist Party of Greece refuses to support the adoption of such unacceptable resolutions , especially at a time when we are all witness to the daily killing of hundreds of children and civilians in Palestine by Israel , with the support of the same imperialist forces now turning a blind eye , and the people of Yugoslavia were not party to the resolution in question .
The black history of Europe , the human capacity to reveal the worst of itself , has not ended .
Srebrenica and its terrible tragedy are not only the most recent instance of human horror .
They are a reminder , if such were needed , that destruction is always possible , that the human condition is a permanent struggle for peace , and that nothing we acquire is permanent .
However , the memory of this massacre , the commemoration of this tragedy , is also the tribute that evil pays to good .
For us Portuguese , who are geographically and culturally distant from the places of the main European horrors of the 20th century , and who have another history , it is even more important to remember them .
Geography and culture offer us different histories , but they do not distinguish our human condition .
The memory of what we could have witnessed should be an integral part of our heritage .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting in favour of the motion for a resolution that would establish 11 July as a day of commemoration for the victims of the Srebrenica massacre .
The tragic month of July 1995 , when Serb troops led by Ratko Mladić massacred over 8 000 Bosniaks , still lives in all our hearts .
The best way to honour the victims of the atrocities of the war in the former Yugoslavia is to announce a day of commemoration so what happened can be remembered .
Further efforts and sacrifices are also required to ensure that those guilty of the genocide are brought to justice ( the most important of whom is General Ratko Mladić ) in deference to the fathers , mothers , children , brothers and sisters of the innocent victims who died in those years , and also in deference to the Europe that wants to live in freedom .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Iran : the Shirin Ebadi case
The next item is the debate on five motions for resolutions on Iran .
author . - Mr President , the persecution of Nobel Prize Laureate Mrs Shirin Ebadi is only one example of many that are taking place in Iran currently , and such persecution should come as no surprise to us considering the blinkered vision of the anachronistically theocratic rulers of that country .
Nor should we be surprised by the fact that the regime in Iran will take no notice whatsoever of this resolution .
They will laugh at it and throw it in the bin in exactly the same manner that they have dealt with all previous resolutions of this Parliament .
And who can blame them ?
They know that our resolutions are just words , not deeds , and in their estimation they are not worth the paper they are written on .
If we really want to help bring change in Iran then we must match our words with action .
For example , we can remove the PMOI from our terrorist list , or we can stop lucrative contracts between EU Member States and applicant countries and Iran .
If we take such action , then we can be sure that the authorities in Tehran will take us seriously and will think twice about continuing with the persecution of their democracy-seeking citizens .
So , it seems to me that we should have had a second motion for a resolution in addition to this one , calling on the governments of some EU Member States , such as the UK and France , and applicant countries , such as Turkey , to stop their hypocritical stance on Iran and start taking real action against it immediately and effectively .

author . - Mr President , the story of Shirin Ebadi , Nobel Peace Prize-winning lawyer , the first Muslim woman and first Iranian to receive the prize , may be well known to most of us here today .
She was the first female judge in her country but was forced to resign due to the Iranian revolution .
She defended the rights of Iranian women and children , fighting to change divorce and inheritance laws in Iran .
She stood up to defend religious minorities and their rights , and most recently she has defended seven members of the Bahá 'í faith who have been collectively arrested and who face persecution like many others of faith in Iran .
But it is her work on human rights and her courage and determination which has gained her the respect of all of us in the Chamber .
She , along with other human rights activists , bravely founded the Centre for the Defence of Human Rights in Tehran .
Its purpose was to report human rights violations in Iran , to provide representation of political prisoners and to help their families .
However , right from the start , the authorities have tried to close the office down .
Those who work there have been threatened , imprisoned and intimidated .
Shirin Ebadi has personally faced numerous death threats , and the international community has , for some time , expressed its concern for her safety .
Then , just before Christmas , as those at the centre were about to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , Iranian security officials closed the centre down .
The centre must be reopened immediately .
We must put pressure on the Commission , the High Representative , the Czech Presidency and our own Member States to take this case up and see the centre reopened .
It is hard for us sitting here in this Chamber to truly comprehend the bravery , the courage and strength required by human rights activists like Shirin Ebadi to function in Iran and stand up to the dictatorship .
However , the work of human rights lawyers and activists is needed to shine a light on what is happening in Iran , to give hope to those like the Alaei brothers .
Arash and Kamiar Alaei are both doctors helping those with HIV and AIDS who have been charged with cooperating with an enemy , when all they have been doing is trying to help the sick .
I hope that we will see the re-opening of the human rights centre and that this Parliament will do all it can to help Shirin Ebadi .
After all , as fellow human beings , her struggle is also our struggle .
author . - Mr President , I think it is important for us to support human rights defenders , whether we think that governments are going to be listening to us or not .
People have often told us they take great courage from external voices recognising the threat that they are under .
As has been said , this is a serious case , because an attack on such an internationally renowned defender of human rights signals that people questioning the state or exercising their fundamental rights , such as those to the freedom of belief , will not be safe , so they have to conform to the state or face the consequences .
Shirin Ebadi herself has faced death threats on many occasions , not least because she has defended the seven-member leadership of the Bahá 'í faith in Iran , who themselves face significant persecution .
We have seen further arrests in the last 24 hours of people who have worked with her and indeed other members of the Bahá 'í faith .
When we look at what we do here , we also need to realise that we are actually seeing a shift in the recognition of human rights by certain governments throughout the world , and that this has an impact on countries with which the European Union has dealings .
They now feel that they do not have to pay so much attention to human rights because they can trade and work with countries that really do not care .
I think , therefore , that makes it even more important for us to make sure that we try to uphold those standards and that , as has been said , we do not look to increase trade with countries whose human rights records are abysmal , but make every effort to support those working for human rights and those democrats opposing the undemocratic forces .
author . - Mr President , the situation of Iranian citizens who live under the oppressive dictatorship of Tehran 's mullahs is alarming and has been deteriorating in all areas since 2005 .
Therefore , I urge the Commission to continue to monitor the human rights situation there and to present a comprehensive report on the situation during the first half of this year .
Today , we protest against the harassment of a Nobel Peace Prize winner , Ms Shirin Ebadi , and her Centre for the Defence of Human Rights .
It has often been asked what is the result of these protests .
This question should also be addressed to the Council and the Commission .
The Iranian regime is potentially the biggest threat to world peace and the rule of law .
In all likelihood , in the nearest future , Tehran will have nuclear warheads - it already has the missiles to deliver them .
Iran , too , is a big exporter of terrorism - to Iraq for example , it is a supporter of Hezbollah and Hamas .
At the same time , the EU is still hoping to convince this dictatorship through compromises and has , until recently , been helping the terrorist regime in Tehran to tie the hands of the main democratic opposition , ironically labelling it as a terrorist organisation .
So we need a clear and forceful stand on human rights and also to have the human rights situation in Iran as a priority in dealing with Tehran .
Mr President , Mr Matsakis is right .
Shirin Ebadi 's persecution is not an isolated incident .
Under the regime 's critics , she enjoyed a privileged position for years .
The existence of its human rights centre created the impression that things were not that bad in Iran .
The majority of the victims of the theocratic regime in Iran are unknown .
Holding a different political opinion , protests on the part of discriminated-against ethnic minorities and religious minorities , homosexuality and fighting against the disadvantaged position of women , are all reasons for being locked up or murdered .
Many things that we take for granted in Europe can get you killed in Iran .
Some victims are hung from tall hoisting cranes as an example in the presence of large crowds .
Despite this , the outside world , including Europe , is not terribly interested in this appalling situation and the way in which this can be brought to an end .
International attention tends to focus on other things .
Whilst it would like to see Iran 's military power restricted and stop the application of nuclear energy , the international community mainly attaches importance to the continued delivery of petroleum and the maintenance and / or extension of good trade relations .
As a result , Iran has been under a constant threat of war , while criticism of the lack of human rights is not expressed .
It even leads to a situation where cooperation with the Iranian regime is bought by constantly placing the main exiled opposition groups on the list of terrorists .
We must put a stop to the bizarre situation in which , every time there is a judicial ruling declaring this placement on the list of terrorists to be illegal , a new , identical decision is taken by the Council on behalf of the European Union .
Unlike most other victims of persecution in Iran , Shirin Ebadi is not anonymous but internationally known and respected .
So far , the status of the Nobel Prize-winner has , at times , secured her a limited degree of freedom .
The fact that this status is now coming to an end indicates the need for international support for those forces that seek change .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , my office in Munich is situated on a street that is home to many Christian Armenians from Iran .
They are members of one of the most ancient Christian communities in the world and are , at the same time , patriotic Persians .
This shows that Iran / Persia has an ancient tradition of tolerance , not only towards different religions but also towards the many peoples comprising its large empire .
It runs entirely counter to the Iranian / Persian spirit to rule as intolerantly as this mullah regime is doing .
It runs counter to the best , most noble traditions of one of the most ancient countries on earth .
Therefore , it is in the interests of the Iranian people and its future that we be clearer in our denunciation of these abuses .
Ms Shirin Ebadi , who has denounced these abuses at great personal risk , and who won the Nobel Peace Prize as a result , continues to do so on behalf of all ethnic groups and all religious communities .
We cannot tolerate such dreadful , abominable persecution of Ms Ebadi .
She needs our solidarity .
Therefore , I appeal to the Czech Council Presidency to apply its sound human rights policy in this matter , too .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to draw your attention to the absence of the representative of the Czech Presidency during the course of this debate .
I very much regret this fact , as the Czech Republic is heir to the democratic tradition of the struggle for human rights in the whole of Central and Eastern Europe .
I repeat : it is deeply regrettable that there is no representative of the Czech Presidency attending this debate , although other Council presidencies , such as the German Presidency , have always sent a representative .
Today , we are discussing human rights in Iran , which is an important country in the Middle East and one which will have a decisive impact on the political situation in that region .
The Iranian Government should therefore be even more strongly bound to absolutely respect human rights and international standards in the field of humanitarian law .
We defend the Nobel Prize winner Shirin Ebadi and oppose the recent actions of the authorities and the government campaign , intended to turn public opinion against Shirin Ebadi .
I would also like to draw your attention to further arrests of university students in Shiraz . This week , while the European Parliament has been in session in Strasbourg ( on 12 January to be precise ) , a further six people were arrested .
We must defend the independence of the student movement in Iran .
I would also like to draw your attention to the repression and harassment of doctors involved in AIDS research .
Commissioner , there is only one conclusion that can be drawn : the human rights situation in Iran must be further monitored by the European Commission and the whole European Union .
Mr President , in Iran , where the principles of fundamentalism are supported by a large section of society , the activities of all democratic institutions which are based on different cultural precepts encounter a great deal of opposition and intolerance .
This is the sort of example that Iran provides .
Although the politicians in power in Iran , in order to improve their image , may sign up to commitments resulting from international agreements , everyday reality is very different .
The case of Shirin Ebadi , Nobel Peace Prize winner and Director of the Centre for the Defence of Human Rights , may serve as an example .
The fact that her activities are persecuted is due to the weakness of the ruling class which , fearful for its status , cannot discipline the fundamentalists involved in anti-democratic activities .
We support the Resolution .
I think that more radical action needs to be taken in this field .
( RO ) Iran provides perhaps the least documented cases of human rights violations within the international community .
At the moment , there is no sign of the situation improving .
In this respect , the persecution of Mrs Shirin Ebadi is a very serious matter , and I can also say the same about the situation of the six students which was mentioned earlier .
It is encouraging that several resolutions have been proposed on this subject , initiated by several political groups .
I do believe , however , that the resolution put forward by the European People 's Party fulfils our obligation to defend human rights much better .
As a citizen of a country which has recently experienced both a totalitarian regime and the freedom of speech guaranteed by a democratic regime , I cannot help but sympathise with the cause of this woman fighting for human rights , and I am sure that this matter will be taken into consideration .
This constructive criticism can only help relations between the European Union and Iran .

( PT ) I would not only like to support this resolution but , in particular , to support the position of all the friends of a free Iran who , like Mr Matsakis and others , have made a point of emphasising that the main problem is the policy of appeasement towards the Iranian regime .
It is a policy under which oil and commercial contracts are more important than principles .
Placing the People 's Mujahedin of Iran on the list of terrorist organisations was a scandal from the outset .
It turned what was an extraordinarily important real problem into a policy that is the contrary , which is to do favours for those who , in fact , pursue terrorist policies .
For this reason , I would once again urge the Council to immediately bring an end to this situation and remove the People 's Mujahedin of Iran from the list of terrorist organisations .
( PL ) Mr President , Zbigniew Brzeziński describes the arch of instability which stretches from Egypt to Pakistan as the main threat to global stability and future prospects for global development .
According to him , the main country in this arch , a sort of linchpin , is Iran .
If we do not resolve the problem of Iran , if we do not ensure that it becomes a predictable and democratic country , it will be very difficult to think about eradicating the danger of which Mr Brzeziński speaks .
However , we cannot introduce democracy or stability to Iran .
The Iranians themselves must perform this task .
By Iranians , I mean those living in Iran itself , such as Mrs Ebadi , as well as émigré Iranians , such as Miriam Rajavi .
That is why it is important to support precisely these democratic movements and to finally acknowledge that the Mujahedin is not a terrorist organisation .
( PL ) Mr President , ironically enough , the situation in Iran is similar to the situation in Gaza when Hamas was elected , namely that the government has been elected by the people .
This is a problem for us , as there is little we can do .
Something needs to change in Iran .
We can only speak out before the whole world and send our message to Iran , namely that we condemn the violations of human rights and the lack of democracy , whether they like it or not .
Perhaps in this case , words will serve as our weapons and , at the same time , offer aid to the people in Iran who are fighting for real freedom , which I hope they will achieve .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Commission is closely monitoring developments in the situation faced by Mrs Shirin Ebadi and it regards as unacceptable the threats made to her and her colleagues following the search carried out at their office in Tehran on 29 December .
The search of the office is the latest in a series of acts of intimidation aimed at Mrs Ebadi which have included , for example , the closure in December of the Centre for the Defence of Human Rights , an organisation which she led .
The European Commission therefore fully supports the French Presidency of the Council of the Union in presenting two declarations regarding Mrs Ebadi 's case on 31 and 22 December last year .
The Commission especially emphasises the fact that the Iranian authorities must comply with their international obligations in the human rights area and in particular the right of peaceful assembly set out in the International Pact on Civil and Political Rights .
Iran has signed and ratified this Pact and hence it must allow the offices of the Centre for the Defence of Human Rights to be reopened and it must provide them with the legal status they have been requesting for many years .
In 2009 , just as in the past , the Commission will not forego any opportunity to apply pressure on the Iranian authorities to provide protection for Mrs Ebadi and other human rights defenders ( individuals or organisations ) and to allow them to continue operating in the country without interfering in their legitimate activities .
As you all know , the issues of nuclear power and human rights greatly limit the scope of our activities in Iran .
Despite this , the Commission will continue in 2009 with cooperation in areas of common interest , especially in the fight against the drugs trade .
We have also managed to maintain some programmes supporting human rights and the proper administration of public affairs , for example a project to support children 's rights in cooperation with UNICEF and projects in support of judicial reform .
We are also pursuing initiatives aimed at strengthening cooperation and exchanges in the area of education and culture - exchanges within the framework of the Erasmus Mundus programme , the recent visit of several Iranian journalists to Brussels , or the broadcasting of television programmes in Persian which the Commission wants to launch before the end of this year .
Despite this , it is clear that our relations will not be able to develop in a normal way unless the human rights situation in Iran improves dramatically .
2 .
Guinea
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the situation in Guinea .
author . - Mr President , Guinea has had a very troubled past history , with European countries being involved in one way or another in its tragic past .
It was taken over by the Portuguese in the 15th century and its citizens were subjected to the European slave trade in the 16th century and beyond .
In 1890 , it was colonised by France . After independence in 1958 , firm ties were formed with the Soviet Union .
Its post-colonial period was largely dominated by presidential totalitarianism , with its rulers being backed by its admittedly rather primitive army .
Guinea , although blessed with very rich mineral deposits , including iron , aluminium , gold , diamonds and uranium , is nevertheless one of the poorest countries in the world .
These minerals are being exploited by companies from Russia , Ukraine , France , Britain , Australia and Canada .
Heavy corruption of officials is well known to occur , and the governments of the countries to which such companies belong seem to care very little about the welfare of Guinea 's citizens , and only start complaining about the appalling human rights situation in the country when their financial interests are disrupted or threatened .
Be that as it may , presently there is yet another dictator in power in Guinea , a young junior army officer called Captain Camara .
He heads a junta that has pledged to rid the country of corruption and to improve living standards for its 10 million citizens .
To this end , a 32-member National Council for Democracy and Development was set up to govern the country .
I have no idea whether Captain Camara is genuine in his endeavours , or whether he will succeed in improving matters in Guinea .
One thing is certain , however : things cannot get worse than they have been for the last few decades , during which Europe and the rest of the world were happy just to sit back , watch and enjoy the benefits of the mineral exploitation of Guinea .
So , although I oppose military dictatorships a priori , I can only hope that , after a short period of time , a transition to democracy might occur .
Mr President , Mr Špidla , ladies and gentlemen , on 22 December 2008 , the President of the Republic of Guinea , Lanzana Conté , died at the age of 74 .
Over the course of that night of 22 and 23 December , his close relatives were busy making arrangements for the interim period amidst rumours of a coup d 'état .
At that very moment , were they sincere , those men running a country deemed by Transparency International to be one of the most corrupt in the world and relying on a rule of law and a democracy that have never actually existed ?
At that very moment , were they recalling how , 24 years ago , General Lanzana Conté seized power when the father of independence in 1958 , the Marxist President Sékou Touré , died in 1984 ?
At that very moment , were they thinking that a simple officer in charge of fuel procurement for the army would be able to seize power ?
At that very moment , were they regretting not having worked hard enough to establish true rule of law and real democracy that would have enabled those precious elections to have been organised within 60 days , as laid down by the constitution ?
If they did indeed have these regrets , Captain Moussa Dadis Camara 's feelings and those of his friends were to change to remorse within a few hours .
On Wednesday 24 December , the unknown captain declared himself the President of the Republic , he was cheered by thousands of Guineans and , on 25 December , he made a display of the allegiance offered by the civil government , who agreed to his ultimatum .
He promised to fight corruption and to organise elections before 2010 .
He appointed a decent man as Prime Minister , an Egypt-based international civil servant .
He happily reported that nobody in Guinea was condemning him ; the opposition political parties , civil society , accepted this situation .
Should the coup d 'état be condemned in these circumstances ?
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , we have to condemn it !
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on behalf of whom I am honoured to speak , condemns this coup d 'état although we are not naïve ; we know that political solutions are never simple when a country is emerging from a dictatorship .
We call on you to vote in favour of the joint resolution of the six political groups .
Mr President , on 15 February 2007 , we discussed the state violence of dictator Lansana Conté in Guinea as a matter of urgency .
This dictator came to power following a coup d 'état in 1984 and has been in power ever since .
He considered that country his own private property that was of particular significance on account of its natural deposits of gold , iron and bauxite .
Most parties did not take part in the elections that were organised under his control , and the official opposition that was temporarily represented in the parliament was later forced to leave .
Consequently , the trade union confederations CNTG and USTG became the main force in the fight for democracy .
The presidential security force , led by the dictator 's son , responded to their protest rally on 22 January 2007 by killing 59 people and wounding 150 others .
This appalling regime came unexpectedly to an end when the dictator died in December last year .
The junta put a banker forward as its next Prime Minister .
The question now is what exactly the military junta that subsequently took over power has made room for .
Is this a step towards democracy and equality for all residents , or will this new coup d 'état clear the way for a new dictator who is , once again , mainly interested in the country 's natural resources and in the prospect of lining his own pockets ?
The reaction from the outside world is one of confusion .
The West-African cooperative bloc , ECOWAS , has condemned the latest coup d 'état .
The Nigerian President praises the late dictator but , fortunately , he does demand a swift transfer of power to a democratically elected government .
France and Senegal , too , are applying pressure for elections to be held within a year .
My group has , over the years , always supported the demands of Guinea 's democratic opposition , which still appears to be out of the game .
We do not condemn the changeover of power , but we do condemn the possible continuation of a lack of democracy in the near future .
There is , as yet , no reason to penalise or isolate Guinea , but we should remind the new leaders that their moment in the limelight can only be very short-lived .
That country does not need another dictator , but the restoration of democracy .
Mr President , Commissioner , the time has fortunately passed when the only known way to topple a government in West Africa was by means of a military coup .
While in countries which share a border with Guinea , namely Sierra Leone , the Ivory Coast , Senegal or Liberia , a political thaw is taking place , military regimes have collapsed and a young democracy is emerging , Guinea remains stuck in the past .
The late President Conté himself seized power in a military coup , and now there is a sense of déjà vu .
Twenty-four hours after the President 's death was announced , the military seized power in Guinea and suspended the constitution .
The only good news is that the coup has been condemned by other African states and by the African Union .
Further European Union aid for Guinea must undoubtedly be linked to re-establishing constitutional order and calling presidential elections as soon as possible .
Independent international organisations should observe the election process and monitor the fairness of these elections .
If Captain Camara wants , even in the slightest , to be a Guinean Obama , then corruption and poverty in that country would have to be radically reduced .
Mr President , the day after the death of President Lansana Conté , on 23 December 2008 , a military junta , led by Captain Camara , took power in Guinea , suspending the constitution and the right to political activity and dissolving the government .
The junta has declared war on corruption and intends to hold presidential elections by December 2010 , although previous legislation had , until that point , stipulated that elections must be held 60 days after the end of a term .
However , one cannot fail to notice that the population of Guinea supports the new government .
On 29 December , the African Union suspended Guinea 's membership , giving the country six months to re-establish constitutional order .
The European Parliament should call on the Guinean government to re-establish civil law and to hold democratic presidential elections as soon as possible .
I hope that the European Commission will provide humanitarian aid to the civilian population and begin a process of dialogue with the government of Guinea .
Mr President , President Lansana Conté was the archetypal African strong man , a corrupt dictator who ruled the people of Guinea with an iron fist .
In fact , Guinea has never enjoyed true democracy in its half-century of independence .
The death of Mr Conté offered an opportunity for Guinea to turn the page but any hopes of transition to genuine democracy were extinguished by the military coup .
Predictably , the African Union 's response to the coup has been lamentably lacklustre .
The AU cannot expect to be taken seriously internationally while it continues to prevaricate and procrastinate .
Why should we in the West go to such lengths to address this issue when African governments appear so indifferent ?
The EU should consider invoking the provisions of the Cotonou Agreement relating to sanctions .
Captain Camara and the coup leaders need to understand that the EU expects certain basic standards of governance in return for a trade-and-aid relationship .
Guinea 's only path to prosperity is through democratic , civilian government .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , we have before us another case where a group of officers has seized power .
Military juntas behave in a similar way : first there are arrests , then the constitution is suspended , and later there is an announcement that democratic elections will be called .
In this case , the elections are to be held in two years ' time .
However , in practice , the officers start to exercise power and find that they like it .
This then leads to social oppression and revolts , as well as violations of human rights and democratic principles .
We have reason to suspect that the same might happen in Guinea , although we all hope that things will be different this time , that events will take a turn for the better and that the outcome will be more positive .
I think that the announcement made by the Economic Community of West African States and the African Union that they were suspending Guinea 's participation in their work exerts a certain pressure and appeals to common sense .
I think that , in view of the social situation , i.e. the constantly falling per capita income , the European Union , and therefore the European Commission , will also take appropriate and considered , but also courageous , action to ensure that normality returns to this country as soon as possible , for the good of its people , and in order to prevent genocide and human rights violations .
( LT ) Today we are discussing the coup d 'etat in Guinea , one of the most corrupt countries in Africa .
In addition , the social and economic situation in Guinea is unenviable , people 's living conditions are extremely harsh , there is a lack of basic foodstuffs , human rights are blatantly violated and all this creates an environment favouring a seizure of power by illegal means .
On the other hand , we know very well that seizures of power by means of a military coup have become a tradition in Guinea .
Parliamentary elections were not called when the term of the National Assembly ended two years ago .
All this undoubtedly is of concern to the international community .
In any country , such a situation sooner or later leads to rioting , instability and often also the spilling of blood .
Therefore , I agree entirely with the resolution we are debating , which urges the organisation of parliamentary and presidential elections , the observance of international standards and help from the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States .
In addition , freedom of the press , speech and assembly must be guaranteed before the elections , otherwise the elections will become an electoral farce .
( PL ) Mr President , the coup d 'etat in Guinea has followed the same pattern as the majority of similar coups in Africa and on other continents .
It took place immediately after the death of President Conté , who came to power following a coup 24 years earlier .
The economic and political situation in this extremely poor country incites the people to protest .
These protests are then pacified by the armed forces , which consolidate a corrupt government and the division of the country into those who prosper and those who are dying of hunger .
The fact that the African Union and the African Economic Community has suspended relations with the junta is a positive step in this case .
External pressure might force the junta to call democratic elections .
The lesson to be learned from this situation is that , in order to support democracy in Africa , the African Union needs an action plan , which would prevent coups that result in enormous losses for the citizens of this poor region of the world .
I support this Resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the news of the death of Guinean President , Lansana Conté , which arrived on the morning of 23 November 2008 , was followed several hours later by a military coup led by a junta which established a National Council for Democracy and Development and which declared the suspension of the constitution and the dissolution of government institutions .
The European Commission wholeheartedly supports the declaration of the EU Presidency condemning this violent takeover of power and calling on the authorities in Guinea to return to civilian , constitutional and democratic government as quickly as possible .
The positive reception accorded to the military regime by the Guinean public , especially by political parties and trade unions , clearly shows that the standard of living for the Guinean people has deteriorated so much that even a military coup is viewed as a change for the better and as an event creating optimism for the future .
It also shows that the former regime had lost the trust of the Guinean people to such an extent that they preferred the government to be taken over by military units rather than official successors .
In this confused situation , it is important to welcome the rapid and effective initiatives undertaken by the Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) and its chairman , Mr Chambas , as well as the determination and decisiveness of the Community and the African Union , which have suspended Guinea 's membership in their organisations and have condemned the violent takeover of power .
The Commission is determined to support the efforts of ECOWAS and the African Union and to support their efforts to enable the quickest possible return to a civilian , constitutional and democratic government through free and transparent elections .
The challenge facing the international community in the following months is to support Guinea in its transition to democracy and in the arrangement of free and democratic elections for a law-making assembly and a president .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you know , in March 2004 , following elections which did not respect democratic principles and which violated fundamental elements of the Cotonou Agreement , we decided to begin consultations between Guinea and the European Union under Article 96 of the Agreement .
Progress was achieved in the following areas : general elections to follow in 2006 , media liberalisation , election system changes to be carried out jointly by the government and the opposition and improvements to the macroeconomic framework .
We are not losing hope .
We firmly believe that the election process which was started in October last year can be successfully resumed .
Currently , a joint mission of the Presidency and the Commission is leaving for Guinea this Wednesday .
The mission includes groups from ECOWAS and the African Union and its aim will be to assess the situation in the country and to propose appropriate measures for supporting Guinea in its transition to democracy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
3 .
Press freedom in Kenya
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on press freedom in Kenya .
author . - Mr President , freedom of the press is synonymous with freedom of expression and democracy .
This does not , of course , apply in an ideal fashion in our society , in which media barons as well as government and political party media interference are not unheard of , but is rather prominent in some western countries , not excluding the USA and some EU Member States .
However , at least as far as legislation is concerned , the media in our societies are given the theoretical protection of the law they need to function as near properly as possible .
This is where we beg to differ with the Kenyan Government , which is introducing legislative measures that can be used for possible repression and persecution of the press by the state .
We therefore call on the Kenyan authorities to reconsider their stance on the matter and give their mass media the legislative freedom they need in order to try , at least , to function as democratically as possible .
The Kenyan Government must understand and accept that the protection of the press is essential for their country 's road to betterment of living standards for its citizens .
We hope and trust that the plea we have made through this resolution will not be seen as interference but as friendly advice to the Government of Kenya , that it will be taken seriously into consideration and that there will be wiser reconsideration of what they have been doing so far .
Mr President , Kenya has been in the throes of a serious political crisis for a long time .
The current President , Mr Kibaki , is implementing measures which are clearly intended to restrict the freedom of speech and of the press .
On 2 January 2009 , he violated the provisions of the Declaration of Human Rights and the African Charter of Human Rights by sanctioning amendments to what is known as the Kenya Communications Bill of 1998 , giving the national authorities new rights , including the right to dismantle broadcasting and communications equipment , as well as to control and alter the content of mass media publications .
The international community unanimously declared this to be a further step towards media censorship in Kenya .
Moreover , in spite of earlier commitments arising from agreements signed to establish Kenya 's grand coalition government , the President failed to consult the Prime Minister in office regarding either this decision or any further decisions .
This exacerbated the crisis in Kenya , which had already lasted for over a year and which had claimed around 1 000 victims and left 350 000 people homeless .
The European Union cannot stand by while fundamental freedoms are being blatantly violated .
We should welcome the Kenyan President 's assurances that the amendments will be revised and that all political powers will be consulted on this matter , in order to give these amendments a new , democratic quality and ensure the broad support of Kenyan society .
The European Union must support these measures and monitor them in detail , fostering pluralism during the process of building a civil society .
At the same time , the Kenyan authorities should take stronger action to introduce a state of normality in the country , including the creation of a special committee , consisting of local and international experts , to punish those guilty of violence and of causing the crisis last year .
There is a chance that these measures will stabilise the internal situation and prevent a humanitarian disaster , which inevitably threatens this Eastern African country with a population of ten million .
author . - Mr President , I regret the signing of the Kenya Communications ( Amendment ) Bill by President Kibaki .
This act disregards the rights to freedom of expression and press freedom as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and echoed by other international conventions , including the African Charter on Human and Peoples ' Rights .
This act would give considerable powers to the Kenyan Information Minister to raid media houses deemed to be a threat to national security and to dismantle broadcasting equipment .
The act will also give the state the power to regulate contents to be aired and published by electronic and print media respectively .
I welcome , however , President Kibaki 's recent move to revise this media law and his gesture to consider amendments to legislation proposed by members of the media .
Freedom of expression is a fundamental human right , as stated in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
I call on the Kenyan Government to initiate a stakeholder consultation in order to build consensus on how to better regulate the communications industry without interfering with press freedom and without infringing rights contained within the Universal Declaration .
Finally , I would like to underline the need to adjust the culture of impunity in Kenya in order to bring those responsible for the post-election violence a year ago to justice .
I call for the setting-up of an independent commission consisting of local and international legal experts who would carry out investigations and prosecutions into the violent events following the flawed elections in December 2007 .
Mr President , Kenya has a violent past .
After the Second World War , when Europe slowly came to accept that the independence of African countries was eventually inevitable , Kenya was emphatically excluded , as was the country we now know as Zimbabwe .
According to colonial rulers , there were too many foreign colonists and too many foreign economic interests in those countries to be able to leave them in the hands of the predominantly black populations .
Unlike other West African countries , independence in Kenya did not come about peacefully , but only following a protracted and violent struggle by the independence movement Mau Mau .
This need for a violent struggle has laid the foundations for continued violence and intimidation .
The victors mainly belong to one major tribe , the Kikuyu .
Other population groups have always been kept in opposition , where necessary on the strength of rigged election results .
The latest presidential elections proved once again that a non-Kikuyu cannot become President , not even if the majority of voters vote for him .
Thanks to a compromise , the opposition candidate is now Prime Minister and domestic peace seems to be restored .
While , out of the two African countries with rigged presidential elections , Zimbabwe is considered the country with the bad compromise , Kenya has been praised as the country with the good compromise .
For years , Western Europe and America considered Kenya to be a major success story .
It was a country with relative prosperity , freedom for international businesses , friendship with the West and attention for tourists .
Kenya has now lost that success-story image .
A food shortage and a new press law have made for renewed tension .
This food shortage is partly attributable to the fact that the President , in exchange for the construction of the port , has leased out 40 000 hectares of farm land to the oil state Qatar for food supplies .
The press law appears to be a lever which the President uses to restrict the power of the coalition government and to eliminate critical opponents .
This is all the more shocking , given that this law came about without the Prime Minister even being consulted .
The coalition compromise between the President and the Prime Minister is in jeopardy if the President is given the capability of bypassing the Prime Minister , restricting the role of the government and protecting his own role against the critical press .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , until last year 's violence , Kenya had a reputation as one of Africa 's politically more stable countries and had a tradition of a relatively free and robust press .
President Kibaki needs to realise that political stability and a free press are mutually reinforcing .
This restriction of freedom of speech , as proposed , is unbecoming for a country led by a man who came to power promising a new era of openness and transparency .
Unfortunately , it seems that many senior politicians in Kenya have still not developed a sufficiently thick skin to handle the inevitable barbs of a free press and a democracy .
I hope that President Kibaki will take our advice and change his mind .
That would reassure us of Kenya 's purported commitment to a free society under a power-sharing coalition government .
It would also strengthen Kenya 's case for moral authority and leadership in an unstable region .
I welcome the President 's pledge now to consider amendments to this bill and to consult more widely with the media .
Given that Prime Minister Raila Odinga and the ODM , his party , are vigorously opposed to this legislation , it is also vital for the stability of the Government that it does not become even more of an inflammatory and divisive political issue .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I am glad to have the opportunity to speak on this joint motion for a resolution on press freedom in Kenya .
A year ago , like many others , I was dismayed and disappointed that , after flawed presidential elections in Kenya , street demonstrations led to riots and ethnic clashes that spread across the country , killing more than a thousand people and leaving another 350 000 people homeless .
Those responsible for the post-election violence a year ago must be brought to justice and a period of reconciliation and tolerance is now essential for Kenya .
In this context , it is very bad news that , on Friday 2 January 2009 , President Kibaki signed the Kenya Communications ( Amendment ) Bill 2008 , which amends the Kenya Communications Act of 1998 .
This bill flies in the face of press freedom and disregards international conventions signed up to by the Kenyan Government .
Two sections effectively introduce direct media censorship by the Government .
Section 88 gives the Information Minister considerable powers to raid and dismantle broadcasting equipment from a media house that is deemed to be a threat to national security .
Section 46 gives the state the power to regulate contents to be aired and published by both electronic and print media .
Within Kenya , the bill has been opposed by journalists , by Prime Minister Odinga and by the ODM , and its passing highlights a serious lack of consultation within the current grand coalition .
I regret the passing of this bill and urge that any revision of the media law takes account of the many , many reservations expressed .
Mr President , as a member of Solidarność , and someone who has experienced martial law in Poland , I know that freedom of speech is the lifeblood of democracy .
The Kenyan Government signed and ratified the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international conventions , including the African Charter on Human and Peoples ' Rights .
These conventions include the right to freedom of speech .
Today , the Eastern Africa Journalists Association informs us that the government intends to introduce censorship in Kenya .
I hope that President Kibaki will refrain from any amendments to legislation concerning the media , which could infringe the freedom of speech .
I call on the Kenyan authorities to relinquish their plans to introduce censorship , to build consensus in order to foster the freedom of the press and the public communications sector .
I hope that the rights of religious and ethnic minorities will be respected in Kenya .
A year ago , over a thousand people died during protests linked to the elections and 350 000 people fled their homes .
I hope that those responsible for these incidents will be justly punished .
( PL ) Mr President , even if it is true that some of the private media in Kenya helped to instigate riots following the emotional election campaign , this is no justification for restricting the freedom of speech .
The attack on the freedom of the press in Kenya also involved the violation of the fundamental principles of parliamentary democracy .
It is worth stressing that the new legislation was adopted by 25 out of the 220 members of parliament .
This is an utterly inconceivable situation .
What is worse is that , until that point , Kenya had boasted one of the most developed and pluralistic press networks in the whole of Africa .
This will change after the new legislation is implemented , which will allow special services to interfere in the activities of the media , close down editorial sections and control the printed or spoken word .
Restricting the freedom of the media sector in the name of national security can only have the opposite effect to the one intended .
( LT ) Why are we concerned with freedom of the press in Kenya ?
Why is the European Parliament debating this issue as a case of human rights violation as a matter of urgency ?
Firstly because freedom of speech is a fundamental human right , as laid down in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , to which Kenya is a signatory .
Therefore , it , like other signatory countries , must not only observe its spirit , but follow it to the letter .
The demonstrations which took place almost a year ago after the Presidential elections in Kenya and grew into riots and ethnic conflict , in which more than 1 000 people were killed and tens of thousands were left homeless , is the strongest argument for not allowing similar events to be repeated .
Therefore , the Kenyan Government and President should act together and honour their own obligations to respect freedom of the press , speech and assembly .
In addition - and this is particularly important - they should fight impunity and call to account those who are responsible for the riots which took place a year ago .
Mr President , while we are debating humanitarian issues and freedom of the press in third countries , I take the opportunity to inform the House that , according to media reports from Gaza , the offices of the UN which were bombarded earlier on today by the Israeli forces are completely ablaze and all the UN humanitarian aid which was stored there , much of it sent by the EU , has been completely destroyed .
The same fate has befallen the offices of Reuters and of other international journalists in Gaza .
I wish to record that I share the view of the UN Secretary-General , Mr Ban Ki-moon , currently in Israel , who is reportedly completely outraged at the Israeli authorities .
Mr Matsakis , thank you for this declaration , but I am not supposed , in theory , to accept it because the rules require that when you ask to speak by catching my eye , it must be on the subject under discussion , which is , I would remind you , the freedom of the press in Kenya , even though the events to which you have referred are indeed dramatic , as everybody agrees .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Parliament 's Resolution on press freedom in Kenya highlights an important issue .
Dictatorships begin with restrictions on the freedom of the press and information , as well as civil rights .
I hope that this process will be halted by international and internal action .
I think that President Kibaki and Prime Minister Odinga will take appropriate action .
The Resolution , which I support , will certainly help the process of democratisation in Kenya .

( PL ) Mr President , during the Communist period , both in Poland and in other countries , one of the provisions of the criminal code stipulated that any person disseminating information that could lead to civil disorder would be punished .
This kind of provision was exceptionally useful as a stick for beating not only individuals but also , and above all , the press .
Today , we see similar intentions behind the legislative endeavours in Kenya .
One cannot state , as an argument or a threat , that the press must be muzzled as it might cause trouble in the country .
That is no justification or explanation for this kind of censorship .
The press is there to provide people with informati