Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 2 October 1997 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like your help on a matter concerning the Minutes of Friday 19 September .
I attended the sitting that day , as I always do . I took part in the recorded votes and stayed until the sitting was closed .
A certain element in the media has accused me of claiming the daily allowance for that sitting without being entitled to do so .
These statements were refuted by the Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , by myself , and by other Members of this Parliament , and I believe the President himself has intervened , but nevertheless certain elements in the Spanish media have used the situation to attack me personally .
At the moment , Mr President , I am in a difficult situation . I maintain that I acted dutifully , whereas these elements in the media say that I did not perform my duty .
I would ask the President to be good enough to confirm publicly that I was present on the day in question .
I always try to stay until the end of the Friday sitting and for that reason , as I think the President is aware , I do not usually catch the special plane , but one which leaves at 3 p.m. in the afternoon , so that I can stay until 1 p.m.

I hope that Parliament 's Presidency will help me resist this smear campaign .
Mr President , allow me to intervene on the same subject as Mr Medina Ortega because I believe Members have the right to be fully informed about this matter .
This issue concerns me too .
I therefore invoke Rule 108 of the Rules of Procedure , personal statements .
What is this all about ?
In fact , we were all seriously defamed by a broadcast on 13 October last on a Dutch television channel , NCRV .
In fact , on Friday 19 September , as many of you will recall because there were many of us present , we were debating the excellent report by Mr Hallam in this House .
On that day this Dutch channel decided to make a programme , the aim of which , publicly stated from the outset , was to demonstrate , as they put it , that the misuse of daily allowances was continuing in full swing .
In order to do this , and in violation of Parliament 's Rules , the channel 's technicians set up hidden cameras in the public galleries to which they have been admitted .
I am not making any of this up , the commentator himself said it , without any scruples whatsoever .
They decided to film Members who had just signed the attendance registers and they selected mainly Manuel Medina Ortega and myself .
The commentaries accompanying the pictures clearly show their malicious intent .
I shall let you be the judge .
This is what was said : just after 9.30 a.m. the Spanish socialist , Manuel Medina Ortega , leaves the floor of the Chamber .
A moment later he arrives at the drivers ' office .
Mr Ortega has signed for 500 Florins daily allowance .
Less than a minute later the Christian Democrat Nicole Fontaine appears .
The French Vice-President has worked for less than three- quarters of an hour .
She too has signed for 500 Florins .
However , unfortunately for this channel , the two victims had been badly chosen .
Our colleague Manuel Medina Ortega did not slip away after having signed - as he has just told you himself - he completely discharged his parliamentary duty , right to the end of the sitting , voting on the Hallam report , as the recorded vote will confirm .
As for myself , present from 9 a.m. , I left the floor of the Chamber only when the agenda for the sitting had been dealt with in full , since I was in the Chair .
Everyone is fully aware of that .
This crude slander , Mr President , does have at least one merit , that of showing up the incompetence and deception of the journalists concerned , who did not even bother to find out what we were doing , what we were voting on , who had voted , who was in the Chair and so on .
( Applause ) All that meant nothing to them .
They had one aim and were prepared to use any means to achieve it .
One can imagine the way they worked , or even the orders which came from on high : find two or three Members , preferably from different political groups , as that will make us look objective ; film them signing in , then go round to the drivers ' office and wait for them , then you film them and that is that .
Well , no , Mr President , that is by no means that !
No parliament , in any democratic country , can tolerate working in an environment with hidden cameras .
No Member of Parliament can allow this campaign to continue with impunity , a campaign we have now been witnessing for months and which consists of lying articles , faked films - we now have formal proof of that - designed to besmirch and ridicule us personally and beyond us our parliamentary institution and democracy itself .
I have too much respect , Mr President , for the freedom of the press to know that journalists who do their work with integrity - and fortunately many of them do - cannot be held responsible for such goings on , which could in fact rebound upon them .
Other Members who have suffered similar attacks , victims of pictures which have been manipulated , mutilated or falsified , have not had the chance , like Manuel Medina Ortega and myself , to be able to confound these slanderers .
Also , thinking of us all and of our institution , which you Mr President are charged with defending , I shall be requesting presently , at the meeting of the Bureau , that exemplary measures be taken in order to put an end to machinations which constitute a serious assault on the dignity of our Parliament .
( Sustained applause )
Several people want to speak .
In view of the strong feelings raised in the House by this subject , I will make an exception and give them the floor .
We will start with somebody else who has been affected by this .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can only add to what Mr Medina Ortega and Mrs Fontaine have said .
I too had the doubtful pleasure of appearing on television .
I hope that at least the picture quality during this important contribution was enough to prevent us coming across as too ugly .
I must admit that I made previous inquiries as to the length of the session .
I was informed that it would run until about 10 a.m.
I was then on official duty , in my capacity as a member of the Latin American delegation , en route for Brazil .
I wish that those journalists - and luckily only a few of them work this way - could spend a week with some of us to see exactly what we do .
I doubt they could stand the pace .
I do not wish to reiterate what has already been said by other Members .
Enough opinions have been expressed on the matter .
We simply will not stand for it .
If your intention is to make us clock in and out , then the answer is an emphatic " No thank you ' .
Mr President , I repeat what I said at the Conference of Presidents : it is disgraceful and unacceptable that the dignity of Parliament and its Members should be trifled with in this way .
The people who have been besmirched behave in an exemplary fashion and were fulfilling their duty on the day in question .
The imputations made by that Dutch television company were repeated by a member of the Spanish press , and it is now extremely difficult to put the record straight and defend the parliamentary work carried out by Mr Medina Ortega , Mrs Nicole Fontaine and those others of our colleagues who are involved .
In fighting corruption and misuse , it is also necessary to defend Parliament 's dignity and the good example of those who fulfil their duty as representatives of the people .
On behalf of my group and of us all , therefore , I join the protest .
This is not just a question of corporate loyalty .
There is no mutual back-scratching here .
What is at stake is our dignity as the representatives of the European people .
Therefore , I call again for us to give our support and protection to these honourable Members , who have been grossly insulted and now find it extremely difficult to explain to the public that they were carrying out their duty .
Mr President , I should very much like to associate myself with the comments made , in particular by Mr Medina Ortega and Mrs Fontaine .
I wish to address myself to the Dutch media and , in particular , to some sections of the Spanish media , who have used this incident in a very vicious way against Mr Medina Ortega .
I wish to place it clearly on record that for month after month after month Mr Medina Ortega , as vice-chairman of this group , has taken responsibility for the plenary for my group on a Friday morning here in Strasbourg .
He has done that in order that I may be able to deal with the administration of my group and to give me some time when I do not need to be in the plenary .
I must point out that I am always here , although not present in the plenary .
Mr Medina Ortega has done that conscientiously , month after month after month , which means that he is not able to take the special plane to Madrid to go home , as other people do , but actually takes a flight later on at his own personal cost in terms of time for other things .
I want to make it absolutely clear that he has my and my group 's complete confidence , and we resent very much these imputations against his personal integrity .
Mr President , it will take me less than a minute to say that my group fully supports the honourable Members who have been so unjustly attacked , and I am sure our chairman , Mr Martens , will be happy for me to say so .
We support them all , of course .
I am thinking in particular of Mrs Fontaine , whose work we all admire , and my compatriot and friend Professor Medina , who fulfils his obligations extremely reliably , as those of us who always stay on Fridays know very well - and not just on Fridays , but on each and every day of our long weeks in Strasbourg and Brussels .
We think that this Dutch television company has not done any favours to the concept of freedom of information , and it is regrettable that certain Spanish newspapers have repeated such untruths .
We are sure , Mr President , that you will do your utmost to protect the honour of this House and its Members , especially those who - like the people in question - are highly responsible in their work .
Mr President , we as Members of this Parliament , both individually and as a body , have no need to lose our composure over television reporting of this kind .
I have nothing to reproach myself for , neither has this Parliament .
We conduct our business conscientiously .
Maybe a report of this kind shows that we need a set of rules .
We ought to make it clear that we are a European Parliament which covers a large area and has a certain method of working .
That is something special .
It is something which should possibly be discussed in the Council of the European Union , and equal rights should be afforded to all Members of this House so that journalistic stunts of this kind cannot be repeated .
A debate has already been held on the procedure .
Clearly , there were three other speakers to come , and the fact is this House is often less than full , since other political obligations necessitate this .
Journalism of this kind is in my opinion poorly researched and , as such , worthless .
It merely serves to drag politics through the mire .
We are abused and accused - this is the second time that I have been the focus of such treatment by the Dutch Press .
We sign attendance lists .
Once it was reported that I had signed the list in the evening .
Yet I had in fact signed morning , afternoon and evening , as I was attending several meetings that day .
Such poor research merits no justification on our part and I do not think we should discuss the matter further .
Reporting of this kind seeks merely to denigrate politics and to suggest that politics can no longer regulate or fashion our society , that it is no longer an expression of our society .
We do not need this type of journalism .
Journalists of this sort can stay well away .
We do not need them to report the business of this House .
Mrs Fontaine , you were in the Chair throughout the sitting .
You are always worth listening to when you are in the Chair , you carry out your duties efficiently and in this respect you are a symbol for us that this piece of reporting was badly researched .
As a Parliament we should state that we have nothing to reproach ourselves with , that we need have no further dealings with this level of journalism , and we should confidently get on with our work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to prolong the debate but I think it is my duty to make it clear in this House , as Mrs Green has done , that Nicole Fontaine and Mr Medina Ortega have done their duty in an exemplary manner .
I am among those who are here on Fridays too .
It was a cowardly attack on them .
Secondly I want to say this : the measures proposed in this Parliament under your Presidency and that of your predecessor can do a great deal to enhance our credibility .
All those who have accepted responsibility in this Parliament are making an effort to implement those measures , which will actually increase and restore Parliament 's credibility .
But I must add that whilst those efforts are being made the campaign against this Parliament is also being encouraged by some of its members and that is not acceptable .
Mr President , I have two comments .
First , I am also in this programme .
I asked if it was correct that despite the protection of privacy rules all Members of this Parliament were to be filmed .
As always when I ask a question , Mr David Martin from the Bureau replied that he knew nothing about it .
So it now seems that Mr Martin was evidently misinformed and on the basis of Rule 8 I would like him to retract those words .
Secondly I would point out to Mr Telkämper and Mr Kreissl-Dörfler that it is only their own group that they have to call to account , since it was their group which was involved in the programme from the beginning and which inspired and initiated it .
Mr President , I shall speak for less than thirty seconds .
I simply wish to make the point that there is perhaps a way of adding to the justified indignation a necessary response which , in my opinion can only come from the President of the European Parliament , for it is he who defends the Institution .
This response consists , for the President , in making use of the legal right of response in the media when this right exists and for the countries where it does not exist , to demand a moral right of response in order to protect the Institution .
In fact , the response must now be added to the indignation .
Mr President , it is quite clear from this discussion that some members of the European Parliament have been unfairly criticized in this programme .
But the programme had wider implications .
We all know that some of the practices exposed in the programme unfortunately do happen .
It was specifically for that reason that in July the Bureau of this Parliament decided to introduce a number of reforms .
Amongst other things the Bureau decided that there should be new rules for attendance and daily allowances for members .
The Bureau also decided that new rules should be introduced for travel expenses .
Both reforms are essential because in these two areas the reputation of this Parliament and therefore of the Union is at stake .
It is our responsibility to make sure that this institution is above all criticism .
So I urge you , Mr President , to make sure that the spirit and letter of the decisions the Bureau took in July are implemented before the end of the year .
This matter must be resolved now once and for all .
Mr President , we fully support the idea that this House should summon up the moral and political resolve to set its affairs in order where necessary .
It was clear from Klaus Hänsch 's initiative over a year ago that this was necessary .
The question still unanswered after this programme is : what has happened in the past year ?
The point is that there has been only one minor decision , nothing else has been done yet .
My group , like most of the other groups , collaborated in this programme .
There are also other Members of this House who were rightly critical .
I totally refute that we organized this and that we were responsible for the unfair attacks on colleagues .
That is quite untrue .
We ask only one thing and that is that this House should set things right itself .
If we are prepared to do so our public image will be quite different .
The result of the whole operation should be that we ourselves have the courage to regulate our affairs convincingly and transparently .
That is what I ask Parliament as a whole .
Mr President I shall make no addition to this debate . I am delighted at the unanimity which reigns in our Chamber on this subject .
Nevertheless , as Mr de Vries has just said , and as I took part in the Conference of Presidents on behalf of our group , I think it is our methods which are in question .
I would have liked the same unanimity and the same wish for reform to have prevailed in the working party which was set up under the presidency of Mrs Péry , and for everyone to agree on reforming the system and also on the enforcement of the few minor decisions taken by the Bureau .
I recall that , as far as we are concerned , we made proposals on the amount of the daily allowances , on the amount of the mileage allowance , on the conditions for reimbursement of travel expenses and on the conditions for reimbursement of intermediate travel expenses .
I also believe that our desire for openness must be made clear when there is the slightest suspicion and that there should be unanimity about setting up a committee of inquiry , as we have often demanded , particularly from the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Thank you very much , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
I am not going to get involved in the debate .
However , the Conference of Presidents has asked me to contact the television company in question to put matters straight .
I will do this today , now that I have had time to draft a letter describing and justifying our grievances clearly , and I would like to thank you for the details we have heard today .
Secondly , at the request of one of our Vice-Presidents , the Bureau will examine this question during today 's meeting , together with the measures we might need to take . I cannot comment on these at this stage , of course .
Thirdly , as you may already know , the working party on a Members ' statute is going to start work immediately , with Mr Martin , our Vice-President , as its Chairman .
Those are the three pieces of information I am able to give in response to your justifiable indignation .
I do not think I need add my voice to the protests because , like all of you , I have seen how hard the honourable Members in question work in carrying out their parliamentary duties .
Therefore , if there are no further comments on this subject , we pass on to the matter raised by Mr Coates .
Mr President , my problem is covered by Rules 2 and 3 of the Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , that is , the rule concerning mandates and the rule concerning privileges and immunities .
As I have already informed you by letter , the question arises because members of the Labour Party in this House were issued with what was called a ' code of practice ' which sought to determine their behaviour in ways which seemed to be in conflict with Parliament 's rules .
I have just this minute been informed that my letter to the General Secretary of the Labour Party on this matter has in fact been answered .
I should explain that I had written to the General Secretary of the Labour Party informing him that under Rule 2 we could not be given a mandate , and that under Rule 3 , as part of the protocols governing Members of the European Parliament in the treaties , it was clear that we shall not be subject to any form of inquiry - amongst other things by external bodies .
I do not yet know whether Mr Sawyer has or has not agreed to accede to my request to withdraw the code of practice .
I request your indulgence to obtain this response before I raise the question with you again if necessary .
When I receive your letter I will of course give it whatever attention is required , and if any information is needed I will ask for it .
Mr President , I have a brief question about another matter .
On the eve of the European employment summit we are receiving various letters and reports about the thousands of jobs that will be lost as a result of the abolition of tax-free sales in European trade planned for 1999 .
My question is whether you will urge the President of the European Commission to ensure that the findings of the study on this matter promised in 1990 are considered as quickly as possible .
Please do not make suggestions like that . It has nothing to do with the Agenda and all it does is upset the flow of our work .
Mr President , on a point of order , following Mr Coates ' point , I think I can help the House .
What he is talking about is an instruction from the Labour Party that no Member of this House may discuss with the press the electoral mechanisms in the United Kingdom .
If it would help you , I have a copy of that instruction myself and I will pass it on to you .
This is not the time to discuss domestic political issues , as you know .
( The Minutes were approved )
Calendar of part-sessions 1998
Following the ruling by the Court of Justice of the European Communities of 1 October 1997 ( Case C-345 / 95 ) the Conference of Presidents , at its meeting of 16 October 1997 , has decided to propose that no partsession should be added to this year 's calendar of part-sessions , but that a part-session from 5 to 9 October 1998 should be added to the calendar of part-sessions for 1998 , which was adopted by the European Parliament on 17 September 1997 .
The deadline for tabling amendments to this proposal will be 12 noon on Tuesday , 21 October 1997 .
The vote will be taken at 12 noon on Wednesday , 22 October 1997 .
Mr President , I shall be extremely brief .
My point is on the same lines as Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's , but I would like to add a question , if I may .
I would like to know what legal reason the Conference of Presidents has found for not adding another part-session in 1997 .
I use the term " legal reason ' because I know perfectly well that there are practical reasons - which are understandable .
Nevertheless , in the absence of legal reasons we find ourselves in the situation described by M. Fabre-Aubrespy : ultimately , we are not enforcing a legal decision .
It is extremely worrying in terms of principles , you will agree .
Mr President , I have no wish to inflame matters further , but I think that we must not place ourselves at variance with the clear and precise provisions of the Court of Justice which unquestionably apply to the year 1997 .
We have a choice of two solutions .
Either we add a part-session for 1997 , in Strasbourg , and everything is in order ; or we do not do so because of material and other difficulties .
But we cannot hold the two additional part-sessions in November and December !
Preamble 29 is crystal clear on this subject .
So , Mr President , I put two questions to you .
First , if we persist in holding these part-sessions in Brussels in November and December , will it not be possible for any person to contest the votes taken there before the Court if it is in their interest to do so ?
Secondly , is the expenditure incurred because of these part-sessions in accordance with our financial rules and will the signature of our financial controller - his vigilance is well known - be forthcoming for this expenditure ?
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents , at its meeting of Thursday , 16 October 1997 , pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed .
Sittings of 20 to 24 October in Strasbourg
Monday : no changes Tuesday : the Group of the European Radical Alliance has proposed adding to the Agenda a Commission statement on the conditions under which humanitarian aid is distributed in Afghanistan .
It should be pointed out that this subject is already included in the topical and urgent debate on Thursday ( Rule 47 ) .
Mrs Lalumière may now move the request .
Mr President , we are all aware of the gravity of the situation in Afghanistan .
This issue is included in the debate on urgent issues .
Fine ! But we would prefer it to be the subject of a Commission statement , which be made place tomorrow afternoon or evening .
Why ?
We know that one of the commissioners was recently in Afghanistan and was able to gather information there at first hand ; what is more it was extremely serious information and concerns us very directly .
We also know that in the event of emergencies the Commission cannot make its views known .
That is why it does not seem to us inappropriate to prefer a statement to a simple topical and urgent debate . It would give us vitally important up-to-date information on the situation in that country and the aid the European Union is giving it through the Echo programme .
That is the aim of our request ; the statement could perhaps be made on Tuesday evening , if tomorrow 's agenda is too full during the day .
Mr President , speaking on behalf of my colleague Mrs Bonino , I can say that she would have been prepared to make such a statement on Tuesday afternoon or Tuesday evening , but naturally the Commission also has to abide by Parliament 's Agenda .
If this matter is to be discussed in the debate on urgency , then as I see it , the possibility would also exist for the Commission to make its statement during that debate .
I was previously unaware that the Commission could express an opinion on matters of urgency .
But in fact it can .
I leave it to this House to decide its preference .
We for our part can comply with either request .
Mr President , I want to draw your attention and the attention of this House to the safety of our visitors ' groups .
Yesterday evening a group of visitors was attacked when they were getting off the coach in Molsheim .
The attacker came from a BMW and got away with a bag .
One of the visitors tried to stop him and was injured .
It now transpires that this kind of attack takes place regularly .
I am asking you , Mr President , what you can suggest to protect visitors to Strasbourg .
Also on the subject of safety and crime prevention , the Council , Mr Van Miert in particular , has still not answered the question I put in March .
Mrs van Bladel , this is neither the time or place to raise that point , so I am not going to answer you in any way .
Mr President , I have drawn up a resolution on behalf of my group on the subject of Afghanistan and I think the point Mrs Lalumière made is a very good one .
I would endorse that and I think a good debate on a statement from Mrs Bonino is really more important than dealing with the matter in the topical debate .
I am therefore in favour .
Mr President , I am very sorry , Mrs Maij-Weggen , but we did not discuss this point again in the group today .
We decided at the Conference of Presidents on Thursday , with our group 's full cooperation , that the statement that Mrs Bonino wants to make on the Tuesday afternoon is absolutely impossible because we have the debate on the budget , which in my opinion is very important .
That means , Mr President , that we have arranged for a resolution in the topical debate on Thursday .
We do not therefore want a debate on Tuesday but we want to deal with it in the normal way in the topical debate on Thursday afternoon .
Thank you very much and apologies to Mrs Maij-Weggen .
To enable Commissioner Van Miert to take part in the debate on the report by Mr Areitio Toledo , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the 26th Report on Competition Policy ( 1996 ) , the Group of the Party of European Socialists has asked for this report to be placed on the Agenda for Thursday 6 November , as originally planned , and for Mr Sainjon 's report , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on relocation of foreign direct investment in third countries , to be placed on the agenda for Wednesday 5 November , as the penultimate item .
Mrs Green may now move the request .
Mr President , we strongly support the proposal for the Areitio Toledo report because it is important that it is dealt with in the presence of the Commissioner .
We understand he is not able to be there on Wednesday but could be on Thursday morning .
That information was not available to us when we took the decision to move the report in the Conference of Presidents .
We would ask the plenary to agree .
Mr President , I should also like to support the proposal .
Nobody opposes the request , then .
I put the request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists to a vote .
( Parliament approved the request )
( The order of business was adopted as amended )
Request for the waiver of Mr Campos ' immunity
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on the request for waiver of the parliamentary immunity of Mr António Carlos Ribeiro Campos :
A4-0311 / 97 by Mr Fayot ( procedure 6119 / 94 ) -A4-0312 / 97 by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi ( procedure 384 / 96 )
Mr President , we are going to talk about parliamentary immunity - in other words the rights and privileges of this House and us , its Members .
As is always the case when talking about rights and privileges , we need to think very carefully about why we have them .
So let us be quite clear about it . The rights and privileges of this House and its Members do not belong to us .
Instead , they are an asset which it is our responsibility to administer with great care , and which must be weighed up against that other basic principle upon which our legislation and culture rest : the principle of equality .
We are all equal before the law .
We are all equal in questions of justice .
And if ever an exception has to be made to this principle , it must never be for the sake of an individual 's interest , gain or privilege , but rather , because higher principles demand it - principles such as the maintenance of the democratic system , to quote the ultimate example .
This is a problem , Mr President , which requires us to think about legal interests and the responsibilities of this House .
We shall consider the two reports separately .
I shall first deal with the report on procedure 384 / 96 , on which my name appears as rapporteur .
With this report , Mr President , the first question which this House needs to examine is whether the necessary procedural criteria apply for parliamentary immunity to be considered .
For as I have already mentioned , we are the trustees of these privileges and rights - only the trustees .
Therefore , we have to be extremely careful when we analyse them .
Well , Mr President , in the case of this request from the Portuguese legal authorities , Parliament cannot make a decision about whether immunity should be lifted , because the procedural criteria have not been met . This was the unanimous vote of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
In order to examine the question of whether or not to proceed with a waiver of immunity , according to the relevant European regulations - which refer to the Portuguese Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of the Portuguese Parliament - there has to be a definitive accusation - a formal charge .
In other words , it is not enough for legal proceedings to have started , or for investigations to be underway to determine whether a specific criminally punishable offence has taken place . Rather , these investigations have to be at an advanced stage ; an indictment has to have been drawn up ; and the competent legal body has to consider that there is sufficient evidence for there to be a charge or formal accusation .
In this first case - procedure 384 / 96 - these procedural requirements have not been met .
The Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities was therefore emphatic , and as rapporteur I have no choice but to support its position : there are no grounds for Mr Ribeiro Campos ' parliamentary immunity to be lifted in this case .
I repeat : this is because of a failure to conform with the procedural requirements demanded by our European regulations , together with and in reference to Portuguese Constitutional Law , specifically Article 160 of the Portuguese Constitution .
The second procedure , No 6119 / 94 , is very different .
The first thing which must be said here , Mr President , is that there is a formal accusation .
Therefore , the answer to the first question is that the procedural criteria have been met .
So it remains for us to decide whether this House should waive the parliamentary immunity of our colleague Mr Ribeiro Campos .
Let us bear in mind that the waiver of immunity requested by the Portuguese legal authorities seeks to allow Mr Ribeiro Campos to give evidence as the accused in these legal proceedings - simply to give evidence as the accused .
This brings us back to what I said at the beginning of my speech . The easiest and most convenient thing for this House to do would be not to waive immunity , and there are even political reasons for such a decision .
Nevertheless , Mr President , I am in favour of lifting immunity , although I hasten to add that I will respect , observe and endorse whatever the majority opinion of this House may be . I am reminded of the beautiful words spoken by Argüelles in the Preamble to the Spanish Constitution of 1812 when he said that light comes from the starry sky of ideas .
On that premise , I believe that the responsible thing for this House to do is to lift Mr Ribeiro Campos ' immunity in this second case .
The reason is that , as I said , parliamentary immunity is not our right but a responsibility which we administer on behalf of and because of our position , for the benefit of the House , but never in our own interest .
I am not going to state here the private interests at stake because they are a matter for the judge , not for us .
However , there can be little doubt that Mr Ribeiro Campos did make imputations which are , in principle , clearly , simply and bluntly slanderous , as the indictment says .
I am not going to elaborate on the injured party 's concern that the matter should be resolved .
The matter can only be resolved if the case is heard .
Because otherwise , in the words of the old Latin principle , the situation will be one of ' probatio diabolica ' .
Nobody can prove that they are not corrupt .
Nobody can prove that they have not abused the responsibilities vested in them by virtue of their position - unless there is a trial .
Nor is it relevant to my argument that Mr Ribeiro Campos may have a private interest in proving that there is substance in what he said , and that there really was a case of corruption .
What is at stake , Mr President , is simply our responsibility to administer these privileges and rights .
This House , which is always demanding transparency and equality from other institutions , must understand that one of its Members has been formally accused by means of an indictment drawn up with all due assurances .
And it is in the interest of this House that this question should be resolved , without being prejudged .
This matter needs to be cleared up .
We need the judge to say whether an offence of defamation has been committed in this case or not , because otherwise Mr President , the uncertainty and lack of transparency will rebound upon the whole House .
I appreciate that there can be political arguments in support of the opposite course of action , and the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities voted accordingly .
However , I believe these political arguments are essentially opportunistic and should not be considered in this case .
Mr President , several of my colleagues share my view that we should administer these rights and privileges responsibly , and that any privilege or right which contravenes the basic principle of equality should be interpreted in a restrictive manner . As a Member of this House , on my own behalf and on behalf of these colleagues , I therefore believe that for the sake of this House and the mandate we have all received from the people of Europe , this situation should be resolved as soon as possible , and therefore we should authorize a waiver of parliamentary immunity so that Mr Ribeiro Campos can go and give evidence .
Mr President , as vice-chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , I am presenting this report on behalf of the chairman Mr Fayot who cannot be here and sends his apologies .
As Mrs Palacio , the original rapporteur , has mentioned , Mr Fayot took over the role in the accepted manner when she indicated after the vote that she felt unable to continue .
She took an opposing view and once the committee had adopted the report she asked Mr Fayot to present it .
However , I should like to pay tribute to Mrs Palacio for the work she has put into this report and for the extremely honest way she made her contribution to the report and has presented her views again this afternoon .
The vote in our committee was not along political lines .
People in the political parties voted in different ways .
As has been said , this case goes back over three years to the time of the last elections to the European Parliament in the summer of 1994 .
For a variety of reasons , it has taken this length of time to come before Parliament .
One of these reasons - perhaps the primary one - was because there was some rather ambiguous communications with the Portuguese authorities at first and Parliament was not sure exactly what was being requested of it .
During the 1994 European election campaign , the Portuguese Socialist Party held a press conference at its headquarters at which Mr Campos made some remarks about Mr Arlindo Cunha , the former Agricultural Minister .
The report before you notes that there were three particular allegations .
They are listed on page five of this report and I do not need to read them out now .
The accusations are that , under Portuguese law , by making such remarks , Mr Campos contravened various articles of the Portuguese penal code .
We all know that the press can present matters and statements in a way that does not necessarily show a Member of the European Parliament in a favourable light and in this case certainly one remark was taken out of context and misconstrued by the press .
However , it seems that Mr Campos ' remarks were not made on the spur of the moment .
Notwithstanding that , under article 10 of the Protocol to the Treaty of the European Communities , a Member of the European Parliament is immune from prosecution during its sessions .
This has been taken and accepted to mean any time during the period of office and at any place within his or her own country and within any other Member State .
To face prosecution for any charge , a Member must have his or her immunity lifted as the previous speaker said .
Since the offence of which Mr Campos is accused happened in Portugal he is protected by the same laws that would protect a member of the Portuguese Parliament under article 160 of their constitution .
In this Parliament , Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure covers the matter .
The allegations against Mr Campos stem from the election campaign and the election campaign was before he was elected .
The purpose of Rule 6 is to protect both Members and Parliament itself by guaranteeing the independence of the institution .
At that time Mr Campos was a Member of the Portuguese Parliament but only a member of the opposition .
In any constitution or any democracy , the opposition 's role is sometimes to support the government but also to oppose when it sees fit .
There can be no more important time to oppose than during an election campaign .
That is what Mr Campos did when both he and Mr Cunha were both candidates .
He opposed the policies of a government minister during an election campaign , making various public statements .
I would suggest that during a campaign the minister , Mr Cunha , could have defended himself in the same political way .
It happens all the time in politics .
It happens especially at election time - it is what elections are for .
This was the interpretation and the view that prevailed by a majority in the committee .
It was for the reasons I have stated and which are listed in the report that the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities decided in this instance alone against waiving the parliamentary immunity of the aforementioned Mr Campos .
Mr President , I shall just very briefly give an account of the principles which form the basis of my position .
I am opposed to waiving Mr Campos ' immunity .
There are two charges against Mr Campos .
The first concerns an event which took place before this term of office began .
People have said that that does not justify him keeping his immunity .
But the point of immunity is that it should apply during the term of office , i.e. that you should be able to carry out political activities during the term of office without hindrance .
In that case it makes no difference from a legal point of view whether the charge relates to an event which occurred before or during the session concerned . That is the crux of the matter .
As far as the offence which Mr Campos is said to have committed is concerned , it is quite clear that the immunity which we Members enjoy here does not relate to criminal offences , for instance , murder or theft . It relates to political conflicts which we may get involved in because of our positions as Members of the European Parliament .
In this case it is quite clear that what Mr Campos is being charged with is a political matter . He made a political statement which annoyed the then agriculture minister who therefore wishes to prosecute him .
To me it is quite clear that both of these stated facts mean that Mr Campos ' immunity should not be waived .
In this case we should instead follow the proposal made by the rapporteur .
Mr President , I would like to apologize to my colleague Mr Campos for speaking in this debate , but I would also like to tell him that I think things would be easier for him if he had waived his immunity himself .
Our immunity is in fact a shield which protects us : we can accuse , insult , and do whatever we like , but that , of course , is contrary to political ethics .
In my grandfather 's day , such matters were resolved by a duel .
Now , no-one dares to fire a shot .
In my father 's day , they were resolved with blows .
Now , they are resolved by a discussion here in Parliament .
Mr Campos could have saved us a great deal of work , and this extremely difficult and unpleasant task of stating whether or not we want to see the suspension of the immunity of a colleague we respect .
And , personally , I have always found him a courageous man , but I have always regretted that his passionate nature should carry him to the extreme of firing shots not only at our enemies but also at our friends , and even to end up by shooting himself in the foot .
That is what has happened to him !
I have always believed that he who has no debts has no fears .
There are obviously two different cases involved here : there is a case of personal defamation , but there is also a more political case , a dispute with the present government .
If in fact Members of Parliament wish to gain credibility , if they want to acquire some prestige from the ethical point of view - which they do not have - if they want to win the consideration of the press - and I know that there are a large number of not very honourable journalists , as we have seen in the case we discussed earlier - the Members themselves will have to fight for that cause .
The day I want to insult someone is the day I will waive my parliamentary immunity , unless there is some more violent exchange of views with the person I have insulted .
I think , as I thought in the case of Mr Tapie - and there is no comparison between the two cases - that the suspension of immunity was necessary to preserve the ethical integrity of this Parliament .
Mr President , may I first of all thank Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi for her introduction , as well as Mr Evans .
The contradiction between the two reports is an indication of precisely the fundamental question that we are discussing today : in the absence of a single Community set of rules we apply various methods based on various traditions .
In some Member States no parliamentary immunity exists for anything said outside the parliamentary chamber .
In other systems anything a person says in the context of his political mandate , whether or not it is offensive - but it was clear that these offensive remarks were made in the course of the election campaign - is considered to be part of his political mandate .


The precedent up to now , established by Mr Donnez and subsequently by Mr Defraigne , has been that the political mandate in the broadest sense of the word must uphold immunity , but we in this House actually changed tack after the Italian Parliament expressed a different view .
That is precisely the question raised by the two reports .
Do we consider that this was part of the political mandate or not ?
I think that the rapporteur , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , is right and we are saying that when there is a personal conflict the judge just has to choose .
Especially as regards what happens within this House , parliamentary immunity should operate and should exist in the interests of the institution and not in the interests of individuals .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.30 p.m. tomorrow .
Satellite communications
The next item is the report ( A4-0279 / 97 ) by Mr Hoppenstedt , on behalf of the Committee for Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the ' EU Action Plan : Satellite communications in the Information Society ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0091 - C4-0131 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . Today 's agenda included two reports on space policy .
One deals with the European Union and space travel , namely the promotion of applications , markets and industrial competitiveness , the other covers the EU action plan for satellite communications in today 's information society .
Unfortunately , the first report cannot be debated today .
However , I think it right that our report , which in some respects is related to the first , should be dealt with today , because we cannot afford to lose time in this matter .
We cannot afford to lose time because of the furious speed at which satellite communications are developing .
But the use of satellite technology in the information society is on the agenda of many of our competitors and there it is being treated with real urgency .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has approved this report unanimously .
This is just as well , as it means support for the report and , more particularly , for the efforts of the Commission to do everything possible to ensure the future of satellite-supported information and communications .
Some steps have already been taken and a number of interesting reports submitted , which have led to purposive discussions - both in plenary session and in Parliament in general , as well as with the Commission and other bodies - on the subject of personal communications via satellite links and the use of satellites in the field of telecommunications .
I believe these to be important steps towards improving Europe 's competence in this area .
Global satellite infrastructures are becoming a critical part of the world 's economic system .
An efficient and coherent satellite communications and services sector for Europe is therefore extremely important , both from a technological as well as from a political viewpoint .
If we look at what is happening in the USA - the biggest supplier of such services - we see that decisive steps have already been taken towards the age of satellite-supported telecommunications .
Successful commercial services and applications are essential if we are to achieve a leading position in the space race .
If we examine the forecasts for this sector , namely a market share of around US $ 400 billion over the next 10 years , imagine what other applications are waiting to be discovered which do not yet form part of current calculations .
With Teledesic planning a future for services and communications which involves the provision of global services with a network of hundreds of orbiting satellites , it becomes clear just how active others have been in this field .
Personal communications services are also well developed .
A total of 17 possible suppliers are in the market , including a European company .
Of course , this is not enough to sustain our presence in this field , but it does mean that we still have a chance of participating , of gaining a foothold .
The Commission 's report therefore constitutes an important step in this direction .
What is needed is greater cooperation between the European Union and the other competitor nations , such as the United States , Russia , the Ukraine , Japan and China .
We need European success at international level , particularly in the organization of the global market .
We need greater collaboration between the European Union , the international space authorities and the relevant market competitors .
This has already taken place to the extent that all relevant market competitors were consulted during the preparation of this report .
We also call for greater support for research and development and greater cooperation in these areas , which will in turn promote the development of new technologies .
We also need to press ahead with the harmonization of technical standards for high-tech multimedia broad-band satellite terminals and receivers .
The emphasis on the significance of the market-oriented concept is obvious .
We too believe that the multi-layered harmonization problems must be solved .
We also think that bureaucratic delays must be avoided , particularly from the national agencies towards the European Union .
We especially require - and this is one of the main focuses of the coming months - an action plan for satellite navigation .
We can no longer tolerate an air-traffic system which sees us dependent on GLONASS and GPS - the Russian and American military systems .
European components must be introduced here .
I am sure that the European Commission will soon be launching an action plan .
We shall do our utmost to support the Commission , since we know that the European dimension has a role to play not only for Europe but also for Africa , and that Europe must collaborate with the other market participants I have already mentioned , namely Russia and America .
If we in Europe do not hold any cards , then we will be in no position to play .
We can no longer tolerate a situation in which funding for space research , manned space travel and the European space laboratory is not part of the political landscape due to pressure for cost savings .
The question which then arises is whether the billions of ECU used to support European tobacco growing should also be part of the landscape .
I believe that we should do everything in our power to demonstrate much more clearly to Europe 's taxpayers that space travel , the satellite industry and its applications are of special global significance for the citizens of Europe and the rest of the world .
I am sure that we can achieve this in the years ahead through actions and debate both here in Parliament and with other European bodies .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the rapporteur , Mr Franco Malerba .
As we are on the matter , I wish to recall that he was the first Italian astronaut , and one of the very first in Italy , to fly into space with the Americans .
And so I think it would have been a shame not to have his enlightened opinion today , as his experience with satellites is certainly broader than all of ours .
Telecommunications satellites comprise the space sector with the maximum potential for development .
Competition between telephone and television technologies in residential connections , the offer of multimedia transmission capacity without geographical frontiers for use in the business field , make satellite telecommunications a technology and a strategic system for achieving an information society .
This perception of a strategic business is very clear in the focussed and concerted action taken by American industry in research plans supported by the American Government , both in the NASA civil programme and in the military programme , and even in the international undertaking assumed by the Federal Communication Commission .
The action plan presented by the Commission deserves our full support and great encouragement .
In the report presented by Mr Malerba on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , the need to incorporate different sections into the framework programme for research for the development of several specific basic technologies and for the construction of platforms is emphasized .
The Commission is encouraged to become that client and user of new services , as well as satellite applications at the service of Union policy .
The subject of satellite communications is again proposed for cooperation projects with Mediterranean third countries , both for the dissemination of technical standards , with the aim of becoming interoperable , and for the many applications that could quickly multiply the opportunities for dialogue with the other side of the Mediterranean by providing assistance for air and maritime traffic , distance learning , telemedicine , promoting tourism by studying and managing the territory and costs , and , finally , the monitoring of natural resources .

Two aspects should be studied in greater depth : the status of the EUTELSAT-type satellite service operators , to make it consistent with the context of the liberalization of services , and the respective roles played by the Commission and the ESA in the management of satellite application programmes , although the close cooperation which already exists today between the Commission and the ESA makes this problem less urgent .
On the other hand , we are shortly expecting an action plan for satellite navigation , which has not been covered by this communication and which , in our opinion , is just as urgent as the subject of the report we are dealing with .
Finally , on behalf of my colleague , Mr Malerba , and on my own behalf , I offer my warmest congratulations to the rapporteur .
Mr President , I thank Mr Hoppenstedt for an excellent report and response to what I believe to be an excellent document from the European Commission .
The technologies that we are speaking about are critical to the success or failure of key European industries into the next century .
The move towards digital convergence has meant that many technologies now use the same sort of communications methods , and for that reason much of what we are discussing today will have an impact going beyond the issue of delivery of satellites into space and what they can be used for - particularly military aspects , but also the development of peaceful aspects and , in particular , the development of the information society .
What we have got to recognize is that either we must get stuck into this approach , as we are doing at the moment , or else we will fall well behind the Americans .
The EU action plan itself makes a strong case for a more proactive and consistent European approach in satellite communications , asserting , and rightly so , that European information technology and satellite technology lags behind the United States , first of all , in terms of the technology itself , but also because of the regulatory framework .
I know that Mr Bangemann met Mrs Cresson and other EU ministers in October of last year in Paris , when this action plan was discussed in some detail .
As a result of that meeting there is clearly a need to coordinate that EU action to complete the EU internal market and remove trade barriers to the creation of the home markets for satellite communications , in particular in the manufacturing sector , and also in the services sector .
There is also a need for improved coordination to reinforce the EU position , particularly in the international fora where these are discussed at global level and , indeed , for the markets as well .
We also need a stronger emphasis on EU programmes for research and development in these sectors in particular .
I believe that the fifth framework programme will be part and parcel of that , when it comes .
The objectives of this are quite clear .
We should support the Commission 's initiative .
Also , we should stress that the CEPT , whilst it has made good progress in harmonizing the role of Member States to some degree , does not have all the answers .
I believe the Commission can play a strong role in that respect .
I take issue with one or two points in Mr Hoppenstedt 's report , in particular item 5 , which talks about privatization as being necessary in order to liberalize .
In my view , there are other models of liberalization that do not include privatization .
Combinations of public and private capital should be thrown into the equation as well .
Perhaps some sort of compromise should be found between the Commission playing a lead role and the CEPT playing the lead role in terms of being the spokespersons , simply because some Member States may not yet be in a position to adopt that .
These are complex issues that need to be grappled with .
Unless we in the European Union grasp the nettle now , we will fall even further behind , to the extent that we may never catch up .
Mr President , we are dealing with an expanding sector with a very high level of technology which , as has been mentioned in earlier speeches , has a very extensive international market from which , obviously , the European Union cannot afford to be absent .
On the contrary , we should be able to have a wide impact , not just within the European Union , but internationally .
Therefore , the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party welcomes the Commission 's proposals . The Commission has paid particular attention to this specific sector , and Mr Hoppenstedt 's report , the main arguments of which we support , has been written on this basis .
Unfortunately , the sector in question presents a familiar European problem .
In some respects we have been pioneers , and in some areas our technological achievements are very good .
On the other hand however , we are once again faced with a set of problems , including : market fragmentation ; a lack of cooperation in some Member States within some subsectors ( in other words , inadequate liberalization of the sector in some Member States ) ; and a lack of balance in our technological research and development .
In some aspects we are still at the international forefront of development ; in others , we are lagging behind .
Therefore , we believe the Commission 's proposals and those of Mr Hoppenstedt - stressing the importance to research and development of coordinating the sectors and encouraging cooperation with the European Space Agency - are a step in the right direction , and therefore they have our full support .
Mr President , it is true that every technological advance gives rise to suspicion and uncertainties in proportion to the size of the changes that it produces .
Nevertheless , in this particular case we are talking about the working out of a plan which proposes not simply to bring about changes , but to reorganize the structures of our society and for that reason we need the greatest possible circumspection and critical stance and the widest possible participation of citizens and their representative voices in the shaping of the final programmes .
However , the Commission 's entire programme of action has been mapped out on the basis of strategies imposed by large multinational players in this arena , mainly American and Japanese , with no account being taken of the needs of society , of the services that should be offered to citizens , and of safeguarding the catholic nature of these services by ensuring the possibility of access to them by all citizens .
We very much fear that the starting-point of this course of action , as set out in the Commission communication , as well as the objectives that have been laid down , will lead rather to an Orwellian society , to a society in which the grey matter of Europe is intertwined , with the aim of enslaving this grey matter and channelling it into the attainment of specific economic aims in support of profit , instead of a society based on freedom of thought , equality before the law , and progress .
Our anxieties are more than well-founded , when one takes account of the fact that the forming , a short time ago , of a high level team , which drew up the Commission communication on the information society , was notable not only for the absence of the Member States from the whole debate but also for the total exclusion of social and cultural vehicles of the citizens of Europe and also the total exclusion of the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture .
Nowhere in the concerns that are evolving is there any mention of safety valves for the protection of consumers and the workers ' social rights .
The only thing that is asked of them is that they appear willing and acquiescent in the name of progress , which in the end is going to replace them and dehumanize them , transforming them into linchpins in the production of wealth for the benefit of big finance .
It is still unclear what the legal framework for the protection of the privacy and dignity of the citizen will be .
Are we talking about the pluralism of information or the super-concentration of means of communication in the hands of a few with the aim of directing free thought ?
The advance of technology and the development of satellite systems must be notable for the widest possible cooperation aimed at contributing to the improvement and upgrading of the standard of living of the citizen and at a human centred conception of progress .
Programmes of international cooperation must not be used for military purposes and must not apportion the exploitation of space to large multinational companies .
The administration of space with a persistent eye on the market opens up dangerous roads for the whole of the planet and its citizens .
Who can , in truth , rule out centralized control at global level of all space satellite communications ?
If mankind is to be at the centre of development rather than the profits of large multinational concerns , then the European Union should play a leading role in the promotion , within the UN framework , of an international and equally honoured agreement on the use of space , the participation of all countries not only in costs but also in profits , the protection of the national security and sovereignty of all nations , the promotion of cooperation between those countries which have the financial resources and the technology , while recognizing the needs of the less developed regions of the planet , something which cannot be guaranteed by the market and its spirit of competition .
Mr President , satellite communications touch on a range of areas .
Many of these areas are , in my opinion , extremely important . For example , areas like television and radio broadcasts , multimedia and the Internet , which really are a chance for my generation and even for people living in sparsely-populated areas to participate in the new society being built .
We must therefore put a lot into this .
It is very , very important that we continue this struggle in an international arena .
I must say , however , that I am a little critical of Mr Hoppenstedt 's resolution because it includes too many military aspects .
I consider space concentration and the military sector to be the critical point .
We know that in both the USA and Russia there are very close links between these issues and the military .
I do not think that the EU shall develop a military capacity in any way .
It is therefore very difficult to know where to draw the line in this area .
Finally , I would just like to comment on a point Mr Malerba raised in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
There we felt that the Commission should take it upon itself to promote the use of new satellite services of social interest .
I think this is a very , very important point , which I really hope the Commission will take upon itself , and which , to an extent , I also think Mr Hoppenstedt missed it out in his conclusions .
Mr President , in view of the fact that the future information infrastructure worldwide will depend to a large extent on telecommunications satellites , one cannot but support Mr Hoppenstedt 's report , since we must prevent Europe from falling behind in this sector of industry .
It is particularly important to incorporate the ESA in the Commission 's plans and to push ahead with research and development in this area .
The amazing advantage of satellite systems is that they provide the means to achieve the political objective of universal access by all citizens to the information society - at competitive prices .
Finally , let me cite an unrealistic example of a rational application .
At Telecom Interaktiv in Geneva , EUTELSAT showed that Internet services could be received by satellite .
A special new Internet channel , the European tourism channel , brings tourist information systems into the home and therefore provides a revolutionary new route for efficient tourism marketing .
Mr President , my colleague , Mr Hoppenstedt , has produced an excellent report on satellite communications , and one which was read with a very flexible attitude on the part of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The report aims at a rapid development in the situation , based on a proposal by the Commission , for the next century , when satellite communications will be of great importance .
Perhaps rather tardily in view of the speed with which the report is being dealt with , I have also discussed this issue with various Finnish experts .
They confirm my view that , aside from the excellent coverage in the report , there is a need here to emphasize the importance of data protection as well .
Although the directive already refers to this , the differing spirit of the law that exists between the USA and Europe might make sufficient global guarantees for data protection difficult .
The need for individual and corporate data protection is high on the agenda in society today , let alone in the next century .
Obviously , satellites will be transmitting even more industrial secrets in the future , and the business world is keen to safeguard these secrets .
They will be transmitting financial information on funding schemes as well as private individuals .
Information of a sensitive nature , such as in the area of telemedicine , will be carried by them , let alone the flood of information there will be to do with security .
Violation of data protection thus embraces a wide area , ranging from industrial espionage to tinkering with and hacking away at national security .
We must therefore hope that the Commission , represented here by Mr Bangemann , will turn its attention to this question .
Mr President , first let me express my thanks to the rapporteur and all those who have voiced fundamental support for the proposals contained in our action plan .
Of course there will always be comments on one point or another , and I would also be pleased to discuss these .
However , I think that we should first accentuate what Mr Hoppenstedt has said .
If we do not pull ourselves together then there will be no need for a debate next year or the year after , for the others will have crossed the line and , whether we like it or not , will be controlling world telecommunications by satellite . They will not only be ahead of us in this vital field of economic development , they will have knocked us out of the ring .
When people ask about the social benefits , I can state quite simply that if we want to create jobs , then this is an area - and I mean communications in general - in which employment is being created .
We calculate that in the years to come most jobs , and not only new jobs , but also old-style jobs whose character is changing , will be in information and communications .
One should not therefore underestimate the importance of this sector .
We shall only succeed if everyone concerned works together .
I am sure that Parliament and the Commission will do what is necessary .
We shall be able to do away with those obstacles which still stand in the way of the internal market .
In the field of research too , as Mr Hendrick rightly said , we must set ourselves new targets .
We should be able to achieve this because here the Commission and Parliament can cooperate effectively .
There are two problems on the horizon : one is a certain reticence on the part of industry .
Sadly , this attitude still prevails . We have in some respects brought industry closer together , we work with it and there is quite a good ongoing debate .
But there is still too little action from industrial quarters .
Our industry does not participate in the way that individual consortiums do in America .
We have commissioned a study to identify business opportunities in this area .
What Mr Schmid and Mr Hendrick said is of course quite correct : we need a degree of public participation in the form of public-private partnerships .
In this respect privatization should not be regarded in too ideological a way .
It is really just a reference .
In the area of telecommunications we need private funding , and this will only be forthcoming when the investment is worthwhile .
At present we are looking into the best way of organizing things so that we can get a full picture of the high risks involved . It is worth pointing out here that such a set-up will cost $ 10 billion or more .
Investors must therefore be certain that they will get their money back , or even make a profit , which is after all the usual object of the exercise .
I do not wish to discuss the comments made by Mr Theonas .
These have partly been covered in the general debate .
There are information society fora in which consumers , trades unions , journalists and many others are represented .
It is not the case that we have regarded this matter purely from a technological or economic viewpoint from the outset .
Neither do I share his fears in this respect .
In my opinion we should reflect on whether a " brave new world ' is not always better than a timid old one .
But these are really ideological arguments which , I hope , we have now left far behind .
The information society forum , in which all these people mentioned by Mr Theonas work , is quite enthusiastic about the new possibilities .
Maybe he should pay them a visit .
We have also made arrangements for Members of Parliament .
Special seats have been provided and it would be very useful for him to see that those whose fears he has just voiced have now become much more daring .
But I only say that in passing .
Now what about the military aspects mentioned by Mr Holm ?
We now basically use GPS for all navigational purposes , whether seaborne or airborne , and this is an American system originally developed for military purposes .
The Russian system was also developed for a military role .
If we now want to use such technology to land our aeroplanes , then to my mind it would be a progressive step if we had our own system , rather than relying on an American or Russian set-up which was developed or perfected for military reasons .
From this point of view the creation of a European satellite-supported communications system could be regarded as a demilitarization of the current technology .
As for using such a system for military ends , if one wished to - I see that you are still impressed by my line of reasoning , are you not ?
I find it really encouraging that you are listening to this !
Naturally such a system could be used for military purposes , if one wished . That is selfevident .
This then becomes a political decision and in the European Union we have to ask ourselves if we want a common foreign , security and defence policy .
This is not my decision , but rather one for the Union as a whole .
However , initially we require this system for quite conventional purposes , such as the landing of aircraft .
You are quite right to mention the peripheral regions , such as the Greek islands . And I mention the Greek islands because no-one else has - not even Mr Theonas .
One might say that each Greek island is basically peripheral and like Sweden or Finland is located in an extensive and thinlypopulated country .
If one wants to ensure effective communications , then the satellite offers the cheapest solution .
It is both the cheapest and the simplest .
Its benefits are enormous and it also offers something for those who live in such peripheral regions .
Now to the Member States .
Unfortunately , the reaction from this body has been muted , and for two reasons : first , because of the old arguments over jurisdiction - something I can partly understand , because when a country loses political jurisdiction to the European institutions , it is hard for national politicians to swallow , and they do not like it - and secondly , because of the existence of the CEPT .
The latter has the advantage of including more countries than the European Union .
On the other hand it is a very loose alliance of countries , in which strategic and tactical considerations do not always receive the necessary response .
For this reason , our action programme states that Member States must participate fully .
Incidentally , what I have always said would happen is now taking place in the field of telecommunications .
The independent regulatory bodies which were set up are now working together superbly .
They have created a European level at which they can cooperate very effectively , and this shows that national resistance can best be counteracted by way of good , practical examples .
My final remark is this . We require greater cooperation at international level .
The whole system can only work by being global , and for this reason we must start considering - and the Commission will undertake to do this and present its findings - how everything that we are seeking to achieve in the area of the information society can be tailored to existing international organizations , or indeed how existing international organizations have to be altered to reflect their global character .
We have today focussed on an important aspect of the global information society and I wish to thank Parliament for its support .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.30 p.m. tomorrow .
Fourth framework programme for research , technological development and demonstration actions ( 1994-1998 )
The next item is the report ( A4-0322 / 97 ) by Mr Linkohr , on behalf of Parliament ' s Delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Decision adapting for the second time Decision No 1110 / 94 / EC , concerning the Fourth Framework Programme of the European Community activities in the field of research , technological development and demonstration ( 1994 to 1998 ) ( C4-0516 / 97-96 / 0034 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after one and a half years of extremely tough negotiations with the Council , and I mean extremely tough , which on a number of occasions were close to failure , the European Parliament through its conciliation procedure finally succeeded in increasing funding for the current research framework programme by ECU 115 million .
This was especially difficult because - and I emphasize the point - the Commission itself had seemed well satisfied with a figure of ECU 100 million .
The figure of ECU 115 million is a real success for Parliament and I wish to thank all those who made it possible , namely my colleagues in this House and - let me be quite clear about it - the Luxembourg Presidency of the Council .
But to what extent can this really be considered a success ?
Our success in carrying through the measure is certainly a positive development , despite the fact that the original figure was ECU 700 million .
It is also good to see the adoption of a new programme , the first time this has been done on the initiative of the European Parliament , rather than at the behest of the Commission .
This programme is aimed at eliminating land-mines , and its funding stands at ECU 20 million , including the supplementary budget .
It has often been said , and I repeat the fact here , that an estimated 110 million land-mines have been laid around the world .
Using current technology , it would take 1000 years to get rid of them all - even if the money were available .
We also approved an additional ECU 35 million for BSE research - a real success in my opinion .
This will benefit research not only into the BSE disease , but also into new transmission mechanisms .
I also anticipate that this work will provide an insight into other epidemic transmission processes .
Last but not least - I believe this is due to pressure from Parliament - we now have more money for renewable energies and also of course for the current programme for multimedia , climate , transport , telematics , etcetera .
The procedure itself , or at least the one employed in this case , prevented any real negotiations - a fact which is worth reflecting on .
We were not confronted with the decision-makers themselves - as I like to call the research ministers .
We should in fact have been negotiating with the Council of Finance Ministers itself , but this body was not present as technically this subject was outside its responsibility .
It is also interesting that in the budgetary process Parliament had been hoping for ECU 200 million through the reallocation of funds for research , whereas the Council finally only agreed ECU 115 million .
A sum of ECU 200 million could have been made available without having to issue additional funds , since this amount was provided through reallocation .
However , the Council only wanted to spend ECU 115 million on research .
This is a remarkable u-turn on research and it certainly shows up all those Sunday speeches we heard in this House .
This decision is all the more regrettable since research activities in the European Union are generally in stagnation .
There may be exceptions , but in overall terms research in the fifteen Member States is in recession , or at least in the doldrums .
This is hardly a good example for the EU 's policy of innovation .
In the coming weeks and months we will presumably be faced with a situation in which economic growth , which is now happily on the horizon again , has stimulated the demand for new skilled workers which we simply do not have because we have not been training them in recent years . This is down to the fact that our young people have been discouraged from studying engineering and natural sciences .
Presumably this means that we shall have to recruit these skills from the Indian subcontinent or elsewhere .
This is good news for them , but bad news for Europeans .
Finally let me say that Members of this Parliament did not find it easy to agree to this compromise .
Nevertheless , I would ask everyone , including those who expressed very little enthusiasm for the decision , to vote for the programme tomorrow .
We should not behave as if we wanted to reject it completely .
If we were to vote against the proposal , then we would ultimately get even less from it .
I therefore call upon all Members to vote for the proposal .
I also urgently implore the Commission to implement these decisions as quickly as possible .
This applies especially to the land-mines issue .
The Commission must also - and I stress the point - set up an appropriate management unit which is capable of taking action and , in the short space of time available next year , must also ensure that the funds are distributed in a rational manner .
Madam President , first of all congratulations to Mr Linkohr , not least for his persistence and his patience over the years .
Like him , I am pleased that we have a result , although I recommend acceptance with a rather heavy heart .
I have mixed feelings and some doubts .
On the one hand I feel considerable relief : it looks as though if Parliament concurs we have an agreement .
This gives some certainty to the scientific community of the European Union , it allows some important programmes to proceed , it gives us a clean sheet for the Fifth Framework Programme and it allows money to be spent with a legal base .
On the other hand , I feel deep disappointment at the result of all the discussions , at the waste of work which went into drawing up more ambitious proposals , at the lost opportunities , at the lack of investment in Europe 's economy and at the failure to respond to the challenge to our economy from elsewhere in the world .
I feel disappointed , too , at the broken understanding , if not broken promise , and the failure of the Council of Ministers to recognize the European Parliament 's codecision powers .
There is a clear and demonstrable link between growth and research and development .
That is understood by Parliament 's Committee on Budgets and I want to emphasize here tonight that every effort was made , particularly by the chair of that committee , to help in the process of obtaining more money for research .
He may feel that his efforts in this agreement are wasted and not appreciated .
That is not so .
If it were not for his efforts in enabling ECU 100 million to be put on the line from the reserve through the supplementary budget , we would not have had the impetus for this tiny success .
The Council of Ministers has been less helpful , if not obdurate , in its approach .
There were two very unsatisfactory meetings , the first of which showed no recognition of the role of the European Parliament .
The second , fortunately , did produce some movement and added ECU 15 million to the figure to be spent on Parliament 's priorities .
That is not a superb victory for the cause of research and development .
We had three choices .
We could carry on negotiating , trying to get more changes in the redistribution of the money - if we had had more time that might have been an option .
We could have abandoned negotiations and abandoned any extra money , just contenting ourselves with rearranging a little bit of money via the supplementary budget - a very ambiguous message from Parliament to the research community .
Lastly , we could do what we are recommending to Parliament - accept on the grounds that no further money is forthcoming , to be realistic , but that some concessions have been made to our priorities .
It was not easy to decide on our tactics .
Our strategy was clear - more money for research .
Each of those choices had serious disadvantages .
I would maintain that acceptance of the deal struck in conciliation is the best solution for Parliament but we must learn the lessons , particularly in our negotiations on the Fifth Framework Programme .
Madam President , I am not going to repeat what Mr Linkohr and Mrs McNally have explained so well to us .
Nobody in the European Parliamentary Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy is happy with the result , but I must make it clear that we have all done what had to be done .
This is the third reading in a codecision procedure for a programme which is of major importance for Europe 's future - namely , research and development .
Mr Linkohr , I congratulate you on your perseverance , as I do everybody who has taken part in the Conciliation Committee meetings .
I do not want to dwell on the fact that we are not pleased with the result . I prefer to emphasize the positive aspects , which do exist .
The finance ministers believe it is important to save money .
We all think so ; housewives do it all the time . However , perhaps in an area as important as research this view is mistaken .
Nevertheless , we have opened up several lines : we have an extra ECU 115 million . There was no time to negotiate more than this because the Commission - Directorate-General XII - would not have had time to prepare these resources and make proper use of them .
With the Fifth Framework Programme for research and development we will have the chance to follow through the ideas which we would have liked to have applied to these programmes .
However , I do want to say that something which we have all fought for , especially you , Mr Linkohr , does now feature here : research to eradicate anti-personnel mines .
This is an enormous problem which this Parliament cannot ignore .
We have also opened up the line for renewable energy sources , albeit in a small way , and water technology research , in two programmes : industrial technology and environmental technology . And we have extended several lines which deal with biomedical research .
Europe is an ageing society , Mr Commissioner . You should tell that to all the commissioners , and maybe they will provide more funds for biomedical programmes .
Europe needs to do plenty of research in brain biology , biomedicine and biotechnology .
This is simply a first step , but one I think we can be satisfied with .
Therefore , Mr Linkohr , I can tell you that the Group of the European People 's Party will give you its majority support .
No doubt there will be members who are not happy with the result and would have liked the negotiations to continue or be broken off .
I think it is better to conciliate - hence the constant use of the word " conciliation ' - and therefore you can be sure that most of the members of the PPE Group will support your excellent report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Bangemann , unfortunately I cannot compliment the rapporteur on the result achieved in the consultation procedure on the financial increase in the fourth framework programme .
I do not agree with him that it is the best possible result .
My group is disappointed , especially since various colleagues were not as firm as they should have been in the consultation procedure .
The final financial increase of ECU 115 million in the financial Framework Programme is very small .
In fact the Council was extremely inflexible .
As far as the allocation of the funds to the various research topics is concerned , more could really have been achieved if , like the Council , we had been a little less accommodating . By that I mean a more equal allocation , more geared to new technologies which create employment than to projects relating to current issues like BSE or particular hobbyhorses .
But - and here of course I am addressing Mrs Cresson 's Directorate-General because otherwise I will once again incur Mr Bangemann 's wrath - the group is equally unhappy with Commissioner Cresson 's behaviour in the consultation procedure .
Right from the start she was hand in glove with the Council and the Commission fought more against Parliament than with it for more money for research .
Despite this very unsatisfactory result my group will vote in favour , because the decision has been taken and consultation has taken place and unfortunately there is nothing more to be done .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is certainly no success story , either from the point of view of the amount of funding or its allocation .
An extra ECU 9 million for renewable energies is not a joke , it is a tragedy .
The relationship between what we know about climate change and what we are willing to spend in this area is really laughable .
The second item is of course welcome .
ECU 15 million for investigating more efficient ways of removing land-mines is clearly a good idea .
However , new mines are being manufactured , sold and laid all the time .
We need $ 40.5 million just to eliminate mines already laid in the former Yugoslavia .
Now to the next item . We want to spend ECU 35 million on BSE research .
This goes against the grain with me for two reasons : first , the initial findings from BSE research have taken 10 years to produce .
We will again have sent thousands of chimpanzees to their death and we have absolutely no right to do so .
And all this without altering our agricultural policy .
Because our farming policy is quite simply the cause of BSE .
Yet we are doing nothing to change it .
All the while we are spending enormous sums of money on investigating something whose origins we have known about for ages .
The facts are obvious : if for the sake of sheer greed we want to turn a cud-chewing animal into a feeder on carrion , then we have got it all wrong .
We follow this up by doing something different along just the same lines .
We have made mistakes - with political approval - and now we are trying to catch up by spending the few funds available - and here I am referring to tax money , which itself does not grow on trees - in the hope of damping down the flames .
I am not impressed by this approach , in fact I am absolutely against it .
For this reason , Mr Linkohr , it is going to be very difficult for us indeed to support your report tomorrow .
I know that some money is better than none .
As my grandmother used to say , a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush .
But surely the time has come for us to take a good look at the direction we should be going in , and this is not it .
As far as land-mines are concerned , there seems to be not enough pressure on our political thinking to force a change .
I have even heard the argument that the production and marketing of these devices creates jobs .
The money earned from these jobs is then spent on finding out how to get rid of the products they created .
This is madness !
As usual , there is then nothing but pennies left over for the important things , namely renewable energies and future technologies .
This is a disgrace .
Thank you for your generosity !
Madam President , it is certainly true that we are adding ECU 115 million to the research programme as a result of this report , but that has to be seen in the context of the original indicative figure of ECU 700 million .
There is a big difference here .
Although we support and are very appreciative of the work that Mr Linkohr has done on this , it is clear a lot of disappointment exists about the eventual outcome of the process .
For once , my sentiments are perhaps more with Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel and Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz than is normally the case in the deliberations of our committee .
The very important point that Mrs McNally brought out was that the Committee on Budgets had made available a total of ECU 200 million .
We are only spending ECU 115 million of that .
So the result does not reflect the financial priorities of Parliament .
What is going to happen to the other ECU 85 million ?
There was a lot of discussion about this in the conciliation process and some disagreement .
The chairman of the Committee on Budgets put it very strongly that this money would be spent anyway on lesser priorities as Parliament saw it .
The Council of Ministers ' representatives clearly felt that they were actually making a saving in the overall total of budget expenditure .
The truth will be seen in the eventual outcome .
I would hope that our colleagues on the Committee on Budgets will take up this point , perhaps by a small own-initiative report or something of that type , to reveal what happens at the end of the day to this ECU 85 million .
That was really the crux of the argument and we were unable to convince the Council .
Secondly , the result does not really respect the research priorities of Parliament either because we are not getting as much for telematics , information technology , the environment , transport or for non-nuclear energies as we had originally hoped .
The Council , in fact , refused to have any discussion at all about the allocation .
If you call this codecision then there are other better words that could be found for it .
We have not had any discussion at all on the allocation .
Regarding Parliament 's team itself , we had a lot of difficulty .
The conditions under which we have to work in these procedures are not ideal .
We did not get the agreement across the political groups that we should have had for such an important issue .
I hope that we will carry those lessons forward when we come to the fifth framework programme .
Madam President , this extra money is a result of the fact that my own country , Sweden , as well as Finland and Austria became Members of the EU .
It is therefore a little disappointing to see how little money has been added .
People may well say that the things money is being invested in , such as information technology , renewable sources of energy and work against land-mines , are very good , but that is far from sufficient .
I would like to refer to the matter raised by my colleague Mrs Block von Blottnitz and ask Commissioner Bangemann whether there is not a great risk that this money for BSE will be wasted as long as the EU 's agricultural policy is not reformed .
That is , after all , the heart of the matter .
I really hope the Commission starts the reform of the agricultural policy so that we get to grips with this problem .
Voting yes or no to this report would be like choosing between pest and cholera .
However , one may as well support it , since it is better than nothing at all .
Madame President , I shall not repeat what my predecessors have said , but I shall recall a point in history to which I was a direct witness .
When in April 1994 the first joint decision was reached between Parliament and the Council , two countries were opposed to the granting of a sum of ECU 12 , 359 billion .
The two countries were opposed right up to the last minute : the United Kingdom - I mention this as a reminder - and Germany .
These two countries finally came round to the common position , saying they could agree to the sum but it should not be presented as such .
There would be ECU 11 , 700 billion , and then ECU 700 million would be refinanced as things went along .
Today let us confirm not only that the Council has not met its commitments , but that there are still these two countries which , up to the last moment , have prevented us from obtaining larger sums , notwithstanding the fact that the financial perspectives have not been revised .
It is therefore a totally extraordinary situation .
The Commission , which is the guardian of the treaties , Mr Commissioner , would do well to question , as Rolf Linkohr has just said , this institutional deviation which is becoming more and more serious , and where we see a particular Council like Ecofin assuming powers exceeding even those of the Council of Europe , as we saw recently with the White Paper .
I draw your attention to this deviation .
This is not just parliamentary talk .
It really is a threat to the balance of our institutions and the mechanics of joint decisions .
As for the Commission , it has been criticized .
Of course , to be fair , I would say that it did its duty conscientiously by presenting a proposal for ECU 700 million .
I would not venture to say that it did so with any great conviction . And we still have not felt the indispensable support of the Commission in this matter .
To all those who find the result rather feeble today , and not without reason , I offer - and this will not surprise my colleagues in the Socialist Group - a Chinese proverb , which says : " It is better to light a candle than curse the darkness ' .
So , let us approve the candle lit for us by Rolf Linkohr .
Madam President , despite the fact that the parliamentary delegation managed to hold its own , from what I have heard - maybe there is even more to come , but it did get results - I can still well understand why people are asking : What do we do now ?
Yet when one bears in mind the various alternatives , as outlined by Mrs McNally , then the question becomes a relatively simple one .
We have - and I have checked this out - made so much progress in the preliminary work connected with all these matters , that the money can now be distributed next year .
This means that next year we have an extra ECU 115 million available .
One might now say that this is not what we expected .
However , if this solution is now rejected , or another codecision procedure is initiated , then it will not be possible to distribute the money next year , that is obvious .
I therefore believe that the best policy is to accept this deal .
As far as the Commission is concerned , I accept the criticism expressed by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel and finally by Mr Desama .
I shall pass these comments on to those concerned .
It may be that they did not fight with great conviction , as Mr Desama states .
That is not acceptable , obviously .
The Commission must always pursue its goals with conviction , possibly even more so when it sees no great hope of achieving its objectives .
It is a strategic error not to enter the fray with drums beating and flags flying .
I shall inform my colleagues and those represented there of this .
I hope that will not jeopardize your support for this proposal .
Let me end by thanking you for this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
Legal protection of designs
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0319 / 97 ) by Mr Medina Ortega , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of the European Parliament and Council Directive on the legal protection of designs ( C40296 / 97-00 / 0464 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , this topic - the European Parliament and Council Directive on the legal protection of designs - has been occupying us for some time .
At first reading , the European Parliament tabled a series of amendments .
The Commission corrected and modified some of those amendments , and added its own .
The matter was referred to the Council , which rejected most of the European Parliament 's amendments .
The scope of the directive is broader than the public sometimes realizes , because it is mainly concerned with the legal protection of designs .
In contrast to other types of industrial property , which could be termed functional - being concerned with making things work , design introduces an artistic element .
You could say it is artistic property and should be considered an aspect of intellectual property .
Therefore , we are not so much interested in whether the machine works or not , as that its visible appearance should contribute to a harmonious overall effect .
So there are elements here that could be termed artistic property rather than industrial property , strictly speaking .
The Directive is not restricted to the legal protection of a specific type of design , but covers them all .
We are talking about protecting textile designs , for example , or designs in glass or plastic - all the types of design which may be involved in a given industrial product at a given time .
That is the nature of the Directive in general , but I think the problems fall into two classes : those concerning the general properties of the design , and those which specifically concern the notorious question of spare parts .
It seems to me that there are not too many differences of opinion about the first , more general problem , which involves protecting industrial designs by means of a harmonization directive . This has led the Council to believe that this matter could be resolved by leaving the other problem - about the protection of spare parts - to one side .
Discussion of spare parts starts with an almost philosophical question : do we protect the overall design of an industrial product , or just a part of it ?
I remember when I was a child , if a radio or something got broken , it was sent to be repaired .
Today , as we all know , repairing most manufactured items is more expensive than buying them in the first place , and therefore the question of spare parts does not arise .
If a watch breaks , we normally throw it away and buy a new one - unless it is an antique , when industrial considerations virtually cease to be relevant .
The question has arisen in relation to spare parts for cars , specifically external parts .
When there is a serious accident in which people are killed , normally the car is a write-off , but most car accidents happen in our cities , when somebody comes too close alongside and the car gets scraped , resulting in damage to the door or mirror , or perhaps just the bumper .
Because of this , the spare parts industry is becoming important in many European countries .
When a spare parts producer copies a design from a specific car , perhaps a luxury model , and puts it on the market , the manufacturer of that car claims that their intellectual property is being violated .
Other people disagree , saying that design protection should only cover the overall design and therefore , if a single part of the design is damaged , that part is not protected .
At the moment legal opinion is sharply divided . In the United Kingdom , protection is not currently granted to individual components , and in at least two other European countries legal opinion is also beginning to deny this protection to the original manufacturer , and grant spare parts producers the right to substitute components in various ways .
My viewpoint as rapporteur for the first reading was that protection should extend to components , but this was thrown out by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , whereupon I gave in gracefully and accepted their opinion .
The committee proposed an intermediate solution , whereby spare parts manufacturers would be allowed to use the designs in question - or at least those parts of them involved in the repair- but would have to pay compensation to the car manufacturer .
This solution was a compromise between the two positions and established a system based on compulsory licences .
The Commission seems to have been happy with this , and decided to go ahead with it .
The Council disagreed , however , and said it was a judgement of Solomon .
We believe that from Parliament 's point of view this is the worst possible solution . There is nothing worse for the internal market than leaving things undecided .
Problems must be resolved in order to provide a certain stability for commercial and industrial relations , and investment . This stability can only be achieved by finding a solution - either good or bad .
The worst solution is no solution at all .
Therefore , Parliament has reintroduced most of the first reading amendments , making use of the Commission 's improvements to the text .
There are a few other , less important , amendments .
For example , there is a clause relating to visible and invisible motorcycle components .
But on the whole , the situation is that the Council has rejected Parliament 's proposals and wants to shelve the matter , whereas Parliament is proposing a solution .
I hope the members of the Council will be able to resolve their differences . Because , as we all know , the real problem is that some Member States in the Council favour one solution , while others would prefer another .
As for Parliament , I believe we have fulfilled our obligations by presenting this set of reasonable amendments , designed with compromise in mind . These amendments were supported by the Commission on a previous occasion , and are perfectly capable of being upheld before the Council .
In other words , Parliament 's position is totally constructive . We have a great interest in seeing this directive adopted as soon as possible , in order to harmonize the whole question of industrial design .
On the other hand , however , we insist that the ensuing regulation must be correct and solve the problems adequately .
Therefore , I call upon this House to support the amendments which have been approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Madam President , I wish to congratulate Manuel Medina Ortega on the amount of work he has put into this report and also the very fair way in which he has synthesized all the various views of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
This is a very important report .
A lot of jobs are at stake : there are about 70 , 000 jobs in the components and motor manufacturing industry in Coventry and the West Midlands alone .
So we are talking about something of economic importance in this directive .
I share Manuel Medina 's annoyance that the Council thought fit to reject the very fair solution that this Parliament worked out in its first reading .
It was hard to get everyone to more or less agree , and this was the best solution that we could find . It is not absolutely perfect but it gathered maximum support in this Chamber .
Then the Council threw it out and went for a free-for-all , with no harmonization on the repair clause issue at all .
It has failed in its duty to look for a proper European solution and I sincerely hope it listens to this Parliament and replaces the repair clause .
It is important for jobs , as I have already said , and it is important for exports : ensuring that companies can export from one country to another .
As Mr Medina Ortega said , the British market will remain open but we are worried about jobs being lost if we cannot export to other countries .
Then there is the consumer issue .
Consumers are entitled to have speedy repairs done at sensible prices with maximum choice , and the repair clause allows this .
There are some concerns about the health and safety issues of spare parts , but this is better dealt with in other legislation .
I urge the Council to listen to this Parliament properly .
Madam President , I only wish to examine the point that has been the subject of particular discussion within the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
The delicacy of the case in question stems from the fact that the object of the measure submitted for our consideration is openly that of creating harmonization between the different legislations to ensure freer competition and greater ease of circulation .
With regard to the point discussed today , and mainly that of the prices of spare parts in the automobile and motorcycle industry , the Commission starts with a motion that provides for the rights of the manufacturers of the original parts forming part of a composite unit to be protected for only three years .
Parliament considers this solution inappropriate and resorts to the compulsory licence system , which does offer protection , but protection that should not prevent the free circulation of spare parts , free manufacture and compensation by giving fair indemnity .
The Commission accepts this motion for mediation , except that the Council , in its common position , abandons the object for which the Directive had been proposed , i.e. that of creating harmonization and ensuring greater competition and a freer movement of goods , and decides that , for the next five years , we will not decide anything .
This solution is clearly unacceptable , which is why the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights proposes once again , through the rapporteur and with a large majority , that the amendments and therefore the position that Parliament had already voted for be reintroduced .
The Group of the European People 's Party , which I represent , will support the rapporteur 's position on this point , and here I would like to argue four points extremely briefly .
The first one , which has already been mentioned by Mr Medina , is a philosophical one , or rather an ontological one : beauty and aesthetics - meaning the design - are connected with the whole and not with an individual part .
An eye , a nose , a hair are beautiful or ugly in relation to the total body of which they form part .
Anyone preparing to design a machine thinks of the whole machine , which is bought because it is attractive as a whole , not for an individual part , which is not beautiful enough on its own .
But the other , and possibly more important , reason is competition .
As the specialists explain , competition can either relate to aesthetics , in the sense that , for the same price a product is more attractive if it is more beautiful -and this is the sense in which the automobile and motorcycle industries are competing today - or to the price , in the sense that , with the same product and aesthetics , consumers are offered a better deal through a price reduction .
When it comes to spare parts , if we do not allow the spare part manufacturers to operate , competition no longer exists and we have a monopolostic system , because the spare parts cannot compete among themselves for aesthetics , as they necessarily always have to be the same and have to be incorporated into that specific type of machine .
So , if we want to ensure competition , which is precisely the object of the directive , we have to allow the production of spare parts even by those who have not produced the whole machine , obviously with guarantees - the trade mark , know-how and efficiency that are described in the directive .
The third argument has already been mentioned - the risk that , if we do not make laws in this connection , we will establish further grounds for redundancies and unemployment because not just a few companies producing spare parts would have to close .
Finally , I have to say , there is a very serious legal reason because , although a law already exists in England , as pointed out by my colleague , Mr Medina Ortega , some countries have case law that does not recognize intellectual property rights in the production of separate parts of a whole .
Finally , I would like to recall that the Court of Justice , in its ruling of 6 April 1995 , said on this subject that the intellectual property right has to be reconciled with free competition and freedom of movement .
It seems to me that this can support the amendments proposed by Parliament through the rapporteur , Mr Medina Ortega , which I hope will be accepted by a large majority .
Madame President , we have before us a text which is very delicate because of its content .
The proposed directive on designs and models was the subject of a common position adopted unanimously by the Council .
So it is highly desirable to conclude with the Council 's balanced version , because going through the conciliation stage would imperil this delicate construction and above all could lead to the final collapse of the entire text .
The European Union really does needs a harmonized and balanced system of legal protection of industrial property .
By returning to the repair clause adopted at first reading , we have created a system which is inapplicable in the circumstances .
Repair clauses do not create any bond between the owner of a right and the copier , who is limited to offering compensation with no guarantee in respect of the volume sold and in respect of the payment made .
This unbalanced relationship can only multiply disputes .
In principle the repair clause should not apply when the owner is able to prove that the copier cannot or will not fulfil his obligations .
But can such proof be produced against a copier when he is based outside the European Union ?
Even linked to a system of payments the repair clause proposed by the rapporteur raises major objections at the level of fairness .
On the one hand it provides that the copier is liable only to offer a payment to the owner of the rights for his copying activity to be considered legal and to escape the description of pirate .
On the other hand the copier will restrict himself to producing articles with a rapid turnover and a high sales volume , while the manufacturer himself will , over ten years , have to produce more than 150 , 000 articles so that they will be available to the consumer .
Contrary to what we are expected to believe the repair clause will not benefit the consumer .
Only the original articles offer the guaranteed resistance to corrosion , mechanical strength and safety demanded by the consumer and to which the manufacturer is committed .
It is particularly for reasons of safety that , in association with the competent legal and administrative authorities of the Member States of the European Union , the manufacturers have launched an unprecedented campaign against the safety risks inherent in fraudulent copying and the black market in spare parts .
In reality , in terms of price , respecting industrial property is not prejudicial to the consumer .
In the United Kingdom , where copying is free , the prices of spare parts increased by 13 % between 1989 and 1993 , whereas in France , a country where industrial property is protected , during the same period prices increased by only 1.6 % .
So the advantage for the consumer is highly likely to be illusory .
A price which appears to be low actually represents a higher final cost , because of problems with quality , safety and adaptability .
Finally , in accepting the copying of spare parts from day one , this clause goes against the basic principles of industrial property and represents a very high economic risk for manufacturers who have to invest massively in the aesthetic elements .
The common position is a balanced whole which cannot be called into question by a factor as serious in economic terms as the reintroduction of the repair clause .
Madam President , right from the start the discussion of this important subject has focussed on the famous repair clause .
I hope the European Parliament will follow the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights in promoting a proper balance between all the interests involved .
This contrasts with the ineffectiveness of the Council of Ministers , which has left it to individual Member States to find a solution .
Such a lack of decisiveness negates any efforts towards European harmonization .
Unless the Council is willing to follow the European Parliament and the Commission , we are heading straight for a confrontation .
I sincerely hope that we shall come to an agreement on the whole question of designs , so that eventually real protection will actually be introduced at European level .
The protection of designs is in fact not only important to the car and cycle market .
It is important for the car market and that market is important .
But countless other sectors , our European fashion houses , those who design equipment like telephones , computers and radios , are waiting for uniform European legislation .
The protection of intellectual property is the legal expression of our intellectual curiosity , creativity and inventiveness , which are beneficial not only to the further implementation of the internal market but above all to our competition with our main trading partners .
It is in that spirit that I hope Mr Medina Ortega 's report will be approved .
Madam President , the problems which have arisen during debates about the common position on the legal protection of designs have been caused not by attempting to protect artistic design , but by trying to resolve the conflicts of interests between manufacturers and consumers .
The difficulty in arriving at a satisfactory legal definition of design has been due to problems related to resolving this conflict .
The very act of resorting to the visibility or otherwise of the design of a component in a complex product , in order to exclude it from protection , demonstrates just how difficult it is to find a concept and a formula to reconcile these interests without causing legal ambiguities and uncertainties .
We have had to perform a balancing act to safeguard the interests of consumers and independent vehicle spare parts manufacturers , who provide a considerable number of jobs .
Parliament has been careful to achieve a balance , showing that we realize this is a delicate matter , but we are in favour of retaining a spare parts market open to free competition , where the interests of the manufacturing industry are also safeguarded .
In Parliament 's proposed solutions , internal market competition is safeguarded in law , and designs are sufficiently protected . This , after all , is what we are trying to do .
The reasonable remuneration established in the repair clause guarantees that car manufacturers will be repaid for the investment they make in technical improvements to their designs .
Therefore , it is difficult to understand why Parliament 's compromise solutions have been rejected .
I would have been in favour of an even greater reduction in the time-scale for protection , but I nevertheless think that Parliament 's solutions are compromises which deserve to be supported .
And despite my difference of opinion about time-limits , I think that at this time a minimum form of protection , like the one suggested in the compromise solution , should definitely not be ruled out .
Madam President , I would like to say that Parliament 's position is a balanced one and has weighed up all the pros and cons in this debate . However , the Council 's position is very strange .
If it gets its way in the controversy over the spare parts repair clause in article 4 , this would amount to creating and preserving monopolies to the disadvantage of consumers and the freedom of competition , and to the disadvantage of small and mediumsized industries which we purport to support .
I ask myself : is this really a Council position or is it the position of one or two Member States ? 80 % of Member States have design protection already in national law .
So Parliament is entitled to ask if this is actually a Council position or the position of one Member State .
The vote on this report will show who in practice is in favour of freedom of competition when it serves consumers and small businesses and who , on the other hand , supports legal protection of multinational monopolies .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I in turn am anxious to thank the rapporteur , Mr Medina Ortega , for his very thorough work and the willingness he has expressed throughout the debates in the Committee on Legal Affairs to take account of the view of the majority of Members of Parliament .
I am of course referring to the opinion expressed during at first reading by our Parliament on 12 October 1995 .
The introduction of the repair clause in the motor industry sector has been at the heart of the debates since this proposal for a directive was put before Parliament .
This focus on the motor industry is hardly surprising . The economic stakes associated with vehicles are considerable .
It is surely true to say that , after a house , a car represents the largest and most expensive investment for the majority of European consumers .
However unsurprising this focus on the motor industry may be , that does not make it any less unfair .
Indeed , how , indeed , could we neglect other sectors of European industry equally affected by this harmonization of national legislation , like textiles and clothing , watchmaking , electronics ?
The fault lies with the repair clause , I am told , but its impact would be less in these sectors .
On the subject of this famous clause , which has become the focal point of our discussions , it must be stated that the Commission has , in its modified proposal , linked up with the position expressed by Parliament at first reading .
This is unusual enough to be emphasized and should rivet our attention .
So the position is now very clear .
On the one hand we have the European Parliament , without prejudging tomorrow 's vote , where 314 votes will be necessary , we have the Commission and the Economic and Social Committee , which do not favour protection of designs and models in spare parts .
On the other hand we have the Council of Ministers which wishes to extend to spare parts the protection already enjoyed by the finished product .
I voted , along with the apparently unanimous other members of the Committee on Legal Affairs , for vehicle fitters to be able to reproduce vehicle bodywork components from day one .
I maintain that the safeguards provided by our committee are significant : a legal licence guaranteeing a fair payment to the owners of the rights , informing the public and the consumer about the origin of the product , information for the owner for the use of his design .
But what convinced me is the particular legal nature of spare parts .
In fact the inclusion of spare parts in the protection of designs and models carries the risk of creating a product monopoly , which is counter to the essence of the law on intellectual property which is not supposed to create a monopoly of form .
The non-introduction of the repair clause would have considerable consequences for consumers who would not benefit from price freedom .
What of the consequences for employment ?
The vast numbers of SMEs , for which the European Parliament is seeking a major plan - to be debated tomorrow morning - and which are already subject to very strict manufacturers ' specifications , are the breeding ground for jobs in Europe .
So we have to think of them as a priority .
The arguments have been rehearsed in my political group , the Group of the European Radical Alliance .
I am not going to hide the fact that some of my colleagues take a different view and oppose liberalization of the spare parts market .
Their arguments are familiar to us all : the clause is economically dangerous for European car manufacturers , legally questionable and would not respect the international agreement signed by the European Community .
To sum up , certain Members in my group have decided to fight a posteriori against fraudulent copying , knowing that the safety risks have different consequences in the motor vehicle sector than in watches or handbags .
Other Members , and they are in the majority , have opted , like me , for more flexible legal protection , suited to the realities of creativity .
In other words , the design of spare parts cannot be separated from the original product .
Mr President , the role of the legislator is to draw up texts which are accurate , balanced and clear , in order to avoid perpetual legal arguments and disastrous economic effects on the sectors concerned .
The proposal for a directive concerning the protection of designs and models will no longer meet these criteria if the repair clause is reinstated .
It removes all protection from designs and models for external parts .
By way of compensation it is proposed that the copier himself should take the initiative of informing the copyright owner of his intention to copy the parts and to propose a fair and reasonable payment .
In practice we do not know how this compensation can operate or how the designers will be able to obtain maximum value from their rights .
What is at stake is research and innovation in the European Union , where industrial companies make enormous efforts to perfect original designs after a complex process .
These efforts , which are needed because of international competition , involve taking industrial risks which represent billions of francs in some sectors .
The repair clause authorizes the copying of the results of these efforts by third parties who will never bear the costs of research and development or the costs of innovation .
The adoption of this clause , which is counter to the basic principle of intellectual property , would send a negative signal to numerous companies in Europe , who could be tempted to reduce their innovative or creative efforts or to relocate to places where costs are lower .
It is a matter of opting for an industrial Europe where the companies which create and invest receive fair protection for the fruits of their efforts of creation , innovation and development .
In addition , this repair clause will be a source of perpetual argument and permanent legal uncertainty .
We are constantly told about a Europe of 380 million consumers ; this Europe must also be a Europe of producers , failing which it will always be more a Europe of the unemployed .
These are the reasons why we shall not be voting for the repair clause .
Madam President , I wish to express my disappointment , and that of my group , at the clear inconsistency of the Council .
Let me explain : on the one hand , the Council does not waste an opportunity to praise the open market , consumer protection and job protection ; on the other , when it comes to the legal protection of designs and models , it adopts rather debatable legal devices that actually favour the predominance of the large spare parts manufacturers to the detriment of the smaller producers , the open market , consumers and workers .
This is the reason for the disagreement between the Council , the Commission and Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
In fact , with the introduction and approval of the amendment to article 14 , albeit at second reading , Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs sought to protect the market and the workers .
If article 14 is excluded their position is worse and with the introduction of the individual states ' right to choose between freedom and monopoly , the Council is distorting the very principles of the European Union .
The Alleanza Nazionale chooses freedom , by tradition and firm conviction . We hope the other groups will do the same by supporting the Medina Ortega report .
Madam President , I , too , would like to support Mr Medina Ortega 's report .
This directive deals with something quite central to the internal market within the European Union , namely the need to protect those firms which carry out research and development .
These are the firms which create Europe 's competitiveness .
The foundation stone for the economy of the future is initiative and research .
Having said that , however , it is also important to say that monopoly status must not be created for individual manufacturers at the expense of consumers .
The second reading of this directive gives me an opportunity to express my surprise at the Council and its attitude in this process .
With its free-for-all clause , the Council has left us in a vacuum , The free-for-all clause will give motor manufacturers a monopoly in the repair market - a monopoly status which means sharp price rises for spare parts .
And this is a price which European consumers will have to pay .
The Council has thus refrained from giving an opinion on design legislation and in so doing has missed the opportunity to lay down a clear standard which could ensure an effective internal market within the design sphere for spare parts .
It is our task here in Parliament to ensure that the internal market is carried into effect .
It must be for the benefit of Europe 's population and protect firms against non-EU countries .
This is a big task , a balancing process , and monopoly status for the motor manufacturers in spare parts is clearly to the detriment of the population .
It is absolutely essential to remove the free-for-all clause .
Consumers must put their trust in the European Parliament and the Commission .
I hope that we will get a majority tomorrow to amend the text .
Last night , the word " copy ' was used .
I would like to say on this that in some cases it is the sub-contractor who develops a spare part - and observes the standard - meaning that we have here cooperation between motor manufacturers , sub-contractors , and so on .
So it is not only a question of car producers here .
Madam President , I very much welcome the Commission proposal and would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work .
The European Parliament reached , after great length , an acceptable compromise .
In my view , the present situation where differences in national laws hinder free movement is no longer acceptable .
The Commission proposal is to be welcomed because it seeks to harmonize provisions which most directly affect the proper functioning of the internal market : the definition of design requirements for obtaining protection , the scope and terms of such protection , grounds for refusal or invalidity of such protection , the definition of rights conferred and the limitations thereon .
Adopting this directive would benefit all sectors of the manufacturing industry , but most especially the consumer goods sector .
As a point of principle , I very much hope that this House will reinsert the repair clause amendment .
I totally agree that when needed for repair , unhindered copying of designs of spare parts on payment of remuneration represents a reasonable compromise .
I therefore support the Commission proposal and the amendments adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
I hope this House will have the courage to adopt those amendments and satisfy the needs of consumers and the manufacturing industry in this regard .
Madame President , ladies and gentlemen , this directive is grounds , in my opinion , for a warning about amendments which might call into question the extremely delicate balance which has been created at Council level between the States and between the commercial interests .
Given the time , I shall refer mainly to article 14 , which is of course the repair clause .
On the pretext of defending the consumer , indeed even small firms , we risk putting the European producers in difficulty and in certain cases facilitating copying and possible piracy , particularly in south east Asia , even if , so far , people have had understandable reservations about mentioning this real danger in geographical terms .
On the other hand , the European Parliament has always shown great concern about the level of unemployment in Europe , quite rightly moreover , and about relocation , which considerably aggravates the unemployment situation in the industrial sector .
The motor industry is already faced with clear and very powerful competition and we can hardly talk about a monopoly in the sector . So opening up this sector to a little more competition involves a risk of weakening manufacturers ' rights over their protected property .
In our opinion this can only favour piracy , engender litigation , in short , create legal uncertainty .
Indeed , everybody knows that legal uncertainty is against the interests of business and that what is against the interests of business is generally , in time , harmful to employment .
The motor industry is powerful , true , but it is also very fragile and the arguments in favour of the amendments before Parliament , although they are very cogent in legal terms , do , in my opinion and in certain cases , lack economic sense and logic in the real world of day-to-day economic existence .
That is why I sincerely hope our Parliament will stick to the common position of the Council , and that , of course , is how I shall vote .
Madam President , we are at second reading !
At first reading , Parliament was almost unanimous in approving the repair clause .
The Commission supported Parliament in this and the Council avoided making any decision .
On the crucial point , namely what we do about the spare parts sector - which was after all the point of the directive - the Council avoided the issue .
Now the matter is going through second reading in Parliament and we say that we did not mean to take things quite so seriously .
This sort of thing only undermines Parliament .
In future the Commission and the Council will not take Parliament 's first reading seriously - even if there is unanimity in the House .
There have been two high court decisions , namely in the House of Lords and the Italian Constitutional Court , which state that the legal protection of designs only protects the design and not the components which constitute it .
All the same , these are just high court decisions !
We are now being told that jobs are under threat .
The repair clause does not deprive the car industry of its market share of the spare parts trade but merely opens it up to competition .
Car manufacturers currently control 88 % of the spares market !
They operate an effective dealer and sales network and there will always be plenty of customers who prefer to use factory-produced components .
To talk of a decline in this market share is therefore totally unrealistic .
The question is whether or not the free market will in future be able to maintain a 12 % share of the spares business .
Manufacturers quite simply want to have a monopoly of this market , and that is not desirable .
Madam President , I want to confine my remarks to the repairs clause .
This will soon become reality if we accept the suggestion that the 180 car and motorcycle manufacturers concerned will end up charging more for repairs and , consequently , for insurance .
This will happen if we do not accept what Parliament has already decided and what the Commission has already proposed .
This means - and here I reinforce what has just been said - that we are actually proposing to prohibit the reproduction of visible components .
This would result in a monopoly , in other words the car manufacturing companies would be in a position to dictate prices .
Of course we do not want this .
We do not want increased repair charges any more than we want to see jobs lost .
I would just like to point out that jobs are going to be lost not only on the production line but also , quite understandably , in the trade sector where spare parts are sold , and of course in turn in the free-market factories which would no longer be able to operate to full capacity .
Jobs are going to be lost there too .
We should be advocating both sides of the argument , that is to say both original replacement parts and reproduction parts .
Both sectors should be tolerated in the same way as we accept authorized repairers and free-market workshops .
After all , this is the beauty of the free market and it should remain so .
This approach is entirely justified when one realises that car manufacturers actually have to buy-in 70 % of their original parts .
The problem of reproduction parts is therefore not as blatant as many would suggest .
The conclusions to be drawn from this are as follows : yes to design protection - but with a repair clause which allows the reproduction of visible components under quite specific conditions , namely that the original manufacturer is notified that copyright royalties apply .
The Council has taken the side of the motor companies in this , and in tomorrow 's vote we in Parliament should support the consumer and the free market .
Madam President , it is regrettable that the debate on the very important report submitted by Mr Medina Ortega concerning the legal protection of designs has basically become restricted to the repair clause .
In my opinion a decision supporting this repair clause would represent a pyrrhic victory for the motorists ' representatives .
By this I mean of course a pyrrhic victory not in the economic sense but rather in the legal sense .
I can well understand the arguments of motorists ' representatives and spare parts manufacturers , but as a lawyer I cannot recognize any objective criterion for abandoning the principles of design protection in respect of car spares of all things .
In fact , I consider this development highly questionable and possibly even creating a precedent .
In truth , the matter under consideration has , I believe , more to do with competition than design protection and it should be judged from that viewpoint .
Madam President , as the Commissioner responsible for industry I should have plenty to say about today 's debate .
However , with an eye on the clock I would prefer not to do that but rather to abide by Mr Rothley 's request that the Commissioner should be consistent .
In the first reading the Commission supported the amendments proposed by Mr Medina Ortega .
The Council did not accept these proposals .
Incidentally , responding to a question from a certain female Member , may I just say that the Council vote was unanimous and that therefore one should actually call it a Council decision .
But we want to remain consistent .
We therefore support Parliament 's proposed amendments , but with four exceptions : we do not support Amendment No 12 since we are of the opinion that it complicates things unnecessarily in that it relates to a matter which is itself undecided , and this will certainly not aid the course of events , particularly in respect of a quick decision .
Then we have material reasons for rejecting Amendments Nos 1 , 5 and 6 .
If the repair clause is to be introduced in the form preferred by Parliament , these amendments could in our opinion give rise to uncertainty as to the meaning of the individual details of the clause itself .
Nevertheless , this indicates that we support the greater part of the proposals , including the repair clause , as we did at first reading , and we hope that today 's discussion will have some influence on the Council .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12.30 p.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.15 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr Medina Ortega has the floor .
Mr President , this is just a question of a detail in the Minutes , but as it affects you too , I would like it to be corrected .
Referring to my first speech , it specifically says , " he called on the President of Parliament to confirm publicly that he had been present on that day , and had only caught a flight back to Spain at 3 p.m. '
You normally travel with me , Mr President , but in fact on that particular day I think we both caught the 1 p.m. flight .
The Verbatim report of proceedings is correct in that I said , " and for that reason , as I think the President is aware , I do not usually catch the special plane , but one which leaves at 3 p.m. in the afternoon , so that I can stay until 1 p.m. '

In fact , on that particular day I flew at 1 p.m. , because the sitting finished earlier .
It is just a small detail .
Mr President , I appreciate your being present in Madrid on 12 October for our anti-racism match , although of course that is not my point .
But I do want to thank you .
My point is that as a Parliament we need to have access to our own legislative documents , which we do not have .
I am writing to you on the subject today .
Mr President , I rise to speak on the point raised by Mr Coates which is to be found on page 6 of the Minutes .
I do not think this is an accurate Minute .
In the first place , it merely states that Mr Coates raised a matter under the Rules .
It does not minute that he raised the very important matter of the mandate of Members .
There can be few matters as important as that .
Secondly , the Minutes do not reflect the President 's reply , which is also of great significance .
He said that this was an internal matter .
I would like to suggest that it is not an internal matter .
If a Head of Government of this Union issues a restriction on Members , saying they may not discuss electoral reform with the press , that is a total invasion of independence under Rule 2 .
I would like the Minutes to be accurate on this matter .
Mrs Ewing , it was an internal matter , that is why it is not there .
It was when answering Mr McMillan-Scott that I said this was not the occasion to discuss internal British politics , which is quite different .
In reply to Mr Coates , I said that I would study his letter and answer it in due course .
Mr President , on the same point .
Clearly , what Mrs Ewing has said is nonsensical and absurd .
I would like to reaffirm what you just said and to point out that the code of practice is quite clearly an internal Labour Party matter concerning Labour Party Members of this House .
It has nothing to do with parliamentary privilege and nothing whatsoever to do with the business of this House .
Moreover , as far as the European Parliamentary Labour Party is concerned , we totally dissociate ourselves from the comments and actions of Mr Coates .
He speaks for himself and for himself only .
Mr President , I rise to speak on the same issue .
Can you confirm whether or not you have received a letter from Mr Coates ?
I want to emphasize the point made by Mrs Ewing and contradict the point made by Mr David .
It is most certainly an issue for this Parliament to consider .
I have a press report here that says that Labour Party Members may not give statements to the press on this matter .
That seems to me to be flagrantly and openly restricting the mandate of openly elected Members of this Parliament and I trust you will take this issue very seriously indeed .
Mr Perry , any issue raised by Members is taken very seriously .
Of course , I will answer the letter and , if there is any doubt , I will submit it to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , which I think is the right way .
I will not allow any more time to be spent on this matter .
Mr President , I can find no mention in the Minutes of the fact that yesterday I drew attention to an attack on a group of Dutch visitors in which one member of the group was injured .
Crime is on the increase and safety cannot be guaranteed .
I have been tabling written questions on that point since March .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mrs van Bladel , your questions will be answered in the proper way .
I asked you yesterday not to raise this matter in the part-session , because this is not the appropriate channel .
If you look at the Report of Proceedings , you will see that what I said was that the subject was not on the Agenda .
Mr President , page 25 of the Minutes of yesterday 's sitting records the proposal you made , on behalf of the Conference of Presidents , regarding the calendar for 1997 and 1998 .
You mentioned Tuesday 's Conference of Presidents .
To my great surprise , on leaving the sitting , I found the 1998 calendar in my pigeonhole , full version and summary .
I must say that this denotes , at very worst , an intention to disregard the vote that was to take place on Tuesday , and at best , a serious malfunction in the department that distributes the calendar , which knew it was going to be modified , or , in any case , which knew modifications had been proposed .
I would like clarification from you on this point .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , naturally , after the first vote which was taken during the September part-session , the appropriate department published a calendar which reflected the outcome of that vote .
This was distributed after the meeting of the Conference of Presidents .
Clearly , the next vote may change that decision .
Until then , the binding decision is that of September and a calendar already being distributed cannot not be withdrawn .
Other Members probably received it before the Wednesday meeting , in your case it arrived afterwards .
Mr President , I just wish to advise you that some of us in the Labour Party share Mr Coates ' concern and would like this code of conduct to be addressed by the President in Parliament .
( The Minutes were approved )
Decision on urgency
Mr President , this is without doubt an important issue .
We are also looking into the matter , but regrettably it will not be possible to debate it in this sitting .
The Committee sits next week and we shall then be in a position to reach our final decision in the first November meeting .
I therefore propose that we decline the urgency for this week .
Mr President , I insist that we should not proceed with this urgency , because I have caught the Commission at some underhand behaviour , I am afraid .
I asked it last summer why it is insisting on the use of Nordic gold in the new euro rather than nickel ; the day after the committee discussed it , the Commission admitted to me that it had absolutely no medical evidence to show that nickel is a particular problem for the large proportion of the population , as it seems to be claiming in its document .
Therefore I would advise the committee to watch very carefully what the Commission is saying about nickel and Nordic gold , because we are not being told the truth .
Mr President , as Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer is not here , I shall presume to defend the suggestion that this report should be debated , according to plan , only when the Brussels sittings start in November .
Loath as I am to express an opinion on the effect on health of Nordic gold or nickel , everyone will surely agree that this matter must be gone over carefully , and that this request for urgency cannot be complied with .
I put the request for urgent procedure to a vote .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
European Council on Employment
The next item is the report ( A4-0307 / 97 ) by Mr Wim van Velzen , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal of the European Parliament to the Extraordinary European Council Summit on Employment ( 20-21 November 1997 ) ( C4-0389 / 97 ) .
The rapporteur , Mr van Velzen , has the floor .
Mr President , now that the treaty contains a chapter on employment , in my opinion it is time to bring the phase in which the Council has mainly discussed what Europe could not do to a close .
It is time to say what Europe can and must do .
In Amsterdam the Heads of Government introduced coordination machinery which is practically identical to the EMU coordination machinery .
It was also decided that employment must be included in all areas of policy and in my view it should be made clear at the Luxembourg summit that the new treaty is not just a piece of paper .
Concrete objectives which can be monitored must be set at both European and national level with binding target dates .
I believe that European Commission directives are a reasonable basis for these , I found the draft better and more ambitious than the final text and I hope that the European Parliament can do a little better as far as that is concerned .
In my report I wanted to stress that it is already possible to work out concrete objectives and target dates and in that respect I am going further than the Commission .
Not because I am setting myself up as a realist , because most of my proposals go straight back to the White Paper by Jacques Delors , whose analysis was at the time , in 1992 , so enthusiastically supported by every Member State .
Let me say a few words about the proposals in my report .
The report is based on an active labour market policy in which people who can work participate as fully as possible and governments accept their responsibility for employment instead of standing by passively to see what the market and economic growth have to offer .
In my report I explained this participation in terms of the inactive / active ratio , but the instruments are certainly just as important .
Instruments such as transferring substantial resources from passive labour market policy to active , more money for education , training , research and development .
Mr President , knowledge will become the most important source of work and prosperity and that knowledge will become outdated more and more quickly .
That means that people must be given new opportunities to update their knowledge all the time .
In my opinion this is also a responsibility for the social partners and for individuals themselves .
It is absolutely impossible for these problems to be dealt with in the public sector alone .
Young people under 25 and the long-term unemployed need special consideration .
In my view no one under the age of 25 should be unemployed .
He or she has a job or is on a training course .
Anyone who is unemployed for a year deserves a fresh start .
Here again cooperation by the social partners is essential .
To make sure that there is work for all these trained and unemployed people , new employment obviously has to be created .
But there also have to be schemes for part-time work , job rotation , sabbatical leave and so forth .
In my view structural overtime should be banned and when people do work overtime they should be paid in time off or work credits .
It is deplorable that with nearly 30 million unemployed , taking everything into account , around 9 million people in Europe are doing structural overtime .
Taxation is an important instrument for restoring employment to our society .
It should be pointed out that competition between Member States is stronger than is often assumed and presents Member States with a dilemma .
No one dares take any action for fear it will make other Member States more attractive to investors .
This means that the immobile factor of labour is more and more heavily taxed and the waste of energy and raw materials , like capital , remains cheap .
One of the most important proposals in the Delors White Paper , shifting the burden from labour to other factors , now has to be implemented .
On that point I welcome the proposals in the Monti report . I hope they will be implemented as quickly as possible and I also call for special consideration for what I call social VAT , a reduction in the VAT on labour-intensive services .
I hope that the Member States at the summit realize that I am not proposing an instrument binding on all Member States .
These are experiments for Member States that are willing to try them .
It might result in a loss of revenue but we are aiming at the higher goal of employment and are prepared for that .
A word about the objectives and target dates .
The European Commission directives have already prompted a number of reactions .
Many are unhappy with the objective of 12 million jobs .
I do not really understand why they have such a problem with this .
If we want to achieve 7 per cent unemployment , which we must in the light of the United States ' much-praised benchmarking , then we need 12 million jobs .
That is not a dream , that is reality .
Others are doubtful whether objectives and target dates are sensible or practicable at all .
As far as that is concerned , look at EMU .
At one time the EMU objectives seemed arbitrary , too ambitious and the time allowed seemed much too short .
Since then 13 of the 15 Member States have more or less met the criteria .
The same joint preparation , the same discipline , is necessary and justified for employment too .
In my opinion the Union 's credibility is at stake .
If the Heads of Government refuse to put what was said in Amsterdam into practice , then I think they are attacking the basis of the ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty .
They are attacking support for processes like EMU and enlargement and also , I am afraid , support for the Union as such .
Mr President , you will notice that I have not so far said anything about the actual money .
I do not agree with those who keep saying that the Amsterdam summit was not a success because no large amounts of money were allocated .
In my view the large amount of money we keep asking for is not the most important thing .
What is important is that it has been agreed that there should be coordination machinery to bring unilateral monetary and fiscal policy into line with unemployment policy .
Finally , Mr President , for me it was extraordinarily inspiring to be able to discuss much of my report with the President of the Social Affairs Council , Mr Juncker , indeed the President of the Council .
I wish him every success with the forthcoming summit and I do so with great confidence because I know that essentially we really want the same outcome and that is not a grand gesture but a process in which clear objectives are set on the basis of clear timetables .

Mr President , Mr President of the European Council , ladies and gentlemen , 1997 may be a decisive year in the fight for jobs .
First , because the autumn economic forecasts have proved that the fruits of our macro-economic policy are being confirmed in terms of growth .
Secondly , because the need for coordinated action on employment at Union level has been consolidated in the treaty . Finally because we are establishing a real policy of coordination of national job markets which has so far been the least developed component at Union level .
This point will certainly be at the centre of the extraordinary European Council on employment .
We all know that the fight against unemployment is complex and comes in many forms and that it would be simplistic to judge it by the yardstick of one of its components alone .
That is why we have never stopped pleading over the years for a coherent and integrated strategy .
That is the message of Mr van Velzen 's excellent report , and I pay tribute to him here for his work .
This year , the pieces of the puzzle are coming together .
We must capitalize on the proposals contained in the White Paper , in the Confidence Pact , in our macroeconomic strategy , in the multitude of actions being undertaken , and magnify them .
Above all , we must put these actions back into a coherent context and remember that they are entered into on a long term basis .
On 1 October the Commission presented its ideas on the reform of national labour markets .
In November it will specify its ideas on the contribution of Community policies in the fight for jobs .
Regarding guidelines for national employment policies , while building on success , the Amsterdam approach is a pioneering one .
I would like to say a few words on the methods we are recommending , because I have the impression that a number of misunderstandings exist .
Some people seem to be focussing all their attention on one element of our proposal , and misrepresenting it .
The rapporteur , Mr van Velzen , alluded to this .
If macro-economic hypotheses are confirmed and if the necessary structural measures are taken , we are committed , as far as possible , to the creation of 12 million jobs over five years .
The essence of this measure lies not in that figure but in the means by which we propose to achieve it .
To understand this , you only have to read our text .
Moreover , I do not need to remind this House that , during the period 1985 to 1990 , the Europe of Twelve succeeded in creating 10 million new jobs , and managed to reduce inflation by 3 % , bringing it down from 10.5 % to 7.5 % .
So the challenge is realistic and we must do all we can to achieve it .
A second observation is , to my mind , essential .
The Commission suggests translating the package of agreed guidelines into national action plans .
This will enable account to be taken of the individual specificities of different national job markets .
One cannot fail to establish , here , a parallel with the coordination of economic policies within the framework of economic and monetary union .
The experience of this shows that initial scepticism regarding the exchange of good practice and the dynamic of peer evaluation was unjustified .
The evolution of dialogue and the search for convergence through common objectives drawn from successful experience have proved their worth and convergence efforts have clearly benefitted from strict instruments in the form of precise criteria .
This is not the case in the area of employment .
The efforts at reciprocal persuasion must be all the greater .
It must also be highlighted that any strategy for employment requires multi-faceted action entered into in the long term .
Concerning this last point , we must remember that we are at the beginning of a new process being implemented in anticipation .
The European Council of Luxembourg will be forced to give an opinion on the ideas put forward by the Commission .
Will it be ready to follow our recommendation of guaranteeing a new start to every unemployed person within twelve months and to every young unemployed person within six months ?
Will it commit itself to reducing by half , within five years , the number of young people leaving school with no qualifications whatsoever ?
Will the various Member States agree to aim , in terms of training for the unemployed , to reach the level of the three best Member States , that is , 25 % ?
Will our governments be ready , as Mr van Velzen forcefully demands , to set a precise objective with regard to the number of people to be actively supported as opposed to passively supported ?
Will they at last reduce fiscal pressure on labour ?
These are some of the questions put to the Heads of State and of Government and to which I await a response .
And it is by the yardstick of the responses provided that the unemployed will judge the value of the repeated declarations by European Councils on the priority to be accorded to employment . And above all we must not hide behind a misinterpretation of subsidiarity to avoid the debate .
The strength of our proposal rests precisely on the fact that we fully respect the jurisdiction of Member States and that our proposals enable specific national situations to be taken into account .
It falls to Member States to fulfil their responsibilities within the framework of the guidelines they have given themselves .
Mr President , structural reforms of national job markets will certainly be at the centre of our discussions in Luxembourg , but this is not sufficient .
As I am always reminding you , it is only one of the elements of our employment strategy .
It cannot be compartmentalized ; it must be directly integrated with the other four constituent parts necessary for its success : a healthy macro-economic framework , effective achievement of the potential of the internal market , ambitious reforms of the job market and an optimal use of structural funds for the benefit of jobs .
Union action is not the same as that of the individual states .
On the contrary , it links with it in two ways .
In some areas , it creates an essential framework of reference for Member States ' actions .
This includes the macro-economic framework , the single market , taxation , state aid , simplification of the business environment and protection of the environment .
One example will suffice to illustrate this .
How do you expect a Member State to reduce taxation on labour if the risks of unfair competition on taxation of capital deprives it of necessary income ?
In other spheres , Union action completes or supports that of Member States .
I am thinking here of the structural funds , the transeuropean networks , research , finance for small and medium-sized enterprises , the information society .
I am not going to go into details at this stage , because the Commission will make its position known before the extraordinary European Council .
It will benefit from the occasion to ensure follow-up to Amsterdam and to reflect in general on the contribution of our policies to the fight for jobs .
Mr President , I said in my investiture speech on 17 January 1995 that what was lacking in Europe was not assets , but a strategy for making good use of them .
I feel that now we at last have the possibility for developing such a strategy , moving from statements of intent to action .
Growth , recovered thanks partly to the prospect of EMU , must be used to our benefit in the adoption of the necessary reforms .
Integrated , coordinated action , involving all the players according to their responsibilities , is about to be put in place .
It will bear fruit , and will not disappoint those who have criticized its delay .
I assure you , the readjustment of European construction towards the real concerns of Europeans is underway .
Mr President , following the Amsterdam negotiations and the introduction of the new chapter on employment , and following the decision to hold a special summit on employment , Mr JeanClaude Juncker threw down a challenge to all Member States and to our institutions that such a summit would only be worthwhile if it led to concrete and viable steps forward .
Mr Wim van Velzen is to be congratulated for meeting that challenge on behalf of Parliament in his excellent report .
Equally , the Commission is to congratulated for its guidelines .
The draft guidelines it has produced on the four subjects of entrepreneurship , employability , adaptability and , crucially , equal opportunities , hit the nail right on the head .
These are the subjects we need to be addressing if we are to properly manage the whole range of changes that need to be managed in our societies .
There are two possible views of what came out of the Amsterdam negotiations .
Either our leaders were giving effect to a genuine desire to restore balance in the Treaty between concern for convergence and monetary union , on the one hand , and employment , on the other - either they were acting honestly to give the Treaty relevance to every citizen of Europe or they were engaging in a cynical exercise ; a pretence by including an employment chapter which they had no intention of giving real meaning or real effect .
If it is the latter , then it is my clear view that citizens and voters in referenda will see through the pretence .
It is also clear that we , on this side of the House , will not be part of a marketing exercise to sell such a pretence .
The test of which view is correct - genuine commitment or a cynical exercise - will be the special summit on employment .
If it does not cut through the endless circular rhetoric of the past , if it does not lead to concrete actions or guarantees for citizens , it will be judged and will deserve to be judged a failure .
It will not be quietly forgotten .
It will be a failure that will dog attempts to have the Amsterdam Treaty ratified .
At the same time we have to recognize that the special employment summit is the beginning and not the end of the new process .
We cannot expect all of the required new mechanisms and procedures to give meaning to the employment chapter ; the employment guideline and recommendation procedures to be put in place with a click of the fingers .
We should not load all of our expectations for these new procedures on to this one special summit , but we must see a clear signal that these procedures will be given substance and real meaning for our citizens .
That involves agreement on at least some concrete actions or guarantees .
That is now recognized by most governments .
I hope those who have still not recognized it will do so by 20 November .
In my view , based on consultations in recent weeks , there are four key actions or guarantees which should be possible for our leaders to agree to at the summit : first , a guarantee that no person will be allowed to drift more than twelve months into unemployment without intervention : job placement , training or retraining , further education , or whatever , the mix to be determined at Member State level ; secondly , a guarantee that no young person under the age of 25 will be classed as unemployed , but rather as a person undergoing training , retraining , work placement , or further or higher education ; thirdly , a decision to allow the reduction of social VAT on labour-intensive services to the lowest possible level ; fourthly , an agreement to establish a benchmark based on the ratio of the active to the inactive population in the three Member States with the best performance .
These are the core tests , in my view , by which we should gauge the success or failure of the summit .
I hope our leaders will meet this challenge .
Mr President , first may I thank the rapporteur for his work on this report and in particular for managing to keep the report brief .
For this Parliament , I think that is an extraordinary achievement .
However when I see the number of amendments there are , it looks as if some people are trying to drag the matter out .
To us it is an advantage that this is a short report .
The Amsterdam Treaty has been signed .
As we know , the employment chapter has been included in the treaty .
Just to recapitulate , article 109 Q ( 2 ) of this chapter makes it possible to draw up guidelines which Member States can take into account in their employment policy ; in addition , under article 109 R , the Council can adopt incentive measures and promote innovative approaches by recourse to pilot projects .
This morning we are of course mainly concerned with the first part .
With the budget this afternoon we shall be talking a little about the second part .
But the Heads of Government will also have to work out the details of this chapter .
I mean the chapter , the whole chapter , and nothing but the chapter .
Sometimes a different impression is given .
Mr Juncker , the President of the Council , has really done his best and is really doing his best , I should say , to bring the Member States into line before the Luxembourg summit .
That is essential .
Mr Juncker has made great efforts to achieve a certain convergence in the objectives of Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
This again is , in my view , unique .
Usually our three institutions go their own ways and then try to coordinate a little at the end .
That has not happened here .
Right from the beginning the three institutions have worked together very closely .
I believe we all want to make the Luxembourg summit an enormous success .
What we need to do now is come up with measures that actually do something to help the 18 million unemployed in Europe , despite the differences between the countries and the varying situations in the European Member States .
However we must not forget that you cannot create more employment without a properly functioning economy .
But a good economy , as we have seen , still does not necessarily mean that there is no employment problem .
That is what this summit is about .
The Luxembourg summit must arrive at something similar to monetary union .
That is in any case the intention .
Criteria certainly have to be established .
They must be quantifiable criteria so that countries and later , I think , regions as well can be judged by their performance .
The report refers to a number of criteria .
A standard must be established which measures the ratio of employed to unemployed in the three most successful countries .
This standard encourages countries to do their best .
That is always very important , precisely because it is based on the three best performing countries .
In addition Member States must of course be encouraged to learn from each others ' good and bad practices .
That is something that could be done more frequently than it has been in the past .
As far as the criteria are concerned , the Group of the European People 's Party can endorse the van Velzen report .
But the group is still not entirely happy about a number of points .
First the question of linking the criteria strictly to the number of years .
It is very difficult to determine when unemployment has been brought down to 7 % .
It is better to review it again each year .
Secondly it is not sensible , in my view , to go too deeply into the question of exactly how much money is to be spent on education at this stage .
The point is that the efforts made on education have to be stepped up considerably .
Thirdly we have to look at the formulation of VAT rates .
We agree with the President-in-Office of the Council that this needs to be looked at urgently .
But we still have to consider whether this is now the best version .
A final point about the structural funds .
We do not believe that the 50 % figure is sensible .
Finally , we wish the Heads of Government success in their summit . Because it is the only answer Europe can give to the 18 million people who are still unemployed at the moment despite Europe 's prosperity .
Mr President , we have to recognize that Europe now has more than 18 million people unemployed , of whom 5 million are under the age of 25 and , as President Santer has just mentioned , nearly 50 % are long term unemployed .
It is agreed therefore , and this is important for us if we want to avoid this destructive process , to give each one of them the chance to find a job again in a growth society with a human face .
Indeed , our citizens expect concrete measures , realistic measures which will be enough to enable Europe to relaunch a dynamic of job creation .
We all know the Amsterdam Treaty includes social improvements , notably in the area of the fight against social exclusion , but we must recognize that with regard to employment , progress on the legal front has not been sufficiently concrete .
This is the reason why the European Council on employment , to be held on 20 and 21 November , will awaken legitimate hopes in the population because , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our citizens expect tangible initiatives to come out of this employment summit and all goodwill must be mobilized .
It is in this spirit that we are today discussing an important report , and the work which has been done by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , under the aegis of its chairman and rapporteur , is of great interest .
So , how can we act concretely ?
On behalf of our group , I have tabled an amendment which we feel is extremely important .
We are requesting the use , in advance , of the ECSC surpluses in order to promote employment , through an exceptional allocation to the European Investment Bank so that it can encourage projects providing jobs in SMEs .
ECU 50 million could thus be freed up .
We think that this non-bureaucratic method , which is a transparent method of management of funds and consists of allocating the funds directly to the EIB , has the advantage of stimulating a spirit of enterprise and innovation and of building the foundations for real aid in the creation of lasting jobs , notably to the benefit of small and medium-sized enterprises .
With regard to this , I thank the rapporteur for his support , because I think it is important that we defend this constructive proposal for employment together .
The second important initiative is that we must encourage the emergence of a new organization of work .
The report indicates that this reorganization should necessarily be through a systematic reduction in working hours .
I am genuinely afraid that the expression " reduction in working hours ' is fashionable today in some European countries and that it will eventually , perhaps not immediately , but eventually , be revealed as paradoxical and antisocial if it is applied in a restrictive way to all businesses .
I also fear that , on the contrary , an automatic reduction in working hours favours the development of overtime , even informal working arrangements , and mechanization .
So , rather than systematically advocating the reduction of working hours , I think it would be better for the competitiveness of European enterprises if we considered a flexible and judicious way of organizing working time , adapted to the economic and human realities of business and the business environment .
It is in this spirit that our group has tabled a number of amendments to Mr van Velzen 's report .
Mr President , it gives me great satisfaction that the President-in-Office of the Council is here , but nevertheless I have to say that , since the first agreements were reached on labour market policy at the European summit in Essen , the European Union has stumbled from one employment proposal to another .
The components of the plans have always been the same .
Even the Commission 's proposal is a repetition .
What is different now ?
What is different is that now there is a Treaty of Amsterdam which is to lead to the Luxembourg summit .
The President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Juncker , has just given us hope .
But all the same my group looked forward expectantly to the Council of Social Affairs Ministers for both short term concrete agreements and the impetus for new longer term policy .
Since Mr Delors ' White Paper on growth , competitiveness and employment , not a single new idea has been put forward , let alone a start being made on implementing the existing proposals .
A typical example is that the issue of the European company statute has again reached stalemate .
It has been known for a long time that a European company statute would considerably increase transfrontier activity and substantially reduce legal costs .
But certain Member States still cling stubbornly to their tried and tested positions and have been standing in the way of decision-making for thirty years .
In this House too , we are all trying to fall into line and innovative ideas go by the board .
The political debate should be about our differences , not our agreements .
But in order to push the European Council forward somehow the van Velzen report and the amendments tabled are chiefly aimed at consensus : consensus in Parliament and consensus between Parliament and the Commission .
Of course we all support this because we regard it as very important to combat unemployment in Europe .
But , Mr President , I would rather see a genuine political debate .
In my opinion Europe cannot in the long run avoid introducing a taxation system that does not tax the employment factor and goes further than the ecotax and energy levies we are already familiar with .
Efficiency improvements in businesses are at the moment almost entirely geared to shedding jobs .
The average tax on labour and businesses in the European Union is high , in many countries over 50 % .
Many proposals at Community level talk about shifting the labour tax to capital .
However no one has the courage to create a workable basis for taxation on capital .
Mostly we remain committed to a capital levy which , with the globalization of the economy , is becoming more and more difficult .
However Mr Juncker has given me hope by raising this point and saying that we have to do something about this issue .
Other innovative ideas such as new pension schemes , growth and dynamism with an appropriate infrastructure and proper functioning of the goods and services market , are all areas to be tackled in the short and longer term if this employment summit is to be a success .
For that spirit is needed .
Spirit from the Member States , spirit from this Parliament and spirit from the European Commission .
That is what I am hoping for .
Mr President , the holding of an extraordinary Council on employment , at the request of the French government , puts this question at the centre of the debate , along with a social dimension to European construction which has until now been lacking .
With nearly 20 million unemployed and 50 million on the poverty line , it transpires that policies followed to date have sacrificed employment and devastated the existence of millions of citizens in our countries , particularly young people .
Unfortunately , the Commission does not show the political will to modify these directions .
Attractive objectives are set .
Who would not be in agreement with the idea of creating 12 million jobs , of bringing the unemployment rate down to 7 % and of reducing the number of young unemployed by half by the year 2002 ?
But what are the means proposed ?
The Commission bases its proposals on competitiveness by relying on flexibility , camouflaged under the concepts of adaptability and feasibility which , I have to say , treats with disdain the elementary right of each person to a stable job , correctly remunerated and reconcilable with family life .
The Commission persists in regarding labour as a cost which it must at all costs reduce , but labour is not a cost , it is a resource .
The van Velzen report is faithful to the Commission 's objectives , as well as the logic which underlies them and which is that of the single currency and its constraints .
This is so much the case that , in dealing with unemployment , the van Velzen report says not a word about the reduction of working hours , and this at the very time when two governments of the European Union have just decided to move towards a 35-hour working week in the next few years .
The 35-hour week is not a fashion , Mrs Hermange , it is a part of the great objective of civilization to achieve better quality of life and create jobs .
Our group therefore positively appreciates the decisions of the French and Italian Governments to move down this path of progress , breaking with the policies followed up to now .
The 35-hour week has burst upon Europe , as a recent headline in the El Pais newspaper put it .
The General Secretary of the ETUC was not wrong when he said that the guidelines for employment which will be decided at Luxembourg will have to include the explicit prospect of reorganization and reduction of working hours amongst the essential priorities in the fight against unemployment .
More generally , our group thinks that the challenge of employment must be raised in order to end the threat to social cohesion in our societies .
The means exist to do this .
Considerable funds are suppressed in market capitalization ; enormous amounts of public funds are misused ; credit and taxation do a disservice to employment and investment .
This is what needs to be changed to be able to increase purchasing power , to revive industrial policies , to develop training on a large scale , to reduce working hours and develop and renovate the public sector .
Our group wants to contribute to this , along with the social movement and the unions , and to act to convert the Luxembourg Summit into political acts and not only ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the spectre of European mass unemployment is once again turning into a major scandal .
It is still unclear whether the summit in Luxembourg will be a PR exercise or whether it will seriously attempt to break down the door to a European exchange-rate policy .
We are therefore obliged , European United Left Members , to debate the minutiae of the matter , and that is something which we should do in all seriousness .
The urgency of the matter is not that employment constitutes an exceptional case , but rather that employment trends are symptomatic of a misplaced policy , a one-sided policy of promoting the supply sector , whose legacy after 10 years is now all too apparent .
This policy must now be ended .
The alternative is clear .
We either have an exchange-rate policy , and one which is not primarily macroeconomic , but rather which is aimed at a new socio-ecological development model in overall economic policy , or the European governments must take the blame for bringing in the euro on the backs of the unemployed .
The summit must not be a cover-up , promoting deregulation and flexibilization , nor should it seek to impose a policy of jobs with no real prospects .
Of course the attempt to apply the Maastricht method to employment policy , with the very sensible proposals made by Mr Juncker as well as by the Commission , is by no means just a continuation of previous policy .
There is the possibility that a door has now been opened , through which a majority of European states will later be able to pass in a determined manner .
I am assuming here that the political make-up will also change in the years ahead so that Bonn too will have a red-green government .
European employment policy requires a fresh approach in a number of areas .
We need an employment-oriented policy mix which incorporates social dialogue with training and education .
We must realise that the restructuring of industrial policy creates jobs .
What is basically required is a redistribution of labour and a reorganization and reduction of working hours .
France and Italy have set an example in this respect and have given us signs of hope .
We need a third sector between private enterprise and the conventional form of public services , which can organize public sector employment in such a way as to avoid the social barriers which have resulted from more than 10 years of neo-liberal policy .
It is our intention to hold a green summit in early November , at which our proposals can be developed and focussed .
I agree with Mr van Velzen that this is now not primarily a matter of funding , though naturally it cannot be financed from petty cash .
We now require the machinery and a clear idea of the issues we have to tackle .
Only then will the German government , currently holed-up in the brakeman 's van , be able to see a clear track ahead and take the necessary turning .
Strategic playing of trump cards is simply no longer enough , Mr President .
The whole deck needs reshuffling .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr van Velzen on his excellent work .
My only regret is that the report reaches a dead end on the theme of reduction of working hours .
It seems to me that we should not be scared to talk about it as one of the many means of fighting unemployment in Europe .
To my mind it is certainly not a question of getting wrapped up in a dogmatic vision by implementing a statutory 35-hour week in an authoritarian manner , but the reduction of the working week is something which the tide of history has brought with it .
The reduction of the working week could create hundreds of thousands of jobs in Europe , on the condition that it is implemented alongside a true revolution in the organization of work , based - why not - on annualization and on a revival of the policy of innovation and training .
This policy has already been emphasized by the Commission .
It has today transpired that economic growth and the drop in unemployment in the USA are based partly on technological innovation .
Why not imagine a European plan that could bring together a certain number of existing programmes in the field of industrial technological development ?
I am thinking of Brite and Euram but also of information technology through Acts , and here it is vital that European SMEs have greater access to the Internet .
I also believe it is fundamental that coordination with Eureka is established on the subject .
Let us not be under any illusions : the EIB funds announced are , when all is said and done , negligible in the face of such issues .
European SMEs often have difficulties when they cannot obtain loans from the banks .
Why does the Eureka programme work so well ?
First because it is close to the ground and to the heads of businesses but also , and above all , because it awards a label of technological excellence which strengthens some enterprises in obtaining bank loans .
So why not think of this labelling idea for the EIB , which could vouch for them with the banks ?
The idea of making activity compulsory for young people after eighteen months seems to me excellent .
I consider that for certain young people from marginal areas , a real brass-knuckle fight is now needed to dig them out of the bottomless pit they have sunk into .
I therefore think that a programme which immerses them in modernity would bring a response to this distress ; this programme would need to be associated with apprenticeships in information technology and foreign languages from the starting points of the Lingua and Leonardo programmes .
Finally , the Danish policy on staff rotation is a proven success : while certain employees are on maternity leave or training , the long term unemployed replace them and are thus trained in the business .
The over-50s are often involved .
Let us therefore participate in this challenge from the viewpoint of objective 4 and a strengthened Adapt programme .
Europeans are expecting a great deal from the states of Europe .
They are tired of speeches .
The 20 million unemployed and 50 million who live in conditions of serious insecurity expect concrete actions .
Proposals being formulated on the eve of the Luxembourg Summit are going in the right direction .
A flicker of hope is appearing and we must make sure it grows brighter .
To enable the citizens of Europe to work is a task of the first order for all politicians in positions of responsibility .
We each have a duty to do all we can to defeat this social and economic cancer . It is also a way of restoring meaning to the lives of millions of Europeans .
Mr President , I can very well understand that the European Union needs results at the extraordinary summit meeting on unemployment .
Hope has been held out to the unemployed on this , of course ; but I suppose the question is whether it is at all realistic to expect results , presumably also because certain members of the EU Commission have begun to refer to the summit meeting as a kind of study group .
Since the Amsterdam Treaty was signed there has been no shortage of golden promises , you know .
This also comes through in the Danish debate where , among other things , the Danish Prime Minister thinks that the goalposts have been moved by getting a section on employment included in the new Union treaty .
But an important addition to this is that the countries are , of course , to be obliged to subordinate all forms of policy to a stability-oriented economic policy at the EU level .
This applies to social and labour market policy and to employment policy .
It is thus reasonable to ask oneself the following question : will there be any benefit to employment at all ?
My answer is definitely no .
It is common knowledge , of course , that the economic policy and implementing EMU will specifically mean a rise in unemployment , not least in the public sector .
In an earlier employment report by Ken Coates , there are calculations which show that if the EMU is carried through to deadline it will actually mean 2.1 million more unemployed people in the European Union .
I do not find this aspect in the report by Mr van Velzen .
Nor do I find it in the debate we are having here today .
When Commission President Jacques Santer says that many new jobs were created last year , I think it should be added that these were above all part-time jobs .
Is this really what the unemployed want ?
It is not - at any rate , not where I come from .
There , across broad sectors of the Danish trade union movement , people entirely dissociate themselves from the flexibilization currently taking place in the labour market , spurred on by the European Union .
The report has only words of praise left for the view that everything must be subordinated to EU economic policy and competitiveness .
However , setting a few minimum unemployment rates is recommended .
But I think the unemployment percentages are something the individual Member States should set themselves .
The report shows quite clearly how , in the EU , one step after the other is being taken in a particular direction .
This has happened in rapid succession just since the summit meeting in Essen , and when this report proposes common minimum incomes and common minimum wages , you are moving out onto a slippery slope which will not do for either this Parliament , the Commission or the populations within the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European employment summit must set in motion a train of events which will ensure that the European Union 's political system gains more credibility .
The 18 million unemployed will be left without hope unless the Treaty of Amsterdam also includes concrete measures .
While the targets set by the Commission , the Council Presidency and the rapporteur too , are quite correct , we still need , in addition to labour-market stimuli and reforms , a quite different economic framework in which to operate .
In spite of the favourable autumn forecasts , further action is needed in this area .
The European Union 's investment ratio is completely unsatisfactory and cannot help us overcome the unemployment problem .
We need at least 1 % more public investment and at least 1 % of GDP more private investment .
I hope this can be combined in a partnership between the public and private sectors so that a European majority can be created in this area to promote employment prospects .
I consider it essential that the employment summit should tackle this issue in a determined manner , so that the dramatic employment crisis can be resolved .
I also believe that taxation requires restructuring , not only to relieve the tax burden affecting the labour market , but also through this means to promote demand within our borders .
To boost employment - which cannot solely be promoted by labour-market policy - we require , in addition to investment benchmarking and infrastructure investment , accountability that public investment is actually helping the employment situation .
I believe that proof needs to be provided every year .
Investment in infrastructure will allow us not only to improve the weak competitive position of the European Union in respect of logistics , transport and communication , but also actually to create new jobs .
I am also of the opinion that in order to boost employment , EU policy , that is to say , all policy measures adopted by the European Union , must focus directly on the job market , and consequently taxation must be restructured away from large-scale enterprises , particularly those engaged in industry , technology and research , and towards the major employers , namely small and medium-sized enterprises .
This would represent a real contribution to tax restructuring from a passive to an active labour market policy .
Mr President , I do not think it is an exaggeration to say that this debate is crucial for the present and the future of the European Union .
The extraordinary meeting to be held in Luxembourg on 20 and 21 November will be a wonderful opportunity to show people how concerned we are about the problem of unemployment , at national level .
We need political decisions which will result in real coordination , with a view to immediately implementing the positive experiences which are producing results in the area of employment in each of the Member States .
For its part , the Commission must give impetus to the value added represented by the European Union , and the value of monetary union in a real single market .
The actual aim of the convergence of our economies is to make the European Union strong and united in the face of its competitors and , through this solidarity , to strengthen a social security system also based on solidarity . Far from being a subordinate issue , such a system should be able to help create employment , in order to ensure its own survival .
Parliament also needs closer collaboration with the Commission .
In the past few months we have seen the development of two different models designed to confront the problems of unemployment and job creation .
In one model , society is the driving force behind the economy and job creation . Those of us who support this model think the social and economic agents should be the main players , and governments should ensure that the appropriate economic conditions are created to allow education , training and research to play a central role in creating jobs and equal opportunities , and fighting youth and long-term unemployment .
The other model is favoured by those who think jobs can be created by decree , by whichever government happens to have been elected to power at the time .
Quantifiable common objectives , such as those proposed by my colleague , Mr van Velzen , cannot be rejected out of hand .
But do the Member States possess the necessary instruments , in the short term ?
Are the current socio-economic indicators adequate ?
Do they have the resources to achieve these aims ?
Let us make a continual evaluation , but without creating unnecessary expectations .
What about the notorious question of the reduction of working hours ?
When is the Commission going to present the results of the comparative studies it was asked to carry out in those areas where such measures are being applied ?
This solution does not have unanimous support .
Opinions vary .
Even within the Group of the Party of European Socialists , there are people who say this measure should not be imposed by government decree .
Let us allow flexible working hours to be achieved by agreement between employers and workers , through their representatives , company by company , sector by sector , without affecting competitiveness or productivity , and without reductions in workers ' pay .
It is not easy to achieve all these things together , but they certainly cannot be imposed by decree .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the importance of this subject has already been emphasized by several parties .
To use Jacques Delors ' parting words to this Parliament , we are dealing with the most important issue for Europe over the next fifteen years .
Somebody used a strong expression today : mass unemployment , almost twenty million Europeans without a stable job .
Surely the need to increase resources for development is one of the priority issues , but I believe that one of the fundamental aspects is connected with the conditions in which the resources intended for development may provide a stable result for greater employment .
We are living at a time in which the world economies are confronting each other , and this will happen more and more .
And so we cannot think of heading in a direction that goes against the general context .
In this situation of grave concern , two countries - France and Italy - have chosen to reduce working hours by law , in an official and organized manner .
Just a few minutes ago , someone used the expression a " better quality of life ' .
But work is part of that quality of life !
Work has a sacredness of its own , it is something that ennobles man , and the fact that working hours have been reduced is incomprehensible .
Let us think for a moment : the work is created by the company , and the company is a living being , a being whose needs change from day to day .
Only if the social forces are capable of talking , of reaching an agreement on needs and objectives , will it be possible to protect employment properly .
What will happen if we reduce the number of working hours to 35 by law ?
There will probably be an increase in costs , there will probably be a drive towards greater mechanization of production , greater automation , we will probably encourage relocation outside the European Union , not only of the large but also of the small and medium-sized companies .
There are specific examples in Europe : Great Britain and Holland , where the unemployment rate has been reduced by several percentage points in the space of a few years by resorting to flexibility and not imposing a reduction in working hours in a planned and bureaucratic manner .
Because everyone is anxious to meet the very important challenge of stable employment and the creation of wealth to protect the guarantees provided by the welfare state , I believe Europe should apply efficient methods to the overall situation we are facing .
Madam President , our resolution today will have no binding effect but it provides an important backdrop to the approach of the Member States and the Commission to the summit .
It is a pity that we have not found greater consensus in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs : we have no fewer than 55 amendments from three major political groups .
What we know is that we are heading for a return to normal growth but that growth will not be enough to reduce unemployment to a tolerable level , and we must tackle youth unemployment and long-term unemployment particularly .
We know that to do this we must make the single market work .
We must recognize the interdependence of our economies and the limits to the effectiveness of national policies , particularly in monetary policy .
It is ironic that countries which cannot make up their minds about the single currency are those in which monetary union would have the greatest job-creating effect .
We need to provide access to capital and training , for small businesses especially , and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , under my rapporteurship , has put budget lines worth a total of ECU 150 million into a package to enable the heads of government to do this .
I am looking forward to welcoming Commissioner Flynn to my constituency in three weeks ' time to look at how we are currently spending some of the money under these budget lines .
But that money will only be made available to the summit if the national governments are prepared to take it seriously .
This must be more than a charade ; we must put real effort into job creation .
Making a reality of the infrastructure projects discussed at the Essen summit would be a good start .
We need to shift the tax burden away from the things that we want , like jobs and investment , and on to the things that we do not want , like use of scarce natural resources and pollution .
I welcome in particular the draft employment guidelines for the summit and its four pillars - employability , entrepreneurship , adaptability and equal opportunities - which are so important in creating a climate in which jobs will emerge .
Exchange of best practice is important too .
The summit provides an opportunity for Member States to make a commitment to creating more jobs .
Exchange of experience is a key role for the European Union .
In conclusion , the most difficult job for the President-in-Office , Mr Junker , will be to find a compromise between different ideological approaches to economic organization .
This must not be a Luxembourg compromise .
Madam President , we must work for success at the Luxembourg summit conference on employment and ensure that clear decisions are taken to improve the employment situation .
Improving the employment situation is perhaps the most important way we have of boosting the confidence of the people in the EU .
When EMU begins we will need a more effective employment policy than before , in order that European growth can continue , and that prosperity can be divided equally .
I have given my approval to Mr van Velzen 's report , as it is important that the Union gets to work on the issue of employment .
And , you know , it is dangerous to keep the issue of employment merely at the verbal level .
It is not enough to create ambitious target programmes if they are not going to be implemented until the next millennium .
What is especially important in the report is the introduction of the lowest possible rate of VAT in the labour-intensive service industries .
It is vital to insist that the Council take a positive stance in this matter .
The report does not go far enough , though .
Too little attention is paid to reducing working hours .
Shortening the working day will be the most enduring way to respond to job losses due to increased productivity , especially in industry .
I think the most essential thing is not whether working hours should be shortened by a change in the law , through negotiations among the labour organizations or by experimenting with working hours .
It is important to act now .
In Finland we have carried out very interesting experiments and had interesting results from the 6 + 6 scheme , where the previous eight-hour shift has been replaced by two six-hour slots .
The number of jobs has increased and companies have gained by increasing production capacity and heightening the efficient use of the day .
Nor does the report pay enough attention to jobs in the public service sector .
These are of untold importance in the Nordic Member States , not only in social security , but especially in jobs for women .
When EMU begins , the public sector will also come into its own in terms of employment as t will be working on the issues of balancing out trade levels and other problems that come along .
That is why the public sector should be higher up the agenda than it is .
Madam President , I would first of all like to congratulate Mr Wim van Velzen on this report on employment and the proposals which he and the European Parliament will present to the summit in Luxembourg .
There are many good proposals in this report which I am going to support .
The summit really needs all the help and all the good proposals it can get , since it has a very , very difficult task .
The summit cannot be allowed to fail . Nor should it be allowed to end in fine words and hopes .
Instead it must really try to arrive at a solution , particularly for the long term unemployed and with regard to youth unemployment .
At the part-session in Brussels , when President Santer gave an account of the guidelines which the summit will discuss and decide on , he said that we must be wary of creating excessive expectations , which we have also heard others say here today .
Yet the EU 's policy is still based on a very optimistic growth forecast with an increase of more than 3 per cent per year .
This also means that the employment policy and the EU 's attempts to create more jobs are based on this growth rate and on encouraging companies to invest .
It is , of course , one measure , but we should not believe that economic growth is a guarantee for creating employment .
In that case we would be deceiving both ourselves and others .
What is needed are more structural measures against unemployment in the form of shorter working hours and a lasting reduction in taxes on employment .
Working hours should be both shorter and , of course , more flexible .
In the slightly longer term our aim should be a 30-hour working week , and our aim now should be a working week of 35 hours .
A reduction in employer contributions and other taxes on work should , in our opinion , be financed through higher energy and environmental taxes , so-called tax switching .
EMU troubles me just as it troubles the rapporteur .
I therefore believe the summit must discuss whether the EU 's own policies are not contributing to the creation of more unemployment because such massive cuts are being made in the public sector .
Another serious structural problem in the current system , and in the EU 's policy , is that far too many people make money by depleting natural resources and destroying the environment .
We have therefore proposed an amendment , No 51 , which I hope many will support .
In it we propose that a new treaty should be concluded , a treaty which would balance other treaties , a treaty with an environmental content , that is , the creation of job opportunities through environmental conversion programmes .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , after the great hopes of Jacques Delors ' transeuropean projects in the early 1990s , Europe is finally concerned about jobs .
Hence today 's report .
It is never too late to do the right thing .
20 million unemployed : it has finally impinged on the good conscience of the Eurocrats .
This employment plan , which at least has the merit of existing , has come up against a brick wall on the reduction of working hours but it directs its essential efforts towards two priority sectors , and that is all the better .
The sector of innovation in communications technology , in multimedia , takes much of its attention , thus highlighting the importance of training .
50 % of the 20 million unemployed Europeans - and not 18 million - have been without work for a year , 30 % of them for two years .
By the year 2007 , 80 % of technology used today will be out of date .
That is why the Group of the European Radical Alliance proposed that , from the year 2000 , nearly 2 % of national budgets should be dedicated to training .
The second priority in the report is aid to SMEs , since for the past fifteen years these have been the only true source of employment in Europe , as opposed to the large industrial groups which have continued to lay off staff .
But in order to help the SMEs , a support fund must be established for the creation of enterprises in Europe , and it will need ECU 800 million if the effort is to be significant .
There are other directions : the creation of a European legal and fiscal status for heads of enterprises , because if you want to encourage individual initiative , you have to specify and limit the risks of the person taking the creative initiative .
A stimulating fiscal policy , with charges reduced and abolished for the creation of jobs , needs to be implemented .
There should also be promotion of small home-based enterprises and teleworking , because that is the economy of the 21st Century .
The European Union has to stop being the Red Adair of economics in Europe and intervene upstream , reflecting on the world of activity as it will be over the next twenty years .
Ultimately it has to define - I and my group insist on this - the quaternary economy , which will be based on community life and activities within easy reach and which will move us from social utility to economic utility .
For , let there be no doubt , Madam President , modernity , as foreseen by the great thinkers of the 19th Century , has accomplished its historic mission : work has liberated us from work .
Madam President , Mr President of the Council , the Luxembourg Presidency has set a very high target for the employment summit .
It must be congratulated .
In particular , it must be congratulated for having introduced new ideas and for having ceaselessly revived the dialogue with Member States , with the social partners , and obviously with the European Parliament too .
If only in this respect , the Summit can no longer be purely an act of public relations , as Mr Wolf suspects .
This summit must , moreover , be a summit which breaks with the siren statements of previous summits .
Madam President , we can no longer believe that one-off adjustments are satisfactory .
If we want to avoid a two-tier society , we must rework certain accepted ideas .
It may not be obvious , but the report by Wim van Velzen is both specific and in-depth , since it raises the essential question while proposing an immediate starting point .
An example is the proposal for a social or minimal rate of VAT for services absorbing a great deal of labour .
This could be applied to convenience services , to the social economy , to apprenticeships .
It is a radical change of perspective .
It would finally allow the local and regional economy to be respected for its specificity , alongside the global economy .
For a part of the economy , it would make adaptation of the standardizing logic of the single market possible .
I think the Commission should leap on this idea and introduce concrete proposals , within the context of the Monti group .
Furthermore , this should not prevent the Member States from being active at the same time .
Madam President , all in all , the Heads of State and of Government , at least some of them , tired by a night of negotiations at Amsterdam , thought they would get some peace by referring the question of employment to an extraordinary summit . They did not realise how much good they were doing .
They have given Europe a capital occasion not only to reflect on employment but also on the whole of our economic system and above all to make a decision on it .
With the van Velzen report , Madam President , no one will be able to say that there are no concrete measures on which to make an immediate decision .
Madam President , I quite unreservedly agree with the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , that employment policy is a matter for the nation states .
On the other hand , I am convinced that in view of the high unemployment figures , the EU should not close its eyes to this problem .
For this reason I would welcome the employment summit due to take place in November .
I await real results from this summit . The debate has gone on long enough , now is the time for action .
We need concrete results here .
The rapporteur , my colleague Wim van Velzen , has produced an excellent report , undoubtedly with the support of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
A number of vital topics for debate can now be tabled at the employment summit .
I quite agree that the training of unemployed young people and the long term unemployed is a very important issue .
However , like Council President Juncker and my colleague Mr Pronk , I doubt that such precise targets can be set , since the starting point is different for the various Member States and such a policy is therefore only likely to arouse false hopes .
This also applies to the percentage targets .
Lifelong learning should be encouraged , of that there is no doubt .
However , whether 0.5 % is required overall for this purpose is another question .
Continued employment after training is tremendously important for motivating young working people .
A reduction in the amount of overtime is something which we have quite rightly promoted for many years , since this will doubtless lead to greater employment opportunities .
In Germany this also applies to the DM 610 category .
Abuse of this regulation does not significantly affect the employment situation in the Federal Republic of Germany .
I unreservedly support moves aimed at placing atypical working arrangements on an equal footing with full-time work .
Equal job opportunities for women have still not been achieved .
Wage incidental costs must be reduced for small and medium-sized enterprises , which are subject to high salary costs .
This will also help control the illicit job market , currently on the increase , which is damaging job opportunities .
It should be made easier to establish new companies .
We must reduce the level of bureaucracy and simplify the legal requirements .
Guarantee funds are urgently required to protect risk capital , so that innovative ideas can be converted into jobs .
The EIB has a role to play here .
The euro must be introduced by 1 January 1999 .
This of course pre-supposes that all participants meet the entry criteria laid down in the Treaty , since only a hard euro can create real jobs .
In conclusion let me say once again that the Council and the Commission must eliminate tax dumping in the Member States once and for all , as this also destroys job opportunities .
Let me recapitulate : the debate has gone on long enough , now is the time for action .
Europe must maintain its social market economy .
This should be neither socialist nor liberal .
Let me end by pointing out that the investment ratio in Bavaria is more than 5 % higher than in all Germany 's red-green Länder .
The advice offered by our colleague Mr Wolf is therefore erroneous , as witness the example I have just given .
Madam President , with economic and monetary union just around the corner the Union is starting to be seen by the public as only concerned with mergers by big companies and serving the interests of shareholders .
The proposal by Mr van Velzen corrects that view , for which I am grateful .
Although I personally feel that job creation is mainly the role of business , this initiative can have its uses , certainly as regards education and providing funds to create jobs .
However I am doubtful about concepts such as lifelong learning .
Great !
But how and who is going to pay for it ?
There are problems about outlawing structural overtime .
Why should people be forced ?
And forced to work shorter hours .
These three aspects are partly up to the individual and of course partly the responsibility of the social partners , whom we should not undermine .
My colleagues are mainly concerned about the younger people who are unemployed .
But the generations that have helped to achieve Europe 's prosperity and well-being should not be left out because of age discrimination .
Opportunities must be offered so that they can stay in employment after reaching pensionable age .
I have tabled an amendment on that point .
The demographic trend in the Union makes it imperative that we address this problem seriously .
Not only so that we continue to make use of the knowledge and experience of that generation and thereby encourage a flexible labour market , but also to make sure that pensions can be afforded in the future .
And after all that is also important .
Mr President , depending on whether or not the aspects I have objections to are adopted , I am certainly in agreement with Mr van Velzen 's proposal .
Madam President , the people and workers of Europe cannot but be overcome with anger and indignation when they hear that employment may gain a firm foundation through the promotion of EMU and the single market , negative changes in the structure of pay and through the flexibility of working hours .
In other words , we are entrusting the care of the sheep to the wolf .
But it is in fact the convergence criteria and the policies of EMU and the single market that are leading to mass unemployment .
Making the labour market more adaptable and flexible is leading to mass poverty .
The President-in-Office of the European Council and also our rapporteur have expressed their fears concerning the credibility of the summit meeting .
The question is , are you in a position to change policy ?
Only that will prevent the summit meeting being shown up as the alibi for the acceptance and promotion of the stability pact .
Madam President , only a combination of policy measures to promote the reduction of the working week without a reduction in wages , the strengthening of the purchasing power of the broad strata of the people , an increase in social spending , a substantial strengthening of small and medium-sized companies , the strengthening and revival of public investment and the public sector , only such a policy would be able to play a role in reducing unemployment and in promoting employment without poverty and social exclusion becoming more widespread .
These are the immediate aims of working people and you can be sure that by fighting and struggling for them sooner or later they will achieve them .
Madam President , in view of the current figure of 18 million unemployed , an improvement of the employment situation is the greatest challenge currently facing the Union .
We have all experienced a certain amount of scepticism when talking to our citizens , the most common question being " what is the point of Europe if it cannot safeguard our jobs ? ' .
I believe that if decisive action is to be taken against unemployment , then Europe must also be brought into the hearts and minds of its citizens .
Amsterdam has set a clear assignment .
The objective , or as Commissioner Flynn puts it , the result , is to create 12 million new jobs in five years - an ambitious undertaking , particularly since no additional resources are to be made available .

This begs two questions : first , do the financing plans stand up to critical analysis , and secondly , are the measures being taken really suitable ?
If we are talking about a release of funds by the EIB , incredible though that may be , then a closer inspection proves to be somewhat sobering .
According to an internal German study , the EIB funds referred to are only sufficient to create a maximum of 60 , 000 new jobs .
The measures proposed by the Commission for combatting unemployment are well known .
The report on employment opportunities in Europe in 1997 basically reiterates previous calls for a reform of taxation policy , better training programmes , a reduction in labour costs and many other measures .
The implementation of these measures is the responsibility of each Member State .
The EU can only participate through exchange of experience , since Europe lacks suitable job-creation instruments .
It remains to be seen whether Amsterdam will give the EU in Luxembourg a new impetus and , more importantly , whether Europe can maintain its credibility and fulfil the hopes of its citizens .
Madam President , I should like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council , the President of the Commission and the rapporteur for their comments today .
I would say to the President-in-Office of the Council that if the key thing that comes out of the Luxembourg summit meeting is simply the facility from the European Investment Bank , and if that is what we are all putting our whole emphasis on , that is not what this summit meeting should be about . We should recognize that the EIB cannot solve the problems of unemployment in the European Union .
We should not present that at the end of the Luxembourg summit meeting as the cure-all for our problems .
I would much rather use this summit meeting as a historic opportunity to look at the whole question of employability and how we can boost employability in the European Union .
On all sides of this House we have to be very honest with ourselves if we want Luxembourg to be a success .
We have to look at employability in relation to work patterns .
I use that phrase because you , Mr President , used the phrase ' work patterns ' rather than ' a shorter working week ' .
We have to look at employability in the context of education and training .
It is disastrous , the number of long term unemployed people who are not in education or training in Europe .
We need to look at employability as far as the welfare state is concerned .
We have to admit that at the moment we have a passive welfare state rather than an active payment system which encourages people to get into employment within the European Union .
I can say that because I represent the area of the UK that has the highest level of unemployment outside Northern Ireland .
In conclusion , we do not want a cure-all for unemployment .
We do not want quick fixes .
We want this to be a historic summit meeting that looks at employability , where there are no sacred cows and where on all sides of this House and on all sides of the political argument , we look maturely and sensibly at how to get our people back to work .
Madam President , there is no doubt that the Luxembourg Employment Summit is one of the most important results of the Amsterdam Council .
It is true that it is an issue that affects the nation states , but it is also true that Europe cannot pretend not to see that the citizens of Europe have great expectations of an overall , coordinated answer .

So I am pleased that President Santer and the President of the Juncker Council have firmly established the objective of achieving the most concrete results possible , as Europe cannot fail to take up the burden .
No doubt there will be a contradiction with the objective of monetary union , which inevitably leads to the requirement for a stability pact , a stability pact comprising social peace within the individual countries and , therefore , political stability .
As has been said , social peace is achieved by the harmonization of fiscal policies , but also of welfare policies .
Europe should deal with this matter , as the information provided by President Santer describes a structural unemployment ; there are structural elements in European unemployment .
The statement that 50 % have been unemployed for one year , 30 % for more than two years , 20 % consist of young people and 75 % of the unemployed have only had compulsory schooling shows the urgent need both to finalize vocational training and , as stated in the van Velzen report , the use of the structural funds and , above all , to finalize a measure aimed at small and medium-sized businesses , as indicated , by reducing administrative expenses , easier access to capital and credit , tax exemption for the cost of labour in particular and greater flexibility in the job market .
Jobs , which have not yet been mentioned here , are being created not only through flexibility in the job market , but also through flexiblity in other production factors , based on the product market .
Those countries that have created a number jobs have also created genuine deregulation of the product market .
The final consideration , in my capacity as an Italian citizen , is on the proposed reduction in working hours .
There is no doubt that a certain reduction in working hours is inherent in technological progress .
A study appeared recently stating that , if recourse was made in Germany to the robots already known today , there would be nine million fewer jobs , and 25 million fewer in the United States !
The problem of reducing working hours is therefore a real one ; we need to study the ways in which we can deal with it .
I do not think the way indicated by the French Government is the best ; it cannot be dealt with by decree or by law , but rather it should be tackled by contracts and agreements between the social parties , as stated , inter alia , in consideration J of the Rocard report , which states that it should only take place following an agreement between the social parties and even then with financial support .
I am not surprised , but would rather ask that financial support should be provided by the state .
It would be much better if the state paid for employment rather than unemployment .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on 20 and 21 November in Luxembourg , the Heads of State and of Government will have a difficult job to do .
They will have to be able to combine the need to find a common desire to identify ways and means of fighting unemployment in Europe with that of not introducing obligations or obstacles or anything else that may prove detrimental to the path to a single currency .
However , the European Union , and the governments in particular , by forcing our countries to achieve the budget objectives laid down by Maastricht , even laboriously , to the limits of possibility , is obliged to make just as much effort to make a specific contribution towards solving the serious unemployment problem .
The European Union should first have the courage and determination to warn the member countries that have adopted deflationary but also recessive economic policies to the detriment of employment not to submit to a monetary union which now has no resources .
Mr Podestà 's position , which I adopt , does not require any further comment .
We believe that the Union , in laying down the conditions for the single currency , should indicate the ways of achieving full development , which it should have done beforehand , a long time ago .
It seems to me that , if the programme submitted by the Commission is adopted , we can consider ourselves to be on the right path .
Today 's speech by President Santer gives me reason to be optimistic .
I would like to make one point , however , in the hope that the summit will adopt it .
It relates to the question of the structural funds which , in my opinion , can play an even clearer role in this context . It is a well-known fact that in some countries the structural funds have not performed the tasks assigned to them in full but , owing to the seriousness of unemployment , we should not feel we are prisoners of mechanisms which , when activated by us , place huge budgets at our disposal which are actually often not used or badly used .
To give an example , and without claiming to be exhaustive , I remember that , on 16 September last , this Parliament voted by a large majority for the report , which I had the honour of preparing , on the extension of the structural funds to measures aimed at preserving and increasing the value of the artistic and architectural wealth , also providing direct benefits for further stable and skilled employment .
Madam President , we do not expect miracle solutions from the November summit . I hope the summit will not be restricted to the usual statements with no appreciable results , but will lead to concrete measures which , observing the principle of subsidiarity , identify the most appropriate national and Community measures , in both the short and long term , for economic recovery , development and employment .
Best wishes to the Luxembourg Summit !
Madam President , the EU should devote itself to the big issues .
Employment is one such big issue which affects and concerns people .
So it is a good thing it is now high on the agenda .
Convergence criteria for employment and unemployment should therefore be inserted into the Treaty on European Union so that they are given the same weight as requirements for membership of EMU .
The way EMU is constructed today means there is , unfortunately , a risk that it will increase unemployment instead .
I see three main areas for action .
First , a good business climate which creates more small and medium-sized enterprises with increased investment , better universities and apprenticeships . Secondly , a switching of taxes with reduced tax on work for low and middle-income earners and increased taxes on natural resources , energy and environmental discharges .
And thirdly , flexible working hours , down to a working week of 35 hours , through negotiation or , as a last resort , through legislation .
Madam President , convergence criteria , PR work , good examples and coordination at EU level together with legislation , collective agreements and implementation at national level could be the way to reduce unemployment in Europe .
Madam President , I share the rapporteur 's view that it is important that we talk in concrete terms before , during and after this summit .
I would like to give some examples of such concrete things .
I share the rapporteur 's views on lifelong learning and knowledge , but in recent years in my country we have seen in concrete terms how the education system has been cut back from the first year of primary school right up to university level , and that selection is increasing in primary education .
I share the view about active rather than passive measures , but at the same time in recent years in Sweden we have seen tens of thousands of women go from their badly-needed jobs in the public sector into passive unemployment .
This is therefore a criticism of the convergence criteria which were determined for economic and monetary union .
Finally , the TEN project .
In addition , the transeuropean networks have recently created an unprecedented environmental disaster in Sweden .
I therefore believe that when we debate this project it is very , very important to see what is happening in concrete terms as a result of what we are doing .
Madam President , still today , unfortunately , we MEPs , with speeches taking half a minute to one and a half minutes , have to offer solutions to the massive problem of unemployment in Europe .
And , as usual , owing to the adverse organizational system of the European Parliament , we have to offer solutions so that the Commission can then disregard them completely .
Everyone complains about the rise in unemployment , everyone maintains that the solution may lie in the small and medium-sized businesses , which could play a fundamental role in employment .
On the other hand , very few Member States encourage their small and medium-sized businesses to take on young people to improve vocational training .
In Italy , it is even prohibitive for a small or medium-sized business to take on young people : the current laws discourage any good intentions , as union logic wants a young apprentice to cost the company the same as a specialist worker .
Consequently , we will have fewer and fewer young people in the workshops , which will have fewer specialists and fewer skilled workers , with ever greater losses for the European economy in the future .
In the few seconds left to me , Madam President , I would like to announce my specific plan for the creation of new jobs in Europe : grouping all Non-attached Members of the European Parliament together into a single mixed group , so as to be able to take on new young executives and so make a positive contribution to the reduction in the percentage of young unemployed in Europe .
Madam President , Mrs Berès , other colleagues and myself have tabled three amendments to Mr van Velzen 's report , which we support and which I hope there will be room for in the Luxembourg Summit discussions .
Firstly , we can but note that in fighting against unemployment , we not only have to control it but we also have to create jobs .
Like you , we raise the problem of the macro-economic context .
But we think that the resources at the disposal of the large networks , including the EIB and our budget , are weak .
We want to revive the idea of a large European loan and we would like your opinion on this .
Secondly , we think that European industrial policies are necessary in sensitive sectors such as the car industry , of course , but also in the more active sectors such as telecommunications , computers and multimedia or the sectors of the future such as space .
Jobs must be created in Europe , they must be created in dynamic industrial sectors and they must give rise to both public and private investments .
Thirdly , the discussion on the reduction of working hours has been forcefully raised within Europe , notably by French government policy .
We think the problem must be considered at European level , for some people are rightly questioning the competitiveness of companies and we want to know your level of commitment to agreements on the 35 hour week , and indeed what you think of the prescriptive route .
Mr Santer has rightly said that readjustments are required in Europe .
From a political point of view , people are becoming visibly aware of the fact that a social and employment union is required alongside economic and monetary union .
As regards the unions , it is one of their demands . But from an employers ' point of view , what will they do ?
The employers have gained everything in Europe - the single currency , the single market , liberalization .
But now we do not see them at our side on the issue of a true employment policy .
I have no answer as to how to get the employers moving .
Please tell us how you intend to convince them .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this morning we have heard from both Mr Juncker and Mr Santer that in the last few years a great many resolutions and reports have been drawn up , a lot of words have been spoken , but unfortunately very little has been decided and the great plans have really not done anything to alter the facts , in particular that unemployment in the Union , at 18 million , is still unacceptably high .
But I remember Commissioner Flynn saying that a higher figure would be more realistic , maybe as much as 15 million .
Unfortunately it is still too often thought that employment is linked solely to economic growth .
Of course we need economic growth .
Without economic growth no directly associated employment can be created , but equally we need an active and efficient labour market , when the economy is booming and when it is in decline .
I want to raise four points in relation to the proposals that we have heard this morning .
First , the transeuropean networks .
I hope the obstacles will now at last be removed and that a decision will be taken in Luxembourg on the funds needed , because we know that the transeuropean networks are real assets which will bring related investment , stimulate economic growth and create more employment .
Secondly , injections of capital into SMEs , which are already the biggest creators of jobs .
Thirdly , financial incentives for scientific research and technological development to make up the gap between us and Japan and the United States and also loans for jobseeking , vocational training , job opportunities in the environmental and cultural sectors and in what is known as the third sector , the social economy sector .
Fourthly , reductions in taxes on employment , both fiscal and parafiscal .
Commissioner Monti has already done groundbreaking work in this area .
I hope that steps can be taken through the efforts of the Luxembourg presidency .
I now come to the last point , one which we can all support , as regards the proposals for tackling this problem .
I believe that in fact it must be said that the only efficient way - as economic and monetary union has shown - is the convergence method , assuming that this is combined with a timetable .
It is this method that we must be able to translate into practical terms at a level such as youth employment , definition of the level of employment , for instance 65 % over five years , training of the long term unemployed , reorganization of working time and so on .
Three participants have an important role to play in tackling this problem : the European Union , which has to provide the impetus , the Member States , which have to draw up their annual action plans , and the social partners , which have to assume their responsibilities .
That is the path to the Luxembourg summit .
I hope this path , pointed out to us by two eminent Luxembourg politicians , is also the right path to social union .
Madam President , in this Parliament a regrettable belief exists that we are wiser than the members of the national parliaments .
We must cure ourselves of that .
Particularly when there are 25 Member States , it cannot do any good for this Parliament to discuss every possible thing which is the responsibility of the national parliaments .
I am sure that van Velzen 's report is good for a social democratic government in Holland ; but it will not work in my country , nor in several other countries , because the problems are different .
Some people need more education , others need demarcation between trades to be broken down and increased incentives to find work .
There must be debate and clarification in the national parliaments .
We must therefore try here to limit the amount of general and - forgive me for saying so - superficial advice about areas where the Union has no influence .
Let us concentrate on what the Union can do , namely stable frameworks , common currency , market access , research , innovation .
I agree that no-one under 25 should receive passive social security benefit - but this , too , is an idea which must be debated in the national parliaments .
Madam President , I agree that this extraordinary European Council meeting on employment is very important for the European Union 's credibility .
My colleagues have emphasized that the most important question is the reduction in working hours , but I would like to stress two other matters which I think are very important : small and medium-sized enterprises , and women .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are essential in the creation and maintenance of employment .
In Spain , we have a wonderful example to prove this point : in the Valencian Community where I live there are a great many such enterprises , producing ceramics , toys , footwear or furniture .
They are highly labour intensive , but they are in crisis because their competitiveness depends on cheap labour . They need to change , and produce quality goods which are well-designed and technologically advanced .
But they cannot make these changes , which almost amount to a revolution , on their own . They need assistance , access to finance , and reduced burdens .
As for women , we make up 83 % of all part-time workers , and have an unemployment level which is 4 % greater than the Community average . This summit has to introduce concrete measures to guarantee equal access to the labour market .
I believe that the credibility of this Parliament and the other Community institutions depends on our finding solutions to the biggest problem faced by the citizens of the Union : job creation .
Madam President , the van Velzen report , for which I offer my congratulations , proposes to move urgently from words to facts by implementing what the European Parliament has always maintained : if we want to dignify a concerted policy on employment by giving it the same importance as the single currency process , we need to take decisions on employment convergence criteria , together with medium term objectives and guidelines for achieving them .
The central point is therefore to show a desire to regulate processes by means of a concerted European policy that forces Institutions at all levels , European , national and local , to direct overall economic choices towards a new model of development , to create the contextual conditions for this development to be made in the direction of creating new jobs .
I think that the contextual conditions are created with the information provided in the van Velzen report : measure relating to training and inservice training , a reorganization of and reduction in working hours .
On this latter point , I wish to digress slightly : my government , the Italian Government , has , in my opinion , made a bold proposal , not to establish a reduction in working hours by law by a decree forcing everyone to do so , but to encourage agreement between the social parties to arrive at a reduction in working hours , with the assistance of the Institutions as well .
This direction favours all the unemployed but , I think , women in particular , who are the most heavily penalized by the rate of unemployment and who have always said that the problem of working hours requires intervention for everyone , men and women .
The contextual conditions are also created with measures favouring retraining , technological innovation and capital support for small and medium-sized businesses .
The European Parliament has done so , not only with the Van Velzen report , but also with the choices made in terms of budget which will be discussed this afternoon .
The European Parliament has shown courage .
As Mr van Velzen said , it is true that we do not always have the necessary resources , but experience has taught me that , if the strategies do not result in resources , they can easily remain a dead letter .
The European Parliament has made a specific choice : an employment package that contains measures favouring small and medium-sized businesses cooperating with the EIB , but aimed at favouring local pilot projects for employment .
I think that the Commission with its guidelines and the European Parliament with the specific information contained in the van Velzen report and with the choices of budget have played their part .
All responsibility now lies in the hands of the Council .
The Luxembourg Summit should conclude with specific choices that also form the legal basis for these programmes .
I would like to tell the President of the Council , Mr Juncker , that he was very brave to put forward his motions .
However , this summit should conclude with a specific fact : legal bases for this programme , otherwise it will only end in words once again .
Madam President , I am pleased that we have all come to the conclusion that employment policy is now a focal issue for the European Union .
This is due in no small part to the prominence which this matter has been given by the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission .
It is now absolutely essential for us to focus our attention on youth unemployment , which now stands at over 20 % for Europe as a whole , with peaks of over 40 % in some of the Member States .
This means that by failing to tackle this problem the EU will be faced with a social powder keg which will threaten the entire future of the Union .
I would therefore like to direct my attention to measures seeking to combat youth unemployment . I urgently request that we pursue our efforts with renewed vigour , both at national as well as at European level .
In this context President Santer has stated that we need new strategies which must be both diverse and durable and , if I may add , most importantly practical .
Here I wish to focus on a number of measures whose implementation is necessary , in my opinion , to combat youth unemployment .
Firstly , we should strive to provide young people with a basic education which includes both a fundamental knowledge of EDP skills and the language of another EU country , with a view to increasing their job mobility .
Secondly , mobility should be an educational requirement , and by this I mean students and teachers alike , since the latter are often not fully familiar with the concept .
This means that we must try to direct the Union 's available capacity towards mobility programmes and overcoming existing barriers to the application of such programmes .
Thirdly , we must learn to educate people to meet the actual needs of the job market .
All too often we tend to over-educate .
I would suggest that annual reports be prepared to assist the Member States in this respect , in order that training and education can be tailored to meet the needs of the future .
Fourthly , we should harmonize our skills training , that is to say we must bring this to the level proposed by the Commission .
Dual training , which is regarded as the optimum solution , should for example be introduced into all European states .
Fifthly , we need to speed-up the creation of new businesses , since the greatest potential is to be found in small and medium-sized enterprises and because many young people want to become instructors and to adopt the American system of business angels .
Finally , to promote innovation in the business sector , I would propose the introduction of networked innovation exchanges throughout Europe for the purpose of displaying and implementing new ideas .
I see the employment summit as a real opportunity to encourage employment throughout Europe , particularly for the younger generation who represent the future of Europe .
Madam President , the great debate for the end of this century is how to create employment in our societies .
In this debate , our actions cannot be preventative or defensive in nature , nor be based on formulae which may have been valid in the past , but are not so valid today .
The current situation would benefit from a bold approach .
As opposed to the concept of deregulation , which seems to cover everything , our proposals should combine flexibility and security , in the view that there is no single employment policy , but that all policies can , and should , benefit employment - although policies which actively favour employment may also be needed .
There are a lot of hopes resting on the forthcoming employment summit - perhaps too many .
Let us hope that they are not disappointed .
As Wim van Velzen 's report says , it would be good to form concrete , even quantifiable , objectives , bearing in mind that the initial employment figures are not the same in all the Member States , and neither are the conditions for creating work . We need to create work in order to create jobs , in each and every one of our Member States .
For employment is created only by creating work - work which satisfies traditional and new needs .
Unemployed young people , who experience extra difficulties in finding a job , need imaginative and even risky formulae , such as increasing the numbers who train for a profession , linking training and work experience , or supporting lifelong learning .
We must share our experiences in how to convert passive policies into active policies , and unemployment benefits into support for new jobs .
The social partners should offer specific agreements designed to create employment . Possibilities include : the conversion of overtime into jobs rather than pay - in Spain last year 65 million hours of overtime were worked ; formulae for flexible working practices , such as agreeing to reduce the working day in exchange for new jobs , as long as companies ' productivity is safeguarded ; and agreements on new ways of organizing work .
We must insist on fiscal flexibility for labour-intensive and unskilled work .
Small enterprises should be given more than a declaration of intent , or concessions on loans .
Small industries need to be helped to understand how they fit into the potential of the single market , and how they can benefit from a single currency .
As has been said many times , the European Union must find a way of adding value to the policies of the Member States , and must give decisive support to certain active policies designed to promote employment .
If this is done , the Luxembourg employment summit could turn out to be a European pact for employment and solidarity .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that 18 million people are unemployed throughout the European Community constitutes a challenge to the European Union , even though the primary responsibility for this lies with the employment policy of the Member States , and particularly with both sides of industry .
This view is now shared by the Amsterdam Council and is reflected in an employment statement and in a supplement to the minutes , with the aim of organizing a special summit .
The European Parliament has successfully intervened in the preparation of the Luxembourg summit and Wim van Velzen has made a significant contribution through his work in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I should like to express my appreciation for this and wish the project every success for the future .
We agree on many points , including those voiced by the President of the Commission .
Of the many proposals put forward today for combatting unemployment , I would only reiterate the importance of qualifications , both for employees as well as for the unemployed .
This matter should be at the top of the agenda at the special meeting of Heads of State and of Government in Luxembourg .
Incentives are needed to promote job training and lifelong learning .
Europe 's position requires not only modern high technology machinery but also a workforce capable of operating it .
Wim van Velzen has made interesting proposals for vocational training and for combatting youth unemployment .
Some of these - and a number of speakers have already made the same point - have admittedly focused too much on percentages and planning .
The Group of the European People 's Party wishes to introduce amendments to give the proposals a much needed boost .
The President-in-Office of the Council has brought a refreshing new tone into the European debate .
He is quite right in warning of the danger of setting the sights too high .
Mr Juncker will , I am sure , be able to make a significant contribution to the summit . The latter must see practical decisions being taken and should not get bogged down in matters of theory .
But it will not work without money , Mr van Velzen , as you well know .
The European budget will have to be scrutinized line by line to see if additional reserves can be found .
The Davignon report has put forward the European Limited Company as an ideal legal instrument , particularly for mobilizing private capital for the establishment of transeuropean networks .
The European Limited Company project has already failed due to the contentious issue of comanagement .
The Council Presidency in Luxembourg has come up with an interesting compromise in this respect .
If political accord can be reached this year within the Council of Ministers on the basis of this partnership solution , then this will also be good for European employment policy .
The challenge to the job market can be answered not by a free market policy but by a social one with real partnership !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Social Democrats are pleased to see this debate taking place today .
I am especially glad that all my colleagues recognize that running down the social system is no way to create jobs .
May I remind you , President-in-Office of the Council , that the employment statement contained in the Amsterdam Treaty was initially quite unpopular .
Germany in particular wanted to reject its adoption right up to the last minute .
The present situation was only achieved through public debate and by the intervention of the European Parliament , the Commission and several Member States .
I mention this because the danger naturally exists that former opponents will again wreck our efforts on 21 November by staging a boycott .
We have lost a great deal of time by the Council 's failure to recognise the need to adopt the Elise programme .
Risk capital for SMEs will now be given top priority by Luxembourg .
The national parliaments and governments will not be released from their responsibility , but Mr Santer , you are quite right , nothing more can be achieved by misinterpretations of subsidiarity .
I would briefly like to mention three points .
First , we need high quality , sustainable employment opportunities .
We have had enough cheap jobs without training , without a future and without social security .
Secondly , we need more jobs for women .
A certain amount of courage is required , even today , to promote this .
Those in responsibility find it much easier to send women back to the kitchen or to parttime jobs .
Thirdly , we need new ideas .
What Member States cannot achieve by themselves , measures which they have neglected and those which they do not yet trust , could be implemented at European level in the form of pilot projects .
For my part I am convinced that the planned funding by the European Investment Bank will not be sufficient in the medium term if the Council of Ministers takes its job seriously .
Mr Juncker , we will be keeping a critical and positive eye on the activities of the Council , demanding real results when necessary and intervening constructively whenever possible .
Madam President , as a whole the EU currently possesses the necessary tools to be able to take advantage of ongoing globalization and technological transformation .
Through the creation of the single market and the introduction of EMU , we have created the basis for making use of new opportunities .
However , this requires a greater degree of adaptability among the nations , regions and people of Europe .
The problem with the van Velzen report is that it is only aimed at the symptoms of a market which is functioning poorly .
There are well-intentioned employment initiatives and plans for ambitious targets , but in fact this risks being totally counterproductive .
I believe , you see , that there is a great risk that we are avoiding an essential structural debate .
Who has wondered today why we are not getting an increase in new jobs in Europe ?
The fact is , we should be discussing structural problems instead ; the cost situation - our taxes are far too high ; regulations - there are barriers to taking people on ; enterprise - there are not enough new businesses in Europe .
Skills levels are sinking instead of rising at a time when skills are increasingly important .
I know these questions are not new , but I think it is a scandal that people did not do their homework better after Essen and start implementing many of the policies which are now needed .
It does not help that the Commission has ambitious analyses , since that cannot compensate for Heads of Government failing to make national changes .
I do not envy President-in-Office Juncker who has taken on a big role .
I truly hope that he and the EU are not left to carry the can , that is , get blamed for unemployment which is due to poorly functioning national labour markets .
My advice to you is to concentrate on what only the EU can do - the single market and the single currency and , if you like , the exchange of good ideas , which goes without saying among friends .
But do not look blindly to the EU alone . We live in a global economy and can learn from other countries and continents where the level of employment is rising and unemployment is falling .
Have the courage to analyse the word flexibility .
Don 't let the expression active labour market policy tempt you into supranational budgetary efforts .
Just as Europe cannot create new jobs and prosperity by sitting back and relaxing , I hope that you do not take a holiday when many tasks are waiting .
I think it is really strange that so many people appear to believe that we can improve our lot by working less .
In my opinion , those who promote that line have given up . They are advocating a stagnating and shrinking labour market .
Mr President-in-Office , you just said very poetically in your introduction that you did not want the summit to be a paraphrase summit , giving birth to another poem .
I could not have put it better and I entirely agree .
Incidentally I want to say to Johanna Boogerd-Quaak that we do not really need new ideas .
We have produced enough ideas .
The Commission in the White Paper , the Stability Pact , this Parliament in the Rocard report and in the various resolutions it has put forward .
What we need now is for the ideas to be implemented .
If Luxembourg is to be a success , at least three things are necessary , Mr President-in-Office .
Firstly , the summit must formulate clear objectives .
It has already been said a few times that a European employment agreement must be courageous enough ultimately to create convergence criteria for employment as well .
The summit must also dare to establish objectives for education , investment in employment , job guarantees and working hours .
I must honestly say that I am slightly surprised that some colleagues have overlooked that passage in the van Velzen report .
But I am even more surprised when I hear that so many governments are afraid to take the plunge and I see it myself in some of the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party and the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reformist Party when it comes to establishing concrete objectives .
After all we have known for a long time , from our experience with monetary convergence , that such criteria are necessary if we are to move in the same direction .
I hope , Mr President-in-Office , that the summit will be successful in this respect .
Secondly , nothing can be achieved without spending money .
And that is also true of a European employment strategy that offers not workfare projects but job guarantees , investment in employment and a better future .
On this point I perhaps differ slightly in emphasis from our rapporteur , Wim van Velzen .
Of course employment must be on the national agenda and therefore the Member States must spend as much as they can possibly afford on employment as a matter of priority .
But that will not satisfy my colleagues .
The concern for sound government finances which is , indeed , laid down in the stability pact , means that policy scope is particularly limited , at any rate in my own country , and fresh resources will therefore be needed to boost the European economy .
For that reason the Amsterdam commitment to financing a European growth initiative must be put into practice at the very least .
In fact , as I see it , Eurobonds could be put back on the agenda in a Delors-style initiative .
In any event I would like to conclude , Mr President-in-Office , by wishing you success .
I hope the summit will not once again result in a beautiful poem .
Madam President , we are not hoping for miracles from the employment summit , but we do expect that from now on the problem of 18 million unemployed in Europe will be treated with due seriousness , that is to say that it will be at the top of all agendas .
The credibility of European policy depends on the extent to which results can be achieved , and not only for millions of unemployed people and their families .
As Jean-Claude Juncker has just outlined , that means not just singing the same old song , but actually beginning a new refrain with new lyrics to match .
The principle of subsidiarity is not being violated .
While main responsibility continues to lie with the Member States , it is now time to give practical effect to the common strategy for employment , as agreed at the Essen summit .
Commission President Jacques Santer is correct in saying that integrated , coordinated action must now be taken , and without further delay .
The Essen summit correctly focussed on five recognized key areas , namely investment in vocational training , raising the employment index , reducing wage incidentals , a more effective labour market policy and measures to assist groups affected by unemployment .
These also feature highly in the report submitted by Wim van Velzen , which is a precise and focussed piece of work , and we intend further to improve the situation through amendments from the Group of the European People 's Party .
Employment and economic policy are two sides of the same coin of a social market economy .
We therefore need convergence criteria for employment in order to supplement the stability pact initiated by Theo Waigel .
The level of commitment of the Member States must be available for monitoring and inspection .
Clearly we need to survey what has been accomplished , but also what remains to be accomplished , and this should include the annual reports submitted to the European Parliament .
Only through qualitative objectives with clear time definitions will we reach the standard needed to evaluate the effective coordination of national policies .
Our key targets are ultimately achievable .
In the area of human resources , the cost of training measures should be based on the average national budget for the three best Member States .
Education and training should be adapted in a much more flexible way to meet the needs of the marketplace .
Both sides of industry need to reach agreements so that after training , job opportunities , including contract-type work , are available to the long term unemployed and the young .
As far as SMEs are concerned , we need to reduce the risk associated with the establishment of new companies and to set up a guarantee fund to provide loans from the European Investment Bank , which naturally includes strengthening the competitive position of the guarantors of most of the jobs and training places in Europe . At regional level , we must set up local employment initiatives and introduce measures to promote territorial pacts .
I believe that the European Parliament has actively complied both with the Council decision on growth and employment and with the Amsterdam employment statement .
The ambitious goal which has been set , Mr President , namely to organize a summit with tangible results , has every chance of success , not least because of the enormous personal commitment and inspiration involved .
Madam President , with the Amsterdam Treaty we have taken a great step towards a better Europe .
The EU must tackle what is most important for the populations of Europe , namely employment and hence the defence of the welfare society .
Treaties do not themselves solve problems .
The many proposals and good intentions must lead to action .
In 1992-93 Denmark had high unemployment and a budget deficit .
We changed our financial policy by reorganizing our tax system and through comprehensive reform of the labour market - things which have made Denmark today the European job-creation champion .
The fact is we can kick-start the economy and in this way secure for ourselves better employment and , at the same time , a budget surplus .
We have carried out tax reform which was the beginning of lower taxation of labour and higher taxation on consumption of resources .
We have carried out a reform of the labour market which has activated the jobless , and leave of absence for training and parental leave have helped to create a more flexible and social labour market for both business and wage-earners .
We have chosen a strategy which invests in training people and not in passivity .
A strategy in which growth and employment go hand in hand with sustainable finance .
We have in Denmark come a long way towards both higher employment and order in public finance , while at the same time preserving a socially responsible community and taking account of the environment .
We now need all EU states to commit themselves to concrete objectives in the employment campaign .
In job creation we in Europe must invest in training , research and quality , and thereby improve our competitiveness in relation to non-EU countries .
The single market means that we have a 90 % common economy and are therefore dependent upon one another .
The Danish effort would have had even greater effect if a corresponding kick-start of the economy had taken place everywhere in Europe .
Good luck with the summit meeting in November !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the extraordinary meeting of the European Council to be held this November in Luxembourg should not and must not be one more of the many European summits marked by the firm and assured repetition of good intentions which have never been , nor ever will be , put into practice .
This will not be a time for further reflection and meditation on unemployment ; it must be a time for realising and implementing the texts adopted at the European Council of Amsterdam , especially those which are essential for the development of an active and coordinated European strategy on employment .
The new section of the treaty on employment , the resolution on the growth of employment and the President 's conclusions on employment , competitiveness and growth have introduced principles , provisions and intentions of such importance that they must , as a matter of urgency , be explored and implemented all the way to the final results .
We cannot wait until the extraordinary Luxembourg summit for new ideas to emerge .
The important thing is to put into practice the innumerable ideas which have already been propagated and discussed .
According to the Amsterdam Treaty , Member States consider the promotion of employment as a matter of common interest , with the Community contributing to the achievement of a high level of employment , encouraging Member States to cooperate with one another , supporting and , where necessary , supplementing their actions .
The Community will respect the jurisdiction of Member States , but Member States must not fail to shoulder their responsibilities to resolve this worrying social problem .
European citizens , particularly the millions of young people without jobs and as many millions again of long term unemployed , are waiting , perhaps with some hope , for the urgent implementation of measures including employment training appropriate to market needs , the organization of working time - not just a reduction in working hours - and the financial measures made necessary by the coordination of economic policy .
The report we are now discussing is an important source of assistance for the Luxembourg Summit .
It seeks to create a catalogue of new opportunities provided by the Amsterdam Treaty , extrapolating a considerable and important number of concrete proposals , which should be taken into consideration at the Luxembourg Summit and implemented the day after their adoption , without further delay .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first let me too express my sincere appreciation to Wim van Velzen for his excellent report .
I also welcome the proposed measures for greater workplace adaptability and more flexible working hours .
However , flexibility should not be introduced without social safeguards .
Flexibility for employers is one side of the coin , social security should be the other .
In this respect we are all under an obligation , governments and social partners alike .
The enormous growth in short term contract work and the current boom in teleworking are the result of exploitation by companies preoccupied with global competition , a sort of Manchester-type capitalism .
Since it is better to have any kind of work than none at all , I now see increasing numbers of people in such a plight that they are forced to accept this type of employment , despite the fact that it involves no social safeguards whatsoever and in terms of workers ' rights falls far short of the benefits enjoyed by full-time workers .
This demonstrates a serious shortcoming in European social policy , and one which must be redressed as a matter of urgency if we are seriously to introduce a more flexible approach to employment .
What is needed here are precise rules and practical European minimum standards .
If we continue with the faint-hearted approach adopted by both sides of industry in their European agreement on part-time employment , then we may as well give up now and go home .
No social progress has ever been made on the zero tax rate and this will never bring us peace in labour relations .
What we need are flexible employment conditions which do not discriminate between employment and social insurance rights .
Madam President , I too wish to congratulate the rapporteur for producing a very concise report which cuts through the usual verbiage that we get when we are talking about reducing unemployment .
In this regard , I would like to refute the criticisms that have been made here by Mrs Carlsson and others in relation to the report .
Last week , in Brussels , we heard the Commission 's latest economic forecasts and on the basis of these projections , Commissioner de Silguy told us that up to eleven Member States will take part in EMU from January 1999 .
While this is to be welcomed , it means very little for millions of people throughout the European Union .
In particular I would submit that it means nothing at all for the 18 million people who we have heard of so often this morning - our fellow European citizens who are without work .
My country , Ireland , has seen a very welcome reversal in its economic fortunes over the past five years but even our " Celtic Tiger ' suffers from the cancer of unemployment .
Its roar is an offence in my view to our many long term unemployed and to our young people who get no job start at all .
Concrete steps must be taken at the Luxembourg Summit to ensure that the battle against unemployment can be won .
One very important step that the Member States could take would be to reverse their position on the abolition of duty-free sales for internal EU travel .
This decision , which was taken by Bertie Ahern and the other finance ministers in 1991 , will have drastic consequences for thousands of workers across the European Union .
It is ironic that we should be talking , on the one hand , about creating employment and , on the other hand , cutting jobs ourselves by our own actions .
I would ask Commissioner Flynn , who is with us here today , where he stands on this issue .
Will he indicate where he stands on duty-free and will he argue for its retention at Commission level ?
If not , thousands of workers will be added to our shameful statistics .
Finally I have just come from a meeting of the Intergroup on Ageing .
Mr Santer might like to reassure us that the concerns of older workers will be taken into account in his deliberations in Luxembourg .
Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for a good report .
In my homeland people sometimes talk as if the high unemployment is due to the EU .
That is not true , because so far the EU has not had the instruments to conduct an active employment policy .
Instead it is the Member States who have until now had the instruments , but who have not managed to conduct a good employment policy on their own . Now there are these instruments in the Amsterdam Treaty .
That does not mean , however , that either the regions or the states will be relieved of their responsibility for future employment policy . It is to do with creating added value .
When we create this added value it is important to do so in concrete terms .
We should not allow another meeting which involves lofty declarations which commit us to nothing .
It is important to have clear objectives with regard to levels of employment and unemployment , particularly youth unemployment and long term unemployment .
It is also important to have clear objectives with regard to the question of an active labour market policy .
On this point Mr van Velzen 's report brings clarification .
Learn a lesson from this at the Luxembourg Council , and do not let it become another document like the rest .
As far as the issue of working hours is concerned , it is true that a reduced working week , correctly carried out , can create jobs .
We know that . We have examples of it around Europe .
What we can learn from EMU is the following : if you create clear , concrete objectives , countries will try to fulfil them .
That has been done in the area of inflation and with regard to budget deficits .
Let us now do the same thing for employment and unemployment .
It is a great challenge , but it is a challenge which the Council must accept .
In conclusion , I would also like to support Mr Malone 's views on the question of duty-free shopping .
Let us now make sure , while we work for increased employment and reduced unemployment , that we do not increase unemployment in certain areas because of past decisions .
Let employment be the overriding objective .
In that case we should postpone the proposal to abolish duty-free shopping .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , at the time of the Single European Act we forecast the creation of many new jobs for our people .
But unemployment has done nothing but grow . At the time of Maastricht there were the same unkept promises .
The austerity of convergence criteria has not enabled us to escape from the spiral of unemployment .
We can clearly see that we must change course . Change macro-economic course , maybe , but also change the method .
We can no longer accept constricting economic criteria without protective social criteria favourable to employment being confirmed within Europe at the same time .
This is why Europe must rapidly move towards a reduction in the working week .
Productivity gains and new technologies must speed up this historically age-old movement .
We can work less and produce more .
Work must therefore be shared , the working week reduced .
In order for this to create jobs , this reduction must be on a large scale , rapid and generalized .
Of course , it is better to do this through negotiation , better to do it through incentives .
But by the dawn of the 21st Century , by the year 2000 , all European enterprises ought to be working on the basis of a 35 hour week .
That is possible .
The same arguments have been put forward throughout history : the economy will not be able to stand it , businesses will no longer be competitive .
This is what was said to Jaurès when he introduced the eight-hour day , it was also said when paid holidays were introduced .
But history has resolved the problem , and it has not been the case .
We can create massive numbers of jobs if , at the same time as reducing the working week , we readjust the relationship between capital and labour , which has been extremely unbalanced to the detriment of the workers , and if we proceed to reform tax deductions and social security contributions in favour of businesses employing large numbers of staff and penalizing more heavily those who make large profits without creating jobs .
A European fiscal policy is therefore needed to accompany the reduction in the working week .
Finally , this summit must not be one of rapid social deregulation .
On the contrary , it must bring a halt to deregulation because , Mr President , what good are convergence rates and apparently lower unemployment rates if , in reality , workers who no longer form part of the statistics no longer have the means to live and live below the poverty line ?
This is not the Europe we want .
A social Europe must gather momentum around the fight against deregulation .
Social progress ought to bring economic progress .
Unfortunately this never happens spontaneously , like a sort of inevitable consequence .
Madam President , for the first time in European history we have a golden opportunity to create an employment strategy for this part of the world .
Parliament has long been active in this respect and has also been calling for action .
Mr van Velzen 's report is , again , a splendid example of this .
The council , on the other hand , got involved only quite recently , in accordance with harmonization policies , after necessary political changes in Member States ' governments took place after elections .
Now there are ideal opportunities to implement an employment programme that contains concrete targets .
Heads of Member States must not return empty-handed from the Luxembourg Employment Summit .
The Commission 's concrete targets have been criticized , because they are hard to measure .
I think , though , that concrete targets are needed for the very reason that we should have a means of assessing the effectiveness of any employment measures .
I am not saying that a 7 % unemployment rate is not a sufficiently ambitious target , but we do need short term goals so that we can monitor our success .
Job creation is the keyword .
There is obviously a limit to the EU budget , but good use must be made of all the benefits of structural funding and the European Investment Bank .
The Council has more room to manoeuvre in this area than it has been prepared to take hitherto .
In the market economy , taxation is also an effective way of controlling supply and demand in the labour market .
Many speakers have emphasized the need to alter the incidence of tax and steer it away from the workforce and towards the areas of energy , capital and environment .
This change must really be put into effect , but , at the same time , it must be recognized that altering the centre of gravity of taxation obviously must not pose a threat to the welfare state .
The criteria for the employment programme must be as plausible as those for EMU , and the Luxembourg summit must produce the criteria for both .
Only then will it have succeeded in its task .
Madam President , addressing unemployment is a fundamental condition for establishing and safeguarding social cohesion in the European Union .
Moreover , it has proved to be the precondition for the ability of the European community to respond to the challenge of globalization .
And I am speaking naturally of the European model and not of some framework " made in the USA ' or " made in Japan ' .
Eighteen million people out of work in the European Union . Worthy people .
But it is not just this outrageous number . Also included in the vicious circle are people who are now in work and struggling with insecurity , and people who will be looking for work in the future and struggling with uncertainty .
And of course the nightmarish circle gets even bigger when their families are included .
In the final analysis desperate citizens do not care about who or what is to blame .
They value solutions and results , and quite rightly so .
And that means allocating and assuming responsibilities , obligations and actions on all sides and throughout the whole spectrum of powers .
The special summit on employment may prove to be historic in the true sense of the word .
It is now or never !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I must say I find this debate quite frustrating .
Not in its fundamental issues , but for procedural reasons .
Indeed , several of you have spoken and I imagine your frustrations will be many when you note the weakness of the Presidential response time constraints force me to give , in the face of such an barrage of ideas .
I would have dearly liked to participate in the debate , so wide we have barely touched on it today , especially during Mrs Dury 's speech , which suggested a number of different paths on which we should concentrate more heavily .
But unfortunately I cannot explore all the different paths you have mentioned today .
I will simply say that this debate has shown that the atmosphere has changed , for now even Parliament sees the problems of employment in a different way from a few years ago .
With few exceptions , regrettable but not necessarily significant ones , we are all agreed on the method to be used , on this method of convergence that the Maastricht Treaty has bequeathed to us , a method we once cursed because it forced Member States to accept responsibility for the results .
Now we consider the method has proved itself and we want to apply it to employment policy .
We are all agreed that concrete results are required and most of us consider that the guidelines should be quantifiable and verifiable .
Consequently , this is a common element of analysis which should enable us to do a good job on this point .
I noted , with an astonishment that sometimes bordered on amusement , the enthusiasm of those who considered that recent developments in the domestic policy of the different Member States of the European Union should facilitate the presidential cause and enable us to prepare better for the Employment Summit .
If only that were true , I would be the first to applaud those who expressed this point of view .
Unfortunately , not all the Member States are convinced that the approach we have chosen , the method the Commission has suggested , is the right one .
We note amongst those who do not share our views and who , in fact , do not share the views expressed here , a fine display of ecumenism .
To reassure some , the conservatives are not the only ones blocking the path to good sense and enthusiasm when it comes to fighting for employment .
Ladies and gentlemen , I therefore invite those of you who are in agreement to initiate in-depth discussions with those who do not share our point of view .
When we leave Strasbourg to go back to our respective countries , we must contact them and convince them to follow the paths that Parliament has rightly indicated this morning , paths , directions and ideas with which I have very little disagreement worth mentioning here .
But if everyone could share these ideas , in London , Bonn , Luxembourg , Brussels , Rome or Paris , given that all political shades of opinion have expressed similar views today , we would have all the necessary elements and ingredients available for the Presidency to mix up a cocktail which would be received by those it was served to as something sufficiently innovative to restore hope to those who have lost it .
We are responsible for those men and women , and everyone who wants to see another literary summit , a seminar summit , a summit of excuses , will bear a heavy responsibility if their attitudes prevail .
It depends on you , it depends on us , to encourage them to follow the methods , suggestions and ideas you have voiced this morning and which largely correspond to the views and ideas of the Presidency .
Let me add my words of thanks to all those who have contributed to the discussions this morning .
I would like particularly to offer my congratulations to Mr van Velzen and Parliament on the substance of the resolution .
It certainly gives us great confidence to know that all of the political forces in Europe are now being mobilized so effectively in the fight against unemployment .
There is something different now compared to what was in place heretofore .
The difference is exactly what the President-in-Office referred to : the change because of the Amsterdam Treaty and the fact that employment is now a matter of common concern and has moved centre-stage .
Also , we now have the link between economic and employment policy in the very same agenda .
When you add that to what President Santer said - that we now also have a new employment strategy to match the content of the treaty - then I believe that we are on our way .
I support what Mr Hughes said regarding the need for urgency of action .
That must be very obvious to us all .
It is brought painfully home to us in what I sometimes refer to as the ' statistics of shame ' of the European labour market .
We cannot forget that our present policies are adding two million extra each year to the long-term unemployed in Europe .
When one considers that one in five of all those who leave our education and training systems in Europe have no marketable skill , and when we further consider that one in ten of the unemployed never get an opportunity of training at all , it is easy to support our employment guidelines which say that there is a jobs gap , there is a skills gap , and that it demands a response and a fundamental change in thinking on how our systems work : our educational systems , training systems , social security systems and taxation systems .
To make progress we have to recognize the failures of the past .
I see the failures of the past in three areas : poor economic management , lack of investment in human resources , and outdated labour market and social security systems .
I now believe that the fundamental failure of the Member States was for too long to adopt a wait-and-see attitude that permeated all the thinking .

So I agree with Mr Hughes , and Mr Pirker made the point strongly as well , that early identification and early intervention are absolutely necessary if we are to tackle these problems , and must be based on the individual needs of the people involved .
Happily things are changing .
We certainly are on the move , and I believe that EMU and the single currency will deal with that first of the failures , the question of economic policy mismanagement .
Our guidelines can settle the skills and systems failure .
Our employment ambitions are realistic and attainable in terms of both the quality and the quantity of the jobs .
To achieve them we need to ensure that the current economic recovery is sustained , not just for a few years but over the next ten years .
We must act decisively to get on top of the structural reforms .
We did all of this before .
We must not forget that in the second half of the 1980s there were 10 million new jobs created in Europe in a much weaker economic situation - before the single market , before the single currency and without any systematic activation of labour market policies .
The arithmetic is quite simple .
Productivity growth in Europe is 2 % per year , so we need at least 2 % economic growth just to keep employment at its present level .
We certainly have to be encouraged - as was pointed out by one contributor - when we think about the recent forecasts for the ongoing recovery that we are experiencing now .
It is well-founded and it is a stable recovery .
We can achieve that 3 % increase .
If we get anything better than that and couple it with the much-needed structural reforms that we have talked about , then the situation improves remarkably and rapidly .
Not only do we create more jobs - 2 million or more a year - but spending on employment can increase , spending on unemployment decreases and tax income increases .
This is the virtuous circle that I believe will create enough jobs - the 12 million that we mention in all - to bring our employment rate up to the target of 65 % for the Union as a whole that we set out in the employment policy guidelines .
Not everybody is attracted by the notion of specific targets .
We could certainly understand that if they were simply plucked out of the air and there was no political commitment or operational machinery to ensure that they are achieved .
But that is not how we see the targets in the guidelines and not how we expect the Member States to react .
The guidelines ' targets are attainable achievements .
They are the consequence of action and they show us where we can be in the Union if we pursue the strategies and policies set out in both the employment guidelines and the broad economic guidelines .
Expectations are high but expectations are important , and without stringent and demanding expectations there are no compelling reasons to rethink old policies to move to the kind of employment rate that our main trading partners enjoy .
So our objectives are realistic and as attainable in their own way as the economic convergence criteria which the Member States adopted and worked towards after Maastricht .
Mrs Ghilardotti makes the point well here .
I would like to say that on the issue of the proposed guidelines the Commission has not dodged the question of working time .
Under the adaptability heading , the Commission acknowledges that reductions in working time may be appropriate in some sectors or situations but that such reductions should be negotiated by the social partners .
The overall aim , however , must be to make enterprise productive and competitive and to achieve the necessary balance between flexibility for the enterprise and security for the individual worker .
Insofar as ratios and indicators are concerned and the guidelines that will come forward from the Commission , we will present a proposal to ensure an agreed comparable database in Member States and agreed indicators in order to monitor implementation .
This will be a priority following the summit 's conclusions in 1998 .
On the question of structural funds , the guidelines call on the Member States to increase the level of structural funding allocated to their human resource development policies .
I very much welcome , therefore , the fact that you share our concern in wishing to see a much larger allocation towards human resources in the future .
Finally , the level of support in this House for the employment guidelines is very reassuring .
These are courageous and I am very grateful to the European Parliament for supporting them .
It is reassuring not just for the institutions but also for the millions of dispossessed and disillusioned citizens who depend on us for leadership and vision to change their lives .
They must not be disappointed again , and it has been quite rightly said that we must not have a series of declarations or pious intentions ; or , as the Presidentin-Office himself says , this summit will not be a fudge .
I look forward to the 21 November deadline as being the moment of truth in the development of a truly European employment strategy .
We cannot contemplate a failure and we simply cannot stand idly by .
Thank you , Commissioner Flynn .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.30 p.m. , in a few minutes .
( The session was suspended at 12.25 p.m. , and resumed at 12.30 p.m. )
Votes
I must say that with some results I have a strong urge to recommend a negative vote , mainly because I very much wonder what agreements and consultation really mean .
But it will be an absolute scandal if the European Parliament is not in a position to present a report to the summit .
That is the only reason , but a more than sufficient one , to urge a vote in favour .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I regret that my opportunity to speak has only come after the vote .
The European Parliament has in its deliberations already caused a scandal in allowing this important report to be debated with so few seats occupied . Indeed , only the employment experts from the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment were present .
Now we have added to this by the fact that with our contribution to the employment summit we fell below the minimum level required .
This is an absolute scandal and we have now only voted for the resolution to prevent an even bigger one .
Mr President , I also wished to speak to explain why I eventually voted in favour of this report .
Just as Mr Wolf affirmed , it would have been a scandal if this report had been overturned here .
( The President cut off the speaker )
The Green Group has today decided to vote in favour of the Conciliation Committee 's report concerning the overhaul of the Fourth Framework Programme .
However , we do so without any great enthusiasm .
The compromise is not really a success for the European Parliament .
The distribution of the money is in the right direction , but the sums in several of the areas are far too small .
The money allocated , including the ECU 9 million for renewable sources of energy , is a ridiculously small sum considering the needs which exist in the EU .
If we are to succeed in phasing out nuclear energy , much larger sums need to be allocated for renewable sources of energy .
We see it as positive , of course , that money has been allocated for the fight to remove the awful anti-personnel land-mines , but the money now allocated will not be anywhere near enough to remove the more than 100 million mines which have been laid around the world .
A major point of criticism concerns the money allocated for research in the area of BSE .
We have nothing against research in this area , but there is a high risk that the money has been wasted , since the crux of the problem is the EU 's agricultural policy .
As long as the EU 's agricultural policy is not changed to reduce the use of chemicals , end the use of antibiotics , stop the cruel transport of animals , stop research into cloning , remove genetically-modified products , etcetera , the problems will continue .
Organic farming is a requirement for us to be able to reduce the anomalies currently found in the EU 's agricultural area .
However , revolutionary initiatives in this area are conspicuous by their absence within the European Commission .
The revision of the Fourth Framework Programme for research is a result of Sweden , Finland and Austria joining the Union .
The new investments which have been made are good , but the levels are too low .
I decided this was a viable compromise and have therefore voted yes to the proposal .
Industrial accidents ( C4-0469 / 97 )
A Convention of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe on the transboundary effects of industrial accidents was signed on 16 March 1992 in Helsinki .
26 countries ratified it , of which 14 were Member States of the Community , including the Community itself .
Being from a border constituency , bordering both a Member State of the Union and a third country , I can only vote in favour of this proposal for a Council decision .
Indeed , pollution knows no administrative or boundary limits between countries .
In Alsace a few years ago , we suffered pollution from Switzerland ( industrial accidents ) , from the Ukraine ( nuclear accidents ) , from the CEEC ( industrial accidents causing acid rain ) .
Work relating to the drafting of the Convention was largely influenced by Community and French policy regarding control of the dangers linked to major accidents involving dangerous substances , taking into account of course , the principle of " the polluter pays ' as the general principle within international environmental law .
Consequently , we have the necessary legal and technical tools to fulfil our obligations resulting from the Convention .
It is necessary for all the Member States of the European Union , as well as the candidates for membership as they may soon be members of the Union , to abide by the conclusions of this Convention .
I will end by mentioning that , within the framework of enlargement , it will be necessary for future Member States to conform to all Community regulations , including environmental restrictions .
I noted with a great deal of astonishment that in the Commission 's communication entitled Agenda 2000 , there is no mention of the restrictions covered by this Convention .
Bonn Convention ( C4-0470 / 97 )
My group has unanimously voted for the proposal for a Council decision on the amendments to the Bonn Convention on the conservation of migratory species of wild animals .
At the fifth meeting of the Conference , which was held from 10 to 16 April 1997 , 21 threatened migratory species were added to Annex 1 and 22 to Annex 2 .
Eleven species are covered by Council Directive 79 / 409 / CE concerning the conservation of wild birds .
I want to discuss this last point today .
I have often said that we cannot but support the conservation of wild flora and fauna .
We must protect all species in order to maintain the eco-system intact .
On the other hand , on many occasions I have come up against the problem of the cormorant .
In fact , after having protected this species , we have been witnessing a spectacular increase in the cormorant population within European territory for a number of years .
We must protect all species , but do it discerningly .
Indeed now , the cormorant , which was a threatened bird , has become a threatening bird because of its excessive population .
It is threatening for fishermen , for aquaculture and , quite simply , for fish .
It is necessary , and I have asked Mrs van Putten , rapporteur on this subject for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , to do what is necessary quickly .
Ecology must not be a religion , on the contrary , it must be analysed as a science permitting respectful development of the environment .
I await her response impatiently so that I can pass it on to those concerned who are suffering important losses in their economic activity . It is also essential as much for regional development as for respect for our countryside .
Fayot report ( A4-0311 / 97 )
In May 1994 , at the beginning of the election campaign for the European Parliament , I was insulted and my honour was called into question by António Campos , now my colleague in this Parliament .
I prosecuted him for this , and the Lisbon Criminal Court would have found the accused Member , António Campos , guilty of defamation and insulting behaviour towards me .
Since the court cannot pass judgment unless his parliamentary immunity is waived , the Public Prosecutor of the Portuguese Republic has made a request to the European Parliament accordingly .
Since it is the practice of the European Parliament never to waive immunity " in all cases where the offences alleged to have been committed by a Member of the European Parliament fall under the heading of political activity ' ( Fayot Report , p .
9 ) , it appears to be up to Mr António Campos himself to request that his immunity be waived , or to resign his mandate , so that the case can be decided .
Contrary to his earlier promise , he has done neither , which shows that he is afraid of being judged by the Court .
When all is said and done , it is always true that the guilty have something to fear .
Since he will undoubtedly continue to take shelter behind successive Parliamentary immunities , I have reached the regrettable conclusion that in the end , for some people , crime does pay .
For that reason , I wish to inform my colleagues that I shall not be pursuing the case any further .
Finally , I wish to inform Parliament that I abstained in the vote .
van Velzen report ( A4-0307 / 97 )
Mr President , the proposals we are considering with the Extraordinary Council on Employment in mind are based on an excellent initial idea .
It would be good if all the Member States could exchange their experiences on employment so that each one could benefit from the successes of the others , while remaining responsible for their own policies .
Unfortunately , the procedures defined for the application of this good idea , notably within the Amsterdam framework , seem excessively bureaucratic to us .
First , the Community , not content with a simple coordination role , has to define a rather rigid framework with reference criteria for us all .
We only just avoided the establishment of the system of sanctions some people wanted .
Furthermore , the authority of the Member States of the Community seems , in practice , very muddled , since the Council will draw up the guidelines , is likely to go into considerable detail , and may , furthermore , adopt minimal prescriptions in the social field .
So the procedure of reducing differences between states foreseen in the Amsterdam Treaty , which it seems is going to be applied in advance , appears dreadfully complex since there are at least ten different stages .
Finally , this coordination which could have been very useful in terms of cooperation and mutual exchange , risks becoming a constraint and a bureaucratic marathon .
On the whole , the proposals drawn up by the European Parliament in the van Velzen report seem inspired by good sense , notably in the area of training and flexibility of working hours , as well as in the lightening of the burden on the low paid .
On the other hand , we have some reservations .
The report shows too great a reverence towards the systematic reduction of the working week , an idea contrary to the way the economy is currently working , but which enables all those who do not have real solutions to unemployment to momentarily look good by making some noise .
Once again , both in the conclusions of the Amsterdam Council and in the Commission 's proposals or those of the European Parliament , the total absence of any reference to the role of European trade defence policy in the fight for jobs is noted .
For us , this policy must necessarily be an integral part of the definition of a healthy macro-economic framework for the European Union .
Mr President , it has largely been a question , this morning , of good or bad recipes for the reduction of unemployment in Europe .
Some have recommended solutions such as an all-round reduction of working hours with full compensation for employees , in other words demonizing flexibility and the new organization of work !
These are recipes that risk destroying employment in Europe even more .
Alongside all the laudable efforts to make the coming jobs summit in Luxembourg a success and not another literary effort to be added to all those since Essen , the Commission and above all Commissioner Monti are applying themselves to the destruction of at least another quarter of a million jobs , because they refuse to take an initiative that could stop the legislation which will end in the automatical removal , by 1999 , of duty-free shops from airports and ships for travellers within the Community .
We have just voted on paragraph 17 of the resolution on the jobs summit which asks the Council to declare that the Monti proposals concerning the single market must be adopted as soon as possible , because of the favourable impact they could have on jobs .
This is certainly not the case for Mr Monti 's position aimed at abolishing duty-free shops in Europe and that is why I could not vote for this report .
Mr President , I must say that I am really sorry that I could not vote for this report or abstain , but actively voted against it .
I think we have said a lot about the 20 million unemployed , which is good , but we have said nothing about the 55 million poor people , many of whom actually have jobs .
Nor do I think that we have considered the defects of the underlying economic policy we are pursuing .
We are now continuing on this road , totally blindly , without making any other changes when we see we are heading in the wrong direction . And that is why I have actively voted against it .
It is ironic , as we have observed several times in a small way during today 's debate , that the decisions we are making here lead to increased unemployment , even though we say the opposite .
I would have looked forward to a debate and a decision which took more notice of the value of human beings than the value of shares .
I now feel that our hopes lie with the French and Italian governments at the forthcoming summit in Luxembourg , which I am sorry that we could not support .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this report although , unfortunately , during the debate in this Chamber Mr van Velzen 's report declined in value .
It already lacked certain components , but , regrettably , in getting it through as a whole , certain proposals were approved which actually do harm to the report .
However , I consider it important that Parliament has clear aims on employment and the shorter working day to present to the summit conference .
It would be immensely embarrassing otherwise .
Nevertheless , I am not going to commit to those proposed changes I voted against .
Although I voted in favour of the report as a whole , I do not subscribe to the notion of creating low-paid sectors , which is included in the Liberal amendment , and was approved by a majority in Parliament .
But I think it is important for Parliament to have one view , in the end .
It would have been embarrassing to set off for Luxembourg without one .
The van Velzen report is based on the idea that politicians , through interventionist measures in the form of large and small adjustments and subsidies , really can create new jobs .
The report lacks proposals for measures to encourage entrepreneurs and enterprise , in other words , the basis for sustainable new employment .
The concept of competitiveness as the basis for sustainable employment is missing .
The idea that by imposing cuts in working hours you can lead companies to employ more people is illfounded .
A strong reduction in working hours to a six-hour day could be compared to extending the statutory holiday by a further two months .
Measures like that are more suited to increasing cost levels and so reducing competitiveness and employment .
Cuts in working hours should come on a voluntary basis in a flexible labour market .
Measures to increase levels of expertise and knowledge are very important .
Many people leave school with inadequate knowledge and with limited chances of getting demanding work in the knowledge society .
There is a lack of availability of more unskilled work since high minimum wages make that kind of work unprofitable for companies .
These young people become long term unemployed and are thus excluded even from the training which every job entails .
But meaningful training programmes for young people must above all be based on improvements in education at school .
There are points of view in the van Velzen report which we also embrace , but because of its fundamental flaws we have decided to vote against this report .
It is not an exaggeration to say that the conclusions of the Amsterdam Summit are conspicuous , above all , for their mediocrity .
They annoy the anti-Europeans and fill the advocates of a united Europe with despair .
Not to be too negative , the future treaty lacks inspiration .
Luckily , amongst the positive points there has been , at the request of left wing governments and the Government of France , the announcement of a Luxembourg Summit totally dedicated to employment .
This Summit cannot fail .
European opinion would never forgive us . The European Parliament and Mr van Velzen have done a good job .
Several governments have been mobilized .
The Luxembourg Presidency and Mr Junker have shown their ability and their willingness .
I want to congratulate them on that .
So what should we expect from this summit ?
Grand declarations , the umpteenth reminder of great principles ?
Concrete and even restricted measures ? Or a combination of all three ?
How will they be financed ?
To what level ?
By whom ?
And when ?
Will they have the courage to tackle the question of working hours and their reduction ?
There are so many fundamental questions .
Personally , I think that concrete decisions are needed , decisions that are innovative and measurable , within the context of the wider principles and based on great work , with a plea for loans , training policies , reintegration of the long term unemployed , growth in research programmes , organization and reduction of working hours , aggressiveness in trade with regard to the United States , a partnership with the south .
You can see the issue is considerable and the Council of Ministers will have to take into consideration our thoughts and proposals even if , in the part-session , a majority on the right have distorted them somewhat .
52 years after the end of the Second World War , world peace more than ever requires European construction .
This construction has two requirements :
solid political institutions ; -reduction , even eradication of unemployment .
The starting point of Mr van Velzen 's report is good intention .
It affirms loudly and clearly that the jobs summit must not be another pretext for new texts , new solutions to unemployment which will go unheeded .
In this respect , I concur with our rapporteur .
On the other hand , we go our separate ways when it comes to considering the means necessary for reducing unemployment in Europe .
I do not believe that we will succeed in this enterprise by applying the devices of technocracy : fixing as an objective an unemployment rate of 7 % of the active population within three years seems to me badly inspired .
Why not 5 % , even 3 % ?
No , this type of measure only serves to ease one 's conscience .
You cannot set a rate of unemployment to be achieved in the same way as you set other economic convergence criteria .
Of course we must reduce unemployment . But setting a figure has no economic foundation .
And the means for combatting unemployment are well known : make the labour market more flexible , reduce the cost of labour , step up training , all while making sure that the most impoverished are protected .
To do this , Europe of course has its role to play , and the euro will be a great help .
But it is above all from national economies that the solution will have to come , by putting in place the structural reforms that are called for .
Mr van Velzen 's report is too far from economic reality .
I will not be able to vote for it unless certain European People 's Party amendments are adopted .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted for Wim van Velzen 's report concerning the employment summit .
The report contains a number of good proposals as to how the EU states can mutually undertake to combat unemployment .
The Danish Social Democrats agree to the report 's many good job-creation proposals .
The report calls for a lowering of the VAT rate for labour-intensive businesses .
However , the Danish Social democrats do not regard this as the right way to go in the campaign for lower unemployment .
Instead , we should invest in training , research and quality , if Europe is to revive employment .
Unemployment , employment and new jobs are national tasks .
However , now that the EU is in the process of introducing a common currency through EMU , it is also necessary to consider employment in connection with this issue .
The general public expects the EU to devote its energy to the big issues . Unemployment and employment are a big issue .
Convergence criteria for employment must therefore be inserted into the EU Treaty so that unemployment is not increased even further through EMU .
Employment can be encouraged at the EU level through convergence criteria for employment , which should have the same weight as the convergence criteria for EMU , both through PR work and good examples .
The Member States and the national parliaments should have the main responsibility through legislation , tax and incentive policy , collective agreements and implementation .
For the above reasons I have voted yes to the report .
I , and my colleagues within the European Parliamentary Labour Party , broadly welcome Mr van Velzen 's report .
It addresses what is a hugely important issue for Europe - unemployment .
Our broad support for this report must , however , be tempered by certain reservations .
Paragraph 1 is overly specific and prescriptive .
Paragraphs 3 and 5 detail what we feel to be unnecessary extra spending commitments .
Paragraph 7 is , again , overly specific and prescriptive , whilst paragraph 11 falls foul of the same , and also contains an unnecessary spending commitment .
Finally , paragraph 13 also has unfortunate spending implications .
As an overall observation , it is important to recognize that economies do react in different ways , at different times .
Mr van Velzen 's report has managed to ignore the normal rhetoric on economic and social problems which is repeated year on year and from one Council to the next .
This is a welcome development , since it is the only way to achieve satisfactory results from the Luxembourg employment summit .
As Council President Jean-Claude Juncker has repeated often enough , a practical approach is required here .
In this context it should not be forgotten that employment policy has to be directed at national level .
It is not the role of the European Union to issue the Member States with precise instructions as to how they must tackle the unemployment problem : the situations existing in the individual States are too varied to be solved by one single European approach .
The EU would be better served by issuing guidelines for the development of a cohesive ( coherent ) framework strategy , within which the Member States are called upon to act at national level .
This framework should name no names , so as not to provoke disappointment and disillusionment when purely conceptual calculation criteria fail to be met .
It is therefore wrong to focus on quantitative criteria , as proposed by the Commission in its strategy paper .
As the report itself suggests , it is first necessary to identify best practice before any reference points can be found therein .
It is therefore somewhat premature to be influenced by the controversial attempts being made by certain Member States .
This criticism , which is aimed at some parts of the report , should not detract from the excellent qualitative proposals contained therein , namely training as a means of matching the unemployed to the needs of the job market , more flexibility in the organization of working hours , lower VAT rates for highlabour service industries , greater consideration of employment policy objectives when introducing structural aid , general reduction in the tax burden and a lowering of the various burdens imposed on SMEs .
The move to reduce working hours shows that while flexibility is necessary , it makes no sense whatsoever to impose rigid working times at European or even at national level : individual enterprises must be free to find the happy medium , in collaboration with their social partners .
More important than qualitatively rigid convergence criteria is the better coordination of a European economic , finance , income and currency policy , in order that a framework may be built which promotes growth , investment and employment in equal measure .
I have , of course , voted for the van Velzen report in accordance with the Social Democrat line .
But I have strong objections on a couple of points .
Paragraph 9 calls for VAT to be reduced in labour-intensive sectors .
This is described in Sweden as subsidizing " servant 's jobs ' and is not regarded as providing any increase in employment to match the negative effects caused by the tax reduction .
Paragraph 10 calls for tax on work to be reduced and for tax on energy and natural resources to be increased .
The view is often expressed that this will create new jobs , but there is absolutely no theoretical or empirical evidence for this .
In spite of praiseworthy ambitions , my conclusion is that the aims sketched out in Mr van Velzen 's report will not reduce unemployment in the Union .
The summit risks producing " another volume of poetry ' about employment .
That concludes the votes .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Amending budget No 1 / 97-1998 draft general budget - draft 1997 ECSC operating budget
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0299 / 97 by Mr Brinkhorst and Mr Fabra Vallés , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on draft supplementary and amending budget No 1 for the 1997 financial year ; -A4-0290 / 97 by Mr Tillich , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year for 1998 : Section III - Commission ( COM ( 97 ) 0280 - C4-0300 / 97 ) ; -A4-280 / 97 by Mr Tomlinson , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 1998 : Section I - European Parliament , Office of the Ombudsman , Section II - Council , Section IV - Court of Justice , Section V - Court of Auditors , Section VI - Economic and Social Committee and Committee of the Regions ( COM ( 97 ) 0280 -C4-0300 / 97 ) ; -A4 / 0314 / 97 by Mr Giansily , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft amending ECSC operating budget for 1997 ( SEC ( 97 ) 0933 - C4-0249 / 97 ) .
Mr President , this is a joint debate on a number of reports .
I will just make one comment on the report for which I am the rapporteur .
I regret that we could not reach an agreement with the Council to fix this in one reading .
The Council procedure made it impossible although only very minor amendments were being made .
The result has been inter alia a delay in the adoption of the supplementary post for DG XXIV - services for fighting BSE .
This is a sad situation .
I should like to emphasize strongly that the European Parliament 's responsibility is not in question here , and I should like to ask the Commission at least to show the flexibility to take measures very rapidly to deal with DG XXIV .
On the two major reports , I compliment Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson for their reports .
John Tomlinson is a safe pair of hands and once again this year has brought more transparency to the European Parliament .
My group believes it is important that we go one step further than him concerning the function of Parliament itself , specifically on the number of costs and the various special arrangements which exist for the benefit of Members .
If we criticize others , we should be open to criticism ourselves .
Mr Tillich - our rapporteur for 1998 - has achieved excellent cooperation with a number of specific committees but above all , as in previous years , with the Committee on Agriculture .
This is no mean feat in this House .
It helped that Mr Mulder was rapporteur for the agriculture side .
It is very clear that we are moving in the right direction in creating reserves and also in asking the Commission to be forthcoming in putting forward modifications which will enable us to establish an agriculture budget by the end of this year which is more in line with reality .
The 1998 budget is once again clearly a very rigorous budget and Parliament has again contributed considerably to this point .
We are now below 1.15 % , that is , 0.11 % lower than permitted by Edinburgh .
It is about time - and I am pleased to see the President-in-Office present - that the Council recognized that Parliament is also responsible for the change in the culture of spending in the European Community .
It would therefore be very useful if the Council committee on Budgets would also recognize that important budget lines which are relevant for the citizens of Europe , like those on information , NGOs , development , environment and consumers , are not simply cut nearly to zero , thereafter using the margin on Parliament 's part to restore it .
It is a childish game and it would be a step forward if two grown-up institutions such as the Council and Parliament were to take the necessary joint action to ensure that in the future this game of ping-pong was unnecessary .
A major initiative for this year is that on employment . I would like to congratulate the Luxembourg presidency for working so actively with Parliament on this point .
ECU 150 million has provisionally been set aside and it can have considerable leverage through the special way it can be used for the European Investment Bank loans and guarantees .
It is also clear that the Council should understand the following message .
If it does not respond in kind - and we know that the Luxembourg presidency would like to work actively in that direction - and does not create the proper legal structure , then , quite clearly , on second reading Parliament will take a different orientation .
Dogmatism in the Council has been responsible for the simple issues of legal bases being beset by difficulties for too long .
I have one or two comments on individual lines .
It is very important that on internal policy we have made a beginning on real information policy .
The fact that Parliament will probably put 30 % in reserve is a sign that we are not yet totally satisfied .
A European Information System worthy of that name can only be achieved if there is real cooperation between the Commission and Parliament .
It is very important , therefore , that we pool all our reserves in that respect .
Finally , this year for the first time we have made the matter of subventions central to our debate .
Subventions are not insiders ' money to play with .
Subventions are there to help useful institutions to work towards the improvement of the situation in Europe in a number of areas .
It is for that reason that we have rejected the idea that behind every budget line there is a specific face .
It is up to the Commission now to take action .
It is up to Parliament to be quite clear on how it will carry out control .
I hope we will continue this line in the coming years .

Mr President , in this joint debate I should first like to comment on the report on draft supplementary and amending budget No 1 for the 1997 financial year , for the Court of Auditors .
As we all know , the Court of Auditors does not have enough auditors . This is due first to the scope of its monitoring activities , secondly , to its increased workload , and thirdly , because of the extent to which it has to produce statements of assurance .
A joint study was carried out into the institution 's needs , and the conclusion was that 48 posts were required .
It was thought that 23 of these could be covered by producing a supplementary and amending budget within the 1997 budget , and that the other 25 would be covered by the budget which Mr Tomlinson will present shortly .
As regards the 23 posts to come from the 1997 budget , the Council approved 5 at first reading , and another 5 at second reading .
I hope that the remaining 13 posts may also be approved in the end , besides the 10 already approved , so that the Court of Auditors may be granted the 23 posts which we requested for 1997 .
I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Court of Auditors on its work , especially the clear and diaphanous use ( if that is a valid expression - and in this case it is ) which it always makes of favourable changes in the ECU-Belgian franc exchange rate . This attitude cannot be observed in all the institutions .
I should also like to remind you of the indispensable contribution of the Court of Auditors to Parliament 's monitoring process .
I come now to the budget which Mr Tomlinson is about to present to us .
I think it is a very good budget . He has done the best he could with the available resources , and this is the result .
It is an austere budget , along the same lines as previous years . Furthermore , it maintains the same pressure on the Member States , in order to be able to achieve Monetary Union .
Despite this austerity , I do not believe that the proper functioning of the institutions will be adversely affected .
I should also like to thank Mr Tomlinson for the improvements he has made in the area of staff management , which take account of the following factors : cost-efficiency , equal opportunities , the objective evaluation of the institutions ' landed property requirements , measures to strengthen and improve interinstitutional cooperation , guarantees for a coherent information policy , and encouragement for the use of new technologies .
As for the huge Commission budget , presented by Mr Tillich , all I want to add is that I am pleased with the following aspects : first , that it has been possible for the Peace initiative to continue , secondly , that the figure of ECU 1 , 000 million has been restored to the structural funds , thirdly , that category 3 sees , for example , the creation of the package of budget lines on the labour market and technological innovation , and fourthly , that funding for Latin America has also been increased , albeit by means of an amendment .
I should like to point out that a 10 % reserve was approved for the Meda programme in an amendment , although we may perhaps be able to find a new amendment here in the House .
I should like to remind you that in fact it was through an amendment of my own that the reserve for the Meda programme was decreased last year .
My aim is that the reserve should not hinder the work .
At the moment we need a provisional evaluation report . I think that 10 % should not hold the work up , but nevertheless I think it clearly shows the Commission what Parliament wants : the provisional evaluation report .
Mr President , firstly I wish to congratulate Mr Tillich on his excellent presentation of the Commission 's budget and thank both Mr Brinkhorst and Mr Fabra Valles for the kind words introduced in the supplementary and amending budget .

I will return to Mr Brinkhorst 's specific question later .

I wish to say that the context is very similar to that which Mr Tillich has described , a context of budgetary rigour and the introduction of austerity into what appear to be fairly generous administration appropriations .
I have made it quite clear in the explanatory statement which accompanies my part of the budget that , despite the fact that there appears to be a comfortable margin in category 5 , it would have been an act of irresponsibility to have regarded category 5 appropriations as somehow more readily available than other appropriations in other parts of the budget .
That would have disregarded the rules of sound financial management , thwarted the efforts being made to improve the operations of the institutions ' administrative machinery and deprived the institutions of the necessary dynamism and spirit of innovation to introduce what I describe as intelligent methods of management and interinstitutional cooperation .
It would have also given the impression that we had money to throw away and that would have been a bad thing .
So the context for the budget is the rigorous use of the available appropriations and for the European Parliament itself committing itself to a 20 % ceiling of the available category 5 appropriations .
I will turn to how we dealt with that later .
First of all , I would like to thank all those concerned in the other institutions , e.g. Court of Justice , Court of Auditors , Committee of the Regions , Economic and Social Committee and the Joint Organizational Structure for the constructive dialogue .
I am sure they all found themselves in difficult circumstances for they had to express their aspirations with the near certainty that none of them would be fulfilled to anything approaching their satisfaction . The Court of Justice clearly has suffered as a result of the restrictive staff policy but not to an extent that precludes it being able to continue its work properly .
It had particular problems in relation to the Palais building in Luxembourg about which I do not need to say anything to the President-in-office of Council . He will know from our budget resolution how important it is for that matter to be resolved speedily and permanently .
To the Court of Auditors , it was always clear that Parliament were going to regard them as the one exception to the rule that there would be no staff increases . We had agreed , not merely to increase the staff as Mr Fabra Vallés has reminded them , but to do it in two instalments with the 23 posts in the supplementary and amending budget and the 25 posts in my budget .
Those 48 posts fall far short of their aspirations as well .
They were asking for 125 posts in the current year - they have got 48 posts in a deal that will now take us into the next millennium . There will be no consideration of additional posts for the Court of Auditors before the expiry of the four-year period covering this agreement .
In recognizing that special request from the Court of Auditors , that special need , we are also recognizing the obligation that was placed on the Court of Auditors by the Maastricht Treaty to complete not only their normal audit work but also the work on the statement of assurance . Increasingly the committee on Budgets , and I believe Parliament as a whole , has come to value that statement .
For the Committee of the Regions , the Economic and Social Committee and the Joint Organizational Structure , we have had useful dialogue with them but during the course of our discussions , circumstances changed dramatically .
I do not think we had anticipated for example that the Amsterdam Summit would come to a conclusion that will over a period of time eliminate the Joint Organizational Structure .
In the light of that decision , in the draft Treaty of Amsterdam , it became important that we saw a solution to the long-term problems of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions that did not in any way allow them to separate because of the Joint Organizational Structure disappearing .
That played a significant part in the discussion that we had in relation to property policy which is a major theme underlying the budget .
There are a number of common themes that run throughout those other institutions and Parliament itself .
I want to emphasize just one or two of the common themes . I will commence with one that has perhaps caused more deliberate misunderstanding amongst people in this House , particularly members of staff who ought to know better than any other , and that is the underlying theme concerning canteens and restaurants in Community institutions .
All of them are well subsidized and patronized by people who are moderately well-heeled . They are all well subsidized by the provision of the buildings , the heating , the lighting , the cleaning , the equipment and maintenance .
What we have as an underlying theme throughout all the institutions ' budgets this year is an elimination of any additional cash subsidy . We have done this in the institutions that we are responsible for and we look to the Commission to put into effect the parallel paragraph that is in Mr Tillich 's motion for resolution .
I do not see anybody here who needs an additional public subsidy for a meal in a canteen . The proposal is to eliminate them over a period of four years ; not to eliminate the subsidy , but only the additional cash subsidy .
We talk about improving the quality of training in Parliament .
Those members of Parliament 's Staff Committee who go around producing leaflets that denigrate both the Secretary-General of Parliament and myself should realise , before they put them into the English language , that canteen is spelt ' c-a-n-te-e-n ' .
The one that is spelt ' ... t-I-n-e ' is the metal trunk in which we carry our papers .
So perhaps when we save a little money on the staff subsidy on the canteens we can improve the literacy of some of our officials and get them to work a little more productively in the interest of European citizens .




Another common theme throughout the institutions is the liberalization of the telecom market and the interinstitutional call for tender so that we and the European taxpayers can benefit from that liberalization of the telecom market .
Therefore money has been put into reserve pending that interinstitutional call for tender .
Equally there is an underlying theme in relation to greater clarity and transparency about the use of some of the appropriations for data processing and the use of modern technology .
I now turn specifically to Parliament 's budget .
We have cut ECU 4.1 million from the draft estimates .
We had given an undertaking .
We have done it and therefore honoured the commitment to the 20 % ceiling .
The European Parliament 's budget has major amendments on the revenue side to introduce greater clarity and transparency .
Concerning Members ' allowances , in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the motion for resolution , there is the point that Mr Brinkhorst referred to .
I wish to make it clear when those words in that resolution say that the proposals of the Bureau are not fully adequate , we are not merely criticizing the bits that they have done . We are saying that there are other things that they need to look at ; not just travel , but the operation of the per diem and other allowances .
But that is the prerogative of the Bureau .
We are merely expressing a view in the budget resolution .
At paragraph 14 we refer to the Edinburgh Summit on which we will be voting certain consequences this week .

If the consequence of the decision in the Court of Justice is that we have a twelfth full partsession here in Strasbourg , the money is already in the budget .
It is in the reserve .
I am sure that the chairman of the Committee on Budgets will agree with me that we will release the money from the reserve immediately a decision is made by Parliament that requires that money to be on the line .
The other consequences of the Edinburgh Summit need to be examined as well because the Edinburgh Summit did not only talk about plenary sessions , it also talked about where committee meetings will be held .

The final major problem in relation to Parliament 's budget concerns property policy .
It is imperative and cannot be said often enough that Parliament must have done everything to be able to purchase the D3 building by the time that our purchase option expires on 31 May 1998 .
Not only must we purchase the building , we must do it in such a way that we get the full financial contribution as promised from both the Kingdom of Belgium and the French Republic .
We have to do that and at the same time dispose of our surplus property . That is a major objective of this budget .
There are a number of other things in the budget of Parliament .
They are all there to be read by Members .
I will not go through them , but I would like to associate myself with the remarks of Mr Tillich in thanking the staff - particularly the Secretariat of the Committee on Budgets and Mr Van den Berge and his staff - for giving us all the information necessary to draw up the budget and the estimates of Parliament .




( Applause )

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the agreement of the House I am going to condense the two speeches anticipated for today into one , but one which will have two parts : the first will be on behalf of the Committee on Budgets concerning the ECSC budget , and the second will be the opinion of the Group Union for Europe on the other reports under discussion .

First the draft amending budget for the ECSC for 1997 , which requires no special remarks on my part , but I would like to draw your attention to the proposal , currently being examined within a legal framework and which I would like to set out on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , aimed at maintaining , in 1998 , the anticipated contribution of 0.011 % of the turnover of the coal and steel industries .
The ECSC , created in 1952 for fifty years , will disappear as an institutional entity in its own right in the year 2002 .
As the loans financed by the ECSC are over a five-year term , it will grant no further loans as from 1998 .
In the eyes of the Council this seems to justify the removal of this contribution which is - and I would like to highlight this - the only Community tax , thus the only receipt instrument , over which this House has a say .
This is a time when the European Union must show proof of its initiative in the area of employment and where everyone well knows that the future is not in the creation of small jobs in an already overcrowded civil service but , on the contrary , in the selective support of SMEs .
It is generally recognized that they are the compost on which jobs truly grow and it seems to me that a gesture of an amount of ECU 50 million on the budget of the ECSC , of which the return would be , if the Commission is to be believed , ECU 1 billion , a gesture which would consist of transferring ECU 50 million to the EIB to enable it to grant improved loans to those SMEs using components coming from the coal and steel sectors , such a gesture would be perceived in a positive way , in the name of solidarity with an industry which has been entirely restructured due to the community system , which it seems to me must now watch over its future .
Let me now come to the opinion of my group on the other reports under discussion .
With regard to the 1998 budget , in the eyes of the Group Union for Europe , it seems clearly more successful than in previous years , largely due to the great desire for dialogue shown on this occasion by the Dutch and Luxembourg Presidencies and marked , probably because of economic reasons , by a clear desire to come to a consensus a month before the Luxembourg Employment Summit .
I must say that nearly all tendencies in the Committee on Budgets took up Mr Jean-Claude Junker 's invitation to make a special effort to free up the financial resources that would enable it to be a success .
The rapporteur , Mr Stanislas Tillich , proposes freeing up ECU 150 million in heading 3 , destined to encourage job creation .
It goes without saying that our group can only be in favour of this proposal and that the risk of seeing the Commission using funds thus made available for an objective other than that which is at the heart of all European concerns seems to us a slender one .
On the other hand , our group would not wish to see the Council 's proposal to reduce the payment appropriations that are destined for structural funds by ECU 1 billion in 1998 followed .
From our point of view , respect for the letter of the interinstitutional agreement with regard to as wide as possible a use of the credits committed in the 1994-1999 planning seems to me to go without saying .
Let us not forget that these funds are also jobs , notably in the building and public works sectors , and let me simply remind you that 1998 and 1999 are the two last years in which the cohesion funds will be wholly destined to areas in difficulty within the Europe of fifteen countries .
Enlargement could not , except by deliberately sacrificing the balances too painfully achieved over the years , translate into a transfer from the countries of cohesion towards the candidates for membership , without coming up with other systems for the regions with the weakest incomes .
This is the task of the Agenda 2000 programme , which we will again be discussing in the future .
But it is one more reason for previously undertaken commitments to be adhered to and that payment appropriations should follow , without the least alteration , the funds which have already been allocated .
With regard to particular funds , and notably the special programmes of Phare , Tacis , Meda and the reconstruction programme for former Yugoslavia , a real effort of control and optimization must be accomplished without delay .
Indeed , it would be regrettable that programmes aimed at enabling enlargement under the best conditions , at sorting out the difficulties of the Republics of the Former Soviet Union , at developing a Euromediterranean partnership and at putting an end to the war in the former Yugoslavia , should remain unused through lack of organization , monitoring and , in a word , efficiency .
This is why the 30 % of funds put to one side that were destined for the reconstruction of former Yugoslavia must be taken as the desire to scrupulously verify the good use of funds whoever the beneficiary is .
Europe , which is heading blithely towards an overspend of ECU 5 million on its programmes overall , spends , relatively speaking , markedly more than the Marshall Plan did previously , of which many Europeans remain nostalgic .
But these new tasks , whose effects now reach as far as the Court of Auditors which is an essential institution for the coherence of European budgetary systems , need large amounts of supplementary funding .
It is therefore very willingly that the Group Union for Europe will follow Mr Tomlinson 's proposals to create jobs in the Court of Auditors in 1998 .
In another sphere , that of communication , our group supports the proposal of the Committee on Economics , aimed at significantly increasing the funds destined for informing public opinion within Member States about the implementation of the euro .
This will be with us in less than fifteen months .
Let us not run the risk of implementing it with badly informed citizens , when they are not deliberately disinformed .
This budget must also , and this is for us a crucial issue , be the opportunity to put an indisputable legal basis in place like , for example , the guarantee fund for the audiovisual industry .
The compromise arrived at in the Committee on Budgets on this resolution seems to me to be going in the right direction .
Lastly , I will finish by mentioning agriculture expenditure , which is so important for the cohesion of European policies and which constitutes a model for common policy .
The extremely tight calculations established by the Commission for next year meet with our approval .
We now have to hope that no catastrophe of the " mad cow ' variety comes along to disturb a structure which can undoubtedly stand up to easy circumstances , but which would not resist very strong pressure on the various COM systems .
Mr President , on this occasion I again want to begin , as on previous occasions , by thanking Mr Tillich for the excellent cooperation we have had as rapporteurs , which has meant that for the first time , as far as I can tell , this Parliament 's efforts were not at an end after the vote on Thursday .
The ad hoc procedure remains open and to me that means that Parliament can have a greater influence on the agriculture budget , which is to be welcomed .
We are now waiting for the Commission 's letter of amendment .
We expect it to stay within the 0.45 % increase , but I can assure you that as far as the other matters are concerned the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development will continue to concern itself fully with how the money is spent .
On previous occasions we have already indicated that we would prefer an adjusted reduction or increase of the individual budget headings to an across-the-board reduction , whatever the result .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development welcomes the fact that most of the amendments by the Committee on Budgets have been approved .
We are neutral in budget terms and they all relate to more environmentally-friendly agriculture , more action to combat fraud in agricultural expenditure and improvements in the quality of agricultural products through active promotion campaigns .
We hope that these amendments will be favourably received by the Council and the Commission .
The accompanying measures in category B1 are also important .
In that respect it is very disappointing that despite the Commission 's promise this Parliament has still not been able to study the results of this programme .
We look forward to a statement from the Commissioner .
When can Parliament study this report ?
As far as the other categories are concerned , of all the amendments drafted most of them , apart from one from the Committee on Budgets , have again been tabled by the Committee on Agriculture .
I would like to draw your attention to one and that is the amendment concerning B2-5122 , relating inter alia to aid to farmers who have been relegated to the sidelines by various political measures arising from agricultural policy .
We commend that to your attention and hope that the House will approve it .
Mr President , I have not time in two minutes to talk in great detail about what we have done .
However , let me try to draw some of the main lines of the discussion in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
The committee has once again this year sought to present a balanced budget , that is to balance any additions that we have made to budget lines with cuts in other areas .
Perhaps the most important addition we have made is to create a budget of ECU 40 million for the Prince programme , the information programme for European citizens .
We consider it particularly important in this coming year that European citizens be well informed about the introduction of the single currency - a major step forward in the development of Europe .
I find it an irony that in my own country the government has finally decided to take money from this budget line but , at the same time , cannot make up its mind whether to join the single currency or not .
Nonetheless I welcome the fact that the opportunity exists for British citizens to become better informed about such an important development .
At the same time we have cut the budget and , in particular , we have made a cut of some ECU 30 million in the publication of the S series of the Official Journal .
This is currently published in paper and nobody reads it .
There is no reason why it should not be published electronically , the form in which most people get access to it .
Perhaps the most salient feature of this year 's budget , however , is the package of budget lines that we have put together , worth some ECU 150 million in total , to assist in the jobs summit .
These are budget lines that have been assisting in job creation , that we have put together as a package and we are offering to assist the heads of government in putting together a wider budget package .
I hope that they will find new money from their own sources to go along with this .
The budget this year in total is only ECU 87 billion , and it is a disgrace that some ECU 5 billion are paid back to Member States at the end of every year .
If Member States are serious about things like job creation , let them put this money into that .
I wish to conclude by thanking the shadow rapporteurs on the Economics Committee and the budget rapporteur , Mr Tillich , for their helpful and cooperative spirit in all of our work .
Mr President , over the years the budget of the Committee on External Economic Relations has grown very considerably as our relations with Eastern and Central Europe , the former Soviet Union and the Meda countries have developed .
For this reason alone , as a committee , we are having to exercise increasing vigilance .
I cannot in all honesty claim that we have a complete handle on the budget for these three highly significant areas .
However , the Commission will know that we are increasingly calling for greater accountability .
That said , I do not find the responses by Commission officials in committee to be anywhere near sufficient .
This is an issue that the Commissioners would do well to consider afresh : the Phare programme , the Tacis programme and the Meda programme .
On the detail , we have questioned the size of the external delegation budget .
Colleagues are keen to support certain European / Latin-American organizations , and I concur with that .
There is support for the textile industry in relation to the external relations budget .
That is high on our list and I refer to Mrs Ferrer 's amendment in particular .
We wish to sustain the budget line on promotion of European exports to Japan , which we regard as one of the great success stories .
Regrettably , the Council - I cannot think why - wants to cut back on that , but we are resolutely opposed to any cuts .
I draw the attention of the representatives of the Council to that specific point here , because many Members here will be familiar with the outstanding success of the executive training programme which enables young men and women each year to go to Japan to learn Japanese for 12 months and to spend 6 months in Japanese business learning the ropes .
No fewer than 650 graduates have benefited from this scheme , which is a further boost for European exports to Japan and investment in that country .
Mr President , the dominant feature of this year 's budget is economy , both on the part of this Parliament and on the part of the Council and the Commission .
I think Mr Tillich has been extraordinarily successful in combining this economy with an effective budget .
The most important aspect as far as social policy is concerned was the employment initiative .
The House has created a package , the Tillich package , containing ECU 150 million .
The specific feature of this package is that it consists both of measures which can have a direct influence on employment and measures relating to labour market policy .
We are thereby lending support to the Council and in particular to you , Mr President-in-Office , and your prime minister , to help do something in the context of the Luxembourg summit .
The package is flexible , but clear enough .
It is a package in which ECU 150 million can be spent and ECU 200 million actually saved .
I think that we have been very successful and that that is a focal point of this budget .
On behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment I very much welcome this development .
Apart from that , Mr President , I should like to say a word about the Commission .
In its draft budget the Commission has in fact seriously underestimated the chapter on social affairs and employment .
Parliament 's priorities were clear and the Commission 's priorities contained too much of Mr Kinnock 's ' employment is money ' ; I do not believe that is the aim and I think it is contrary to what was decided in Amsterdam .
I believe that we need a balanced package which also of course takes account of transport , but it should not be as exclusive as the Commission has proposed .
I think we have been successful in cutting back on that aspect slightly .
I think we have produced a good budget and I want to thank the rapporteur in particular for that .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy . ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , speaking also on behalf of my colleague Mr Costa Neves , who is unable to be here with us today , I should like to emphasize that Parliament 's proposal is substantially better than the poor draft Budget the Council has sent us .
And Mr Tillich is particularly to be commended in that respect .
The Council did indeed say that it wanted to promote a policy for employment .
Yet the proposal it has submitted to us has nothing in it about employment .
In the structural funds , preparations were being made to cut payments by ECU 1 , 000 million .
It was Parliament , through the rapporteur of the Committee on Regional Policy , Mr Tillich , which reinstated the ECU 1 , 000 million .
These funds are used , as has been said , in projects that obviously promote employment in the least favoured regions .
The Council offers no suggestions on the Retex and Rechar programmes , as the Committee on Budgets informs us here . These programmes offer jobs in areas affected by the restructuring of the mining or textile industries .
The Council says nothing about unemployment packages .
There is a letter from Mr Jünkers , which I consider is a poetic letter , because we are talking about budgets , and , therefore , if the Council were seriously proposing an employment initiative , it ought to have incorporated it in the draft budget it has sent this House .
It was this Parliament , particularly through the rapporteur , Mr Tillich , which set up the mechanism of obtaining an ECU 150 million package , which the Council was unable to achieve by the wholesale direct cuts it made in the European Communities Budget .
Finally , the education and mobility of young people .
It is this Parliament which is promoting the Socrates and Leonardo programmes .
These are fundamental instruments for making young people employable , for providing them with technical and professional training , for giving them mobility ; it is we who must provide the budgetary reinforcement those gentlemen are incapable of providing .
And , in addition , the Prince programme for increasing the information available to citizens , of which we have already spoken .
I would only like to ask Mr Tillich , as a footnote , perhaps towards the end , to show a measure of goodwill towards the tropical forests . This is also an extremely important programme in terms of aid and for the image of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if the Commission or the Council were to have their way , then consumer protection and environment policy would have been well and truly blamed for the finances .
That this has not happened is down to the fact that the Committee on the Environment has submitted a very practical proposal and that the rapporteur , Mr Stanislas Tillich , has steadfastly supported our endeavours .
I wish to express my heartfelt thanks to him and to the Committee on Budgets , which has been extremely cooperative .
We are again on the road to progress in the fields of environment and consumer policy , which commenced a number of years ago .
To go into the details of this would not be appropriate at this time .
However , I believe that the basic premises laid down by us in recent years have been taken further , such as the issue that citizens might actually participate in the internal market , for example in the setting of standards .
We have succeeded in extending the Life environment programme .
In the field of public health we have seen that structures have been set up for the future definition and implementation of a European public health policy , and we have at last been able to force the Commission to act .
Alas , this is something which it has recently failed to do in the matter of Alzheimer 's disease .
We have extended the measures and research in place to deal with this new illness .
Environment policy is not only a question of money but also of imagination .
By this we mean screening the budget , not that this is intended to delete money from the structural fund , but rather to allow environment policy measures , including those affecting structures , and promotional measures to take effect .
We are quite happy to leave the responsibility for these areas to those who are legally entrusted with them .
We must insist , however , that resolutions made at European level be retained even in respect of structural measures .
We cannot in this respect disregard environmental and competition policy considerations .
I believe that it is right to have a green structural policy , and in the years to come the agricultural policy should also be made green .
No doubt there will be some opposition to this , but it does constitute the only way to emerge unscathed from future agricultural policy negotiations .
Let me now conclude by again thanking the rapporteur .
Mr President , as the Committee on Culture rapporteur , I wish to state that we are generally very pleased with the outcome of the budget process which is a recognition of the importance of culture , education and the media in the process of job creation .
Our approach has been one of openness and transparency and we have stopped earmarking specific projects .
We are particularly pleased to have seen the support we have received on Socrates - the education programme - and hope that the substantial increase that we have found within the budget of the European Parliament is now matched by a commitment from the European Council .
On the cultural programmes , we are very disappointed with the amount suggested for Raphael , especially after a long conciliation process .
The amount proposed by the general rapporteur does not take into account the new umbrella cultural programme proposed in two years ' time .
We hope that this will be considered during the vote .
On the media aspect of the budget , we are disappointed that there has been no agreement from the Council on the film guarantee fund and we hope that an opportunity will be found later to reinstate this money when a legal base has been secured .
On the information lines , we are concerned that much of the money for the relays may go to just five big documentation centres , but apart from that I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a good job .
Mr President , right from the beginning , the Committee on Development and Cooperation has considered the draft budget presented by the Council to be completely unacceptable , as far as the section on external actions is concerned .
The preliminary draft presented by the Commission had already introduced major cutbacks in those lines specifically concerned with development .
Whereas the Commission 's proposal showed a very limited increase in overall spending on external actions ( of 0.41 % ) , the Council 's proposal shows an actual decrease of 2 % compared with the 1997 budget . The most badly affected cooperation appropriations are those relating to Africa , Asia and Latin America .
We are grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Tillich , because his attitude ensured that the vote in the Committee on Budgets gave satisfactory results , with certain amendments being approved .
We will continue to press for other amendments in the part-session .
In what remains of my time , Mr President , I should just like to say that the European Union 's efforts to economize cannot always be made at the expense of the poorest countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , I would first like to express my regret that the amendments that we had proposed - at least some of them , which in our opinion were important - have not been considered by our eminent colleagues in the Committee on Budgets .
I refer particularly to the modest supplementary credits that we requested to fight against organized crime and to support the common action of the Council .
A great deal more funds were put aside for town twinning : this is undoubtedly what is known as " big politics ' .
I am thinking above all - and this is at the heart of my speech - of the refusal of the Committee on Budgets to add a single penny to budget heading B3-4109 , allocated to the implementation of measures to fight against violence towards children , teenagers and women .
I do not want to dwell here on the tragic events of the Dutroux affair , which cast a shadow over my country and shocked the whole of Europe .
I would , nevertheless , like to remind you that following these events the whole of the European Union declared the protection of children and the fight against trafficking in human beings to be a fundamental priority for the Union .
I would also like to remind you that in two weeks time , the European Parliament will adopt the report of Mr Schulz , which contains numerous urgent recommendations , both necessary and essential , the implementation of which will require supplementary funds .
I am therefore asking Parliament to support the request of the Committee on Civil Liberties to grant supplementary appropriations to line B3-4109 .
I know that there are some in this Parliament who think that by asking a European judge to resign they are doing a lot for the protection of children .
I can affirm , for my part , that those who will not vote for extra funds for line B3-4109 while wrapping themselves in the cloak of moral superiority with regard to a judge , will be just making mischief and , worse still , they will be hypocrites .
Mr President , as rapporteur for the fisheries budget , I have intervened on many occasions throughout the budgetary procedure in order to draw the attention of the general rapporteur to the fact that it is not possible to bring about - as had been envisaged - an across-the-board reduction on all the budgeted posts relating to fisheries without challenging the proper implementation of essential elements of the multiannual plan , which are the foundations of the common fisheries policy .
I am happy that the Committee on Budgets has listened to us on this important point .
Furthermore , by unanimously adopting the two amendments I have proposed concerning lines B2-910 and B2-901 and 902 , the Committee on Fisheries has shown a particular interest in two essential aspects of the CFP , in this case , priority to traditional fishing and the essential means anticipated to put a fair monitoring system in place .
Regarding traditional fishing , I am happy that the Committee on Budgets has followed our proposal to allocate ECU 2 million to this line .
Small coastal fishing is a permanent activity of crucial importance for the survival of numerous maritime regions .
It was therefore essential to provide follow-up to the action initiated in 1995 benefitting a professional activity which requires large amounts of local labour and whose economic and social role , as well as its role in regional planning , is irreplaceable .
With regard to monitoring , the Committee on Budgets has unfortunately not followed our proposal , and I strongly regret this .
If the part-session confirms this vote , we will not have sufficient funds available to put in place an objective essential for the efficiency of the common fisheries policy .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Tillich .
He has been helpful and cooperative throughout .
I am very disappointed at the continuing decrease in spending on renewable energy and energy efficiency .
We have problems with legal bases .
They must be put right by the Commission .
As far as research is concerned , we have always appreciated the support of the Committee on Budgets , and that has continued this year .
We understand that the Commission will be making adjustments in its administrative arrangements in order to retain the needs of the service while making sure that they are accountable .
The transparency is greater , in fact , on the research programmes than in any other item , since it is quite clear how much is spent on administration on each of those specific programmes .
Because of a lack of legal base and little progress on energy we are sending our delegates to Kyoto with very little in their bags .
Our priorities must continue to be renewable energy and energy efficiency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 16 September last I had the honour of presenting to you the principal elements of the draft general budget for 1998 , as formulated in the first reading by the Council during July .
Today , as you get ready to proceed to the first reading of the draft general budget , I would particularly like to raise what seems , in the current budgetary procedure , essential to the institution which I represent .
First of all , let me say that the first duty of any budget authority - and in particular community budget authorities - must be that of as efficient and effective a policy on spending as possible .
Respect for this rule - respect for this budgetary principle - is a must in the framework of the budgetary rigour which the 1998 financial year implies .
It is , furthermore , by this yardstick that the Council measured the expenses registered in the draft general budget for 1998 .
Mr President , the exercise in which you are taking part today and the day after tomorrow is , in fact , a major event in the budgetary procedure .
I say " a major event ' because the amendments you are going to discuss and vote on are , in fact , a budgetary transcription of the directions formulated by the House in its March resolution .
It is a major event because these amendments largely reflect the image of the draft general budget that the President of Parliament will sign in December .
It is a major event because - and in this we are living up to tradition - a certain number of amendments contain a little cherry or a little cactus directed at the other budget authority and , once more , I note that the current exercise is no exception to that practice .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , without wanting to prejudge next Thursday 's votes on the amendments you are going to discuss , I would like to note particularly amendment 815 , which relates to the necessary financing for the promotion of jobs , an area in which the Presidency wanted to include Parliament from the very start of the debate on budgetary procedure .
This initiative , Mr President , is a great credit to your Parliament , as it contributes in a decisive way to the legitimation of the jobs package as it will be submitted to the Extraordinary European Council on 20 and 21 November .
But this initiative will be all the more credible if you are willing to maintain , in Section 3 , a sufficiently high margin along the lines of the substantial margins you are about to maintain in sections 4 and 5 .
With more specific regard to section 1 , the Presidency notes changes - I mean changes and not modifications - sub-section 8.1 appearing as an annex to the rapporteur 's motion for a resolution .
Indeed , these changes constitute a mandate for negotiation between Parliament with the Council at the next trialogue concerning the letter of amendment the Commission will formulate on 29 October next .
The Council will give its opinion on the Commission 's letter of amendment , but I would already like to recall the bilateral commitment of April in order to say to you , Mr President , that the Presidency will do everything it can to ensure the procedure is concluded in only one session .
With regard to section 2 , as I understand , Parliament is ready to re-establish the payment appropriations reduced by the Council at first reading .
I wish to remind you , just to get this straight , that this decision is based on the foreseeable implementation of payments committed during the coming financial year .
With regard to the Peace initiative , we have noted the alternative to the preliminary draft budget , as suggested by the Commission , which would thus like recourse to appropriations not affected by section 2 .
The Presidency is delighted with this solution , which it will support with all its might , and I think the Council will also support the solution , on condition , of course , of respect for the Edinburgh decisions and , more specifically , for the decisions regarding available resources for commitments within objective 1 .
With regard to the financing of the CFSP , I should say that the trialogue of 6 October was a good one , extremely fruitful , following the signing of the interinstitutional agreement of 16 July .
This trialogue considered a new distribution of the total amount amongst different lines as they were formulated by the Council .
The Council will therefore give its final decision on this distribution .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to say how pleased I am that , thanks to the willingness and the sense of responsibility of Parliament , understanding between the two branches of the budget authority has been exemplary from the start of the budgetary procedure .
I note that cooperation between Parliament and the Council has already produced tangible results , both in the area of agricultural expenditure and in expenditure on fisheries and the CFSP .
Mr President , this is all I wanted to say at a moment when you are ready to proceed to the first reading of the draft budget .
In conclusion , I would also , and above all , like to thank all of those in the Parliament who have contributed in a determinant way to the results that we have obtained at this stage of the budgetary procedure .
I would first like to mention the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Detlev Samland . I would also like to mention the two rapporteurs , Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson and , last but not least , I would also like to show appreciation for the considerable work that has been accomplished by the Commissioner , Mr Liikanen and his team , and to include them in my acknowledgements .
That said , Mr President , I thank you for your attention , and am ready to listen to Parliament .
Thank you very much , President Fischbach , and thank you , too , for your kind words to Parliament and Mr Liikanen .
Welcome
I would like to welcome the delegation from the French National Assembly to the European Union , led by the chairman , Mr Nallet , who have taken their seats in the official gallery .
This is the delegation 's first visit to Parliament since the recent elections in France .
The delegation has had a number of talks on topics of common interest , including the Amsterdam Treaty in the light of the increase in membership and European monetary union .
I am convinced that these meetings will help to strengthen the fruitful cooperation between the French Parliament and the European Union , and I would like once more to extend a warm welcome to the delegation .
Amending budget No 1 / 97-1998 draft general budget - draft 1997 ECSC operating budget ( continuation )
Mr President , after listening today to the rapporteurs ' presentations of the budget and the comments by the Council , I would remind you of last year 's budget debate .
It was extremely difficult , there was a lot of tension and we had difficulty in finding a common line between the institutions .
We must all be very happy at the change , and at the renewal of the interinstitutional cooperation which started well at the beginning of the budgetary procedure by the Dutch Presidency and continues this autumn .
We must now carry the budget through in the same spirit .
With regard to the supplementary and amending budget for 1997 , the second reading of Parliament establishes consensual solutions for nearly all questions raised .
It is unfortunate that the procedure has been prolonged but the result permits , in particular , a first important step in the reinforcement of the Community 's consumer protection services .
I would like to thank both the rapporteur , Mr Brinkhorst , and the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , for the considerable effort invested to achieve this result .
For the European Coal and Steel Community there is an agreement between Parliament and the Commission on the supplementary and amending budgets for 1997 .
I understand that the rapporteur , Mr Giansily , wishes to examine the recent Commission proposals for the continuation of some ECSC activities after 2002 before finalizing his views on the draft budget for 1998 .
This debate will therefore take place at a later stage .
Turning to the first reading of the draft general budget for 1997 , the value of the interinstitutional cooperation can be illustrated in most parts of the budget .
For compulsory expenditure , the concertation on the amounts to be inscribed has been extended to take account of the most recent information in the rectifying letter .
It has been a long-standing wish of the European Parliament and it will now happen .
The substance of the result remains to be seen but the trialogues so far have shown a convergence of views .
Among the internal policies , the joint employment initiative of Parliament and the Council presidency is a promising achievement .
It is built upon serious rigour and it concentrates expenditure on programmes which can have a real impact on employment creation and labour markets in the Community .
Combined with the mobilization of the resources of the EIB agreed in Amsterdam , this initiative can , if it is endorsed by Council , contribute significantly to the employment summit .
The institutions continue to work to find the appropriate instruments to obtain the most value added for employment creation from the initiatives .
In category 4 it is good to know that the recent agreements between the institutions concerning the budgets of the international fisheries agreements and the common foreign and security policy have been effectively applied .
Against this broad satisfaction , there are , of course , some points of concern .
Parliament 's orientations for the execution of the 1998 budget foresee an advisory working party to approve programmes in the area of human rights .
The Commission is always available for interinstitutional cooperation to the extent that the competences and the responsibilities of each institution are respected .
But it is important not to erode responsibilities and not to put at risk effective implementation of Community programmes .
Turning to some more specific points , the Commission will prepare the 1999 budget with the euro as its unit of account .
The report on agricultural production methods which was asked for by Mr Mulder should be provided before the second reading .
Parliament 's preferences with regard to Rechar and Retex , which have been mentioned often , are very clear to us .
The initiatives which could be taken in this respect will be examined but this examination should also include realistic possibilities for execution .
Parliament has often given attention to execution figures and that is why we should also do it here .
With regard to the Official Journal , the initiatives for publication on-line will be taken .
We took a major initiative with the publication on-line of Agenda 2000 last summer .
Almost 20 , 000 Europeans consulted us on the Internet on the day when the documents went out .
However , it is unlikely to result in the very important savings expected by Parliament in 1998 .
We need to change a number of directives before they will be legally binding .
Important progress has been made towards transparency and harmonization of the financing of the committee agencies , due in particular to the considerable efforts invested by Members of the European Parliament .
Mr Tappin is not here but his efforts are well known in this House .
It is up to the Council to approach the proposals now on the table in a constructive spirit .
As far as subsidies are concerned , the Commission fully shares the intention to give the organizations concerned an incentive to diversify the sources of their financing .
With regard to implementation , further reflection may be required to make it manageable for the Commission , for Parliament and for organizations concerned .
But as far as the principles are concerned , we fully share them .
Finally , I have noted the growing importance attached by Parliament to zero-based budgeting .
If I understand the underlying ideas , the intention is to challenge budgetary inertia and to strengthen the expost and ex-ante evaluation before deciding on any budgetary provision .
This reinforces the initiatives which the Commission has taken in the context of SEM 2000 to strengthen evaluation , in particular as far as the multiannual programmes are concerned .
A report on the evaluation activities of the Commission is under preparation and should demonstrate the progress made .
I am sure the intention of Parliament is to apply high valuation standards to all initiatives for budgetary spending regardless of their source .


I should like to conclude by congratulating the rapporteurs , Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson , as well as the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , for their work on the 1998 draft general budget .
I also thank Mr Fischbach , President-in-Office of the Council , for his very cooperative approach to the discussions we have had .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , I would like to express concern , satisfaction and determination .
The concern , somewhat premature , is that the reminder , in the future Amsterdam Treaty , of the responsibilities of Member States within the context of the implementation of the budget , does not translate into a dilution of the responsibilities of the Commission , notably due to the fact that it would cease to be the sole body responsible for the discharge of this duty before this institution .
The satisfaction is in the fact that the interinstitutional agreement on the CFSP is already being implemented and this is a good thing for it shows that these expenses are non-obligatory ones , that is , ordinary expenditure .
Finally , the determination will be to see the Commission , in particular the Commissioner , Mr Oreja , follow closely the information policy relating to the Amsterdam Treaty and to institutional questions .
This treaty is already sufficiently complicated and sufficiently incomprehensible for citizens without adding to it and an effort of information and education is clearly necessary .
This , ladies and gentleman , is what I have been given the responsibility of saying on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
Allow me to add , on a personal level , a word of congratulations , perhaps a little premature , for we are only at the first reading , to the Luxembourg Presidency .
I believe that the quality of relations that have been established between this Presidency and Parliament shows what can come of a good collaboration between institutions .
It is undoubtedly this cooperation which will enable some substance to be given to the employment initiative at the European Council of Luxembourg which is dedicated to this issue .
May the relations forged between this Parliament and the President-in-Office bear much fruit , for this is the right road to take .
Mr President , I should like to reiterate what Mr Bourlanges and Commissioner Liikanen have said about the way that we have had good cooperation with the Council on this occasion compared to last year for instance .
It shows what can be done when we work together .
There is a ' but ' coming up shortly .
I wish to congratulate both rapporteurs because the work they have done has helped us tremendously .
In Mr Tomlinson 's case , the other institutions report has gone pretty smoothly ; and in Stanislaw Tillich 's case , he has gone out of his way to work with the various groups to try to get good results when we voted in committee .
I also wish to thank Jan Mulder , the rapporteur for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , as the problems we have had in the past over the agricultural budget have been smoothed tremendously because of him .
I do not need to say too much on category 1 , because Jan has already said it .
I should like to make clear that the Socialists have tried to be consistent in their approach to this budget .
We know that a stringent , prudent budget was needed and we also know that employment had to be at the top of the agenda .
We have tried to look at the positions of Parliament and at what had and what had not got a legal base ; we have looked at the wishes of the committee and at how the lines were being spent .
Taking those things into consideration , we have actually come up with a consistent policy .
At times we have done things with which I did not agree .
In agriculture , I actually led the vote against the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on the tobacco sector , where we agreed to keep the money on tobacco where it is rather than take it out , because that is the way Parliament had voted in July .
That is just one example of where we have tried to go along with Parliament 's wishes .
On the structural funds , the ECU 100 million that we have all now agreed for the Irish peace process is an excellent example of how the three institutions have worked together to ensure that this has been achieved without a legal base .
I should like to make one point clear to the Commission on this - I am not too sure that it is directed at DG XIX so much as DG XVI : we are not kidding , this is serious , we want to see the monies we have made available for Rechar and Retex implemented .
It is Parliament 's wish from last year and we want to ensure that this money on Rechar and Retex is indeed spent .
On category 3 , as I said , our priority has been on the employment chapter .
I wish to say to the President-in-Office at this point : our group has put a lot of effort into getting a commitment and an agreement on this strategy .
At times it has not been easy .
We have seen some budget lines sacrificed so that we could go for this strategy ; we have seen some lines take decreases and some lines disappear , where some of our colleagues were asking us to maintain them or indeed increase them .
It has not been easy to convince our colleagues of the validity of this exercise .
However , we have stuck with it , we have gone with it , and we hope that on Thursday Parliament can vote through a programme which will help create jobs in Europe .
I have to say to the President-in-Office - and this is where the ' but ' comes in - that our great cooperation depends on this .
If the Council cannot deliver , if we do not get a legal base and if his colleagues treat this in a flippant manner , then all hell will be let loose .
That ECU 350 million will be redistributed throughout category 3 .
We will find lines where it will go ; we will ensure that it is put on those lines where it can be spent ; and that will make a joke of our strategy .
A lot depends on whether the President-in-Office can persuade his colleagues in the Council , and I am sure that he will do that .
If it does come off , if we are successful , then once again we can show that if we have good interinstitutional cooperation , we can find the solutions that we all look for in a variety of areas .
On category 4 , the Group has been consistent in its approach to Turkey and Meda .
We do not agree with the vote in committee about putting an amount in reserve .
I make the point now that we will be voting against the amendment to put the Meda money on the line .
It is worth mentioning two lines specifically in category 4 : one is the sex tourism line , introduced by Mr Colom , which we need to do something about ; the second is the CFSP for the landmines .
That should be given full support from all groups .
Mr President , like others I would like to congratulate the two rapporteurs , but in particular , Mr Tillich .
I think he has done an excellent job in what has not been an easy budget year .
Like Mr Liikanen , I prefer this kind of atmosphere to the one we had last year ; but I would simply point out that we in the Group of the European People 's Party are being as consistent as we were last year in looking for a tight and rigorous approach to the budget and also maintenance of our commitments that we , as a Parliament , have signed in the context of the interinstitutional agreement .
Let me make three points for the EPP in this debate .
Firstly , I would like to underline what the rapporteur has pointed out regarding the rigorous approach of the European Parliament to this budget .
We will be somewhere in between the 1.12 % of the Council on first reading and the 1.15 % of the Commission .
It should set at rest the minds of those who have thought that this institution is simply interested in spending money right up to the limits .
The margins in category 3 are over ECU 200 million , and in category 4 , external policy , where we might have been tending to spend funds on tropical forests or other areas of importance as we have done in the past , we have kept a margin of nearly ECU 500 million .
That is over ECU 700 million altogether on first reading .
That is a first , so far as I know .
Secondly , when we then come to the other institutions - if our rapporteur could tune in to my wavelength , Mr Tomlinson - I would like to welcome the fact that we have actually kept our commitments of being within the 20 % , as we have always done .
I would particularly like to thank our own Secretary-General and Secretariat in Parliament for coming forward with a report on interinstitutional cooperation .
It has shown that it has been working .
It does add value to our ability to get value for money in the institutions .
I would certainly support the recommendation at the end of that report that there should be an annual process within the budgetary system whereby , when the Secretary-General submits his draft estimates , we should have a report on that .
Perhaps the Commission could also insert that on a regular basis in its presentation of the budget .
In terms of the other institutions and the European Parliament budget in particular , I would like to draw attention to what we consider the innovation of having clearer public disclosure of the costs of all the buildings owned by the European institutions .
We believe that this is a common ' patrimony ' of the European Union , and at least in this way a start can be made in achieving clarity about where the money is spent .
We hope it will be adopted on an annual basis .
Turning to the European budget itself , for the Commission , section III , there is firstly the point on the jobs initiative .
Ever since 1994 we have supported having an idea of growth and jobs .
This is where the idea initially came from , but it was always stymied by the lack of a legal base .
In the EPP we support what the Socialist Group has said .
We expect the deal to be done at the summit so that we can have a second reading which should go as planned .
We would also like to have , as Mr Tillich 's report clearly points out , a commitment at the summit that when we are looking to the longer term - when we come to December and talk about Agenda 2000 - we should bring together all the elements of job creation into one section under the financial perspective .
It seems to be somewhat odd that we talk about category 3 when we are looking at job creation , whereas category 2 is also doing a significant amount in that perspective .
Lastly , when we come to the use of reserves , we have shown that in the system for Jet - where we want a solution by second reading , and also on the information system - we can , as a Parliament , judiciously use the reserve for matters of policy so that we can then make sure that the system runs as we in Parliament would like it to do .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteurs even though I have to say immediately , in general terms , that I profoundly disagree with the highly restrictive guidelines we are faced with for 1998 , particularly in the Council 's draft .
Because that is , in fact , the essential characteristic of the present budgetary process , and , furthermore , it conflicts with the priority which , it is claimed , is being given to employment .
Obviously we cannot but agree that priority should be given to employment .
This , moreover , should not be merely a budgetary priority but the general priority of the Union .
Nevertheless , any agreement and vote of approval we may give to the inclusion of a fund for that purpose does not mean that we have any great illusions as to the practical reality of that declaration of priority .
In the first place , because we consider that the fight against unemployment and the creation of jobs must immediately be set free from the present restrictive policies .
Next , since not only is the allotted amount limited , since the ECU 390 million earmarked for that use have really been secured essentially by means of financial engineering , which boils down to taking funds away from a number of other appropriations , or from purposes to which they might have been allocated , particularly social objectives , to concentrate them on this new purpose .
The importance of this priority required much more of us .
It demanded new means , and sufficient means to face up to the seriousness of the scourge with which we are all familiar in this field .
It is true that there is not much more the European Parliament could do in the face of the Council 's preliminary and definitive drafts .
But we cannot in any event fail to note the drastic limits of this action , particularly evidenced by the cuts made particularly in important areas of our social , education and youth , cultural , environmental , consumer protection and research policies , to mention only a few of the most important .
These limits are also evidenced by the very increases proposed for other areas , particularly the suggested allocations to information campaigns , which amount to ECU 106 million and do indeed turn that item into a real , if undeclared , priority .
Also on the subject of cuts , I would like to state that in our vote on Thursday we will insist on the reinstatement of some items which have been sacrificed , and also on the reinforcement of certain objectives .
This applies to tourism - which has disappeared - and also to the fight against racism , to the audio-visual industry and the ultra-peripheral regions .
With regard to certain aspects of the process , I should like to say that we consider it a positive sign that it is proposed to reject the cut of ECU 1 , 000 million ecus in payments for the structural actions adopted by the Council .
This is a totally unacceptable proposal and for that reason alone should not be approved .
Meanwhile , and following the same line of thought , we cannot understand and do not accept allocation of the Committee on Budget of ECU 100 million in class II to the Prince initiative ; similarly , we do not agree that the additional allocation of ECU 60 million to the Retex and Rechar programmes should also be at the cost of normal structural actions .
We agree with these objectives , but we do not agree with the means used to include them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this year 's budgetary process has been overshadowed by the deliberations on Agenda 2000 .
Major strategic decisions are therefore not expected .
One is entitled to ask , however , whether or not this budgetary process shows that the European Institutions , the Council , Parliament and the Commission , are in possession of sufficient creative talent .
First a positive example : this year , our budgetary process has centred around the EU 's capacity to act in the fight against unemployment .
The Sunday speeches should now be followed by effective action .
The question is , what can be actually be achieved , given that the EU budget of just under ECU 6 billion for internal policy matters is hardly adequate for major initiatives ?
How do we guard against the illusion that the EU can do something which is really the responsibility of the Member States , the regions , communities and enterprises - namely to promote new employment opportunities in a reforming and innovative way ?
How go we get away from the views of the Members of this House , who sought to add a rider to every existing programme so as to turn it into an employment promotion initiative ?
How do we prevent the raising of expectations which cannot be fulfilled , as was the case with transeuropean networks ?
This can now be seen in the proposal which we have developed for submission to the Council as part of a concerted action .
ECU 150 million for credit relief for SMEs , which is intended to affect assets of between ECU 5 billion and 6 billion .
This action promises more success than a certain employment initiative launched with great pomp and ceremony , namely transeuropean networks , whose job-creation component was from the outset nothing more than pure fiction .
It is regrettable that this scheme did not undergo public review , since my assessment of it would read " Fictions come to fictitious ends ' .
The current initiative is a clear improvement for three reasons : it does not restrict itself to one single area , the construction sector , it focuses on smaller rather than major investment projects and it seeks to meet business head-on , thereby maximizing its catalytic impact .
It is to be hoped that the Council and many national governments , including ours in Germany , takes up Parliament 's offer .
Now to the negative example : in December 1995 this House first made some ECU 150 million available for an urgent rebuilding programme in former Yugoslavia .
A lot of time has passed since then , though sadly little money has been forthcoming and what has been provided has had little or no impact .
Implementation rates are alarmingly low , the restructuring programme has become bogged down and the urgent house-building programme , which is essential to encourage the return of refugees , is completely inadequate , according to representatives sitting on the committee .
A proper review procedure is needed here to assess the international cooperation required for such a venture .
To improve matters , and for no other reason , the Committee has set aside a reserve fund .
Now it is up to the Commission .
It will have to improve its internal personnel management procedure and open up faster routes for the deployment of funds .
The recently agreed fund for democracy in Bosnia-Herzegovina should provide assistance here .
Yet we should not allow the Council to dodge its responsibility in this respect .
Regulations should be simplified in such a way as to focus attention not on the job-orders of home-based tendering companies , such as those based in Spain , but rather on the people of Bosnia .
How then do I sum up our creative achievements ?
Members of Parliament , I leave the decision to you .
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of the budgetary process and procedure , it is the tradition for group spokesmen to start by duly thanking the rapporteurs for carrying out the difficult task of reconciling positions and thus achieving a European Parliament position which is compact , uniform and able to reinforce the role played by Parliament itself , in constituting a reference point both for all of us and for the Council and the Commission .
The desire for dialogue , patience , ability to understand the common priorities of an institution that requires unity in the budget , to affirm its prerogatives ; these seem to me to be the basic aspects of the difficult task of the rapporteurs , which will end on Thursday , at least as regards the first reading .




On behalf of my group , I too wish to offer my heartfelt thanks to the general rapporteur , Mr Tillich , the rapporteurs for the draft supplementary and amending budget 1997 , Mr Brinkhorst and Mr Fabra Vallés , my colleague Mr Giansily for the ECSC budget , President Samland , the entire secretariat and , as already recalled , the Council and the Commission for the excellent cooperation shown throughout this period .
Personally , however , I do not see any reason for thanking the rapporteur for the other institutions who , on my request to make a minor change to increase the Sakharov Prize allocation , replied that the European Parliament and the Committee on Budgets do not enter into politics .
As if the decision to switch from 12 to 11 meetings , including the budget procedure , had nothing to do with politics , although the general rapporteur says so , and the general rapporteur for the other institutions is an honourable man . And as if the decision taken by the Committee on Budgets to abolish , or to take to pieces , the budget lines to set up the reserve to increase the funds intended for the Brussels buildings once again had nothing to do with politics !

But the rapporteur Mr Tomlinson says so , and Mr Tomlinson is an honourable man .
So I will not join in the thanks offered so far , and I hope that the Chamber will , at least on this point , support the amendment I have submitted together with 35 other colleagues , so that , after eight years , the appropriation of ECU 15 , 000 to the Sakharov Price can be increased , and can therefore stand at the minimum that constitutes appropriate recognition for one of the most important initiatives taken by the European Parliament in the field of human rights .
On the other matters and more generally , beyond this minor internal polemic , I would simply like this Assembly to note , at the end of the proceedings , that we are all certainly in favour of this compulsory policy , and heaven help us if we damage this consensus , but we should be aware of the fact that Parliament and the Council still agree to remain below the minimum , or rather , the maximum rate , which is always a minimum , fixed in Edinburgh : so that ultimately we do not risk taking the EU budget to be a public deficit to be corrected , to be reduced , etcetera , etcetera , in any way .
I almost have the impression , from the experience of these last two years , that , beyond the questions of the economic and monetary union , we understand or want public opinion to understand that the more we spend , the more we increase a hypothetical public deficit , as if 1.26 or 1.16 comprised a deficit and not an essential tool for Community policy .
We are therefore paying attention to this point !
Taking care not to say , on 21 November , that we will solve the problem of unemployment in Europe with ECU 350 million .
We have agreed this initiative this year ; I too hope and expect that the Luxembourg Council will produce positive results on 21 November .
However , we should all be aware that this budget is not a non-refundable expenses budget , and the money available seems insufficient to me to achieve a real policy on employment .
Mr President , like last year , the Committee on Budgets is refusing to subscribe to the desire for rigour expressed by the Council which adopted a 1998 budget with zero growth in terms of real ECUs .
Concerned , as always , to confirm the budgetary power of the European Parliament , the Committee on Budgets proposes to reduce the margin , on the financial perspective ceiling , from ECU 1.35 billion to ECU 500 million , as opposed to the ECU 950 million in the Commission 's preliminary draft budget .
My group will vote against this draft budget , regretting that the Committee on Budgets has not retained the broad lines of the initial draft budget of the Council .
A draft in which the ECU 82.5 billion of payment appropriations , although a decrease of ECU 1.8 billion compared with the preliminary draft budget , still exceed 1996 real expenditure by 8 % and are adapted to the foreseeable implementation needs .
Increases in the Council 's draft budget are limited to 0.7 % in relation to the 1997 budget .
The effort is balanced between the budget lines , with a particular reduction of ECU 1 billion in the structural funds , which nevertheless increases by 4.2 % .
This said , the draft budget takes into account the need to limit national contributions to the Community budget .
Let me make three comments to illustrate the legitimacy of this objective .
For 1998 , France 's contribution is already 91.5 billion French francs , being 6.3 % of tax receipts or 36 % of the budget deficit .
Approval of the Committee on Budget 's draft budget would mean an increase in this contribution of 1.9 billion , being a 2.2 % increase as opposed to a 1.4 % increase for the overall increase in expenses .
If the French budget had been indexed to an increase in GDP , as the draft budget proposes , the extra expenditure for France would have been 45 billion French francs , that is 0.5 % of gross domestic product .
There is a discrepancy , Mr President , between what the European Parliament says with regard to the need to put in place the single currency and its behaviour as a budget authority .
Mr President , this budget is excessive , cosmetic and intended to curry favour .
It is excessive for three reasons .
First , because the 1992 European Council overestimated the needs of Community expenditure by fixing the limit of its own resources at 1.27 % of the gross domestic product of Member States , it encouraged budgetary laxity .
This budgetary laxity led governments to propose , for 1998 , a budget which , in payment appropriations , surpasses the real expenditure of 1996 by 8 % .
This budgetary laxity leads the Committee on Budgets to go further and to propose an increase in payment appropriations and commitment appropriations of 2.9 % , nearly 3 % , in relation to the 1997 budget .
This means much higher increases than those of national budgets on which , however , budgetary constraints weigh much more heavily .
This excessive expenditure can be explained first as a way of currying favour .
Currying favour with the structural funds , of which the amount is arbitrarily fixed at too high a level , leading Member States , regions , provinces , districts , public and private organizations , to strive to find ways , often useless and sometimes harmful , of spending the money .
This attempt to ingratiate is also found in internal policies , where a multitude of grants are made with no follow-up .
I have set up a register , thanks to replies from the Commission to my written questions , and I thank the Commissioner who collected together the grants approved , not to all organizations , but to the French ones , which means that there is the equivalent of fifteen times this list for the whole of Europe .
How can you believe that this spending is all effectively used and effectively controlled ?
In reality , this Parliament is too often ready to listen to the different ever present lobbies and not ready enough to listen to the taxpayers , and we often have the impression , on the European right , that we are the only defenders of European taxpayers .
Lastly , this budget is cosmetic since it seeks to disguise the reality .
The Committee on Budgets proposes ECU 150 million to fight unemployment .
ECU 150 million for 20 million unemployed , is this serious ?
Who is going to believe that the problem can be solved with ECU 7 per unemployed person ?
In reality , it is not a matter of solving unemployment with these ECUs , which is due to the opening up of borders , free trade , and an excess of immigration , it is a matter of getting publicity for the European budget .
ECU 150 million will not solve the problem but it will get coverage in the media .
So , this budget , which is ingratiating , cosmetic , excessive and inflationary , ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Gallou has not said anything new .
In fact , the difference between Mr Gallou and the Committee on Budgets , since the former was not present at the voting stage , is that we do not discuss the subject , we make decisions .
We have , and we can say this with every justification , agreed a budget which supports greater financial management and safeguards the interests of taxpayers , in complete contrast to the remarks of Mr Gallou .
Let me illustrate this by citing three examples .
First , what Mr Gallou has been calling for is no different from the flag we have been flying , namely a decisive response to the problem of subsidy abuse .
To put a spoke in the wheels of those lobbyists who are always hanging about , and here I am referring to those whose hobby is blocking as many doorways as possible , the rapporteur has devised a plan for financing EU organizations which is transparency itself .
Organizations are required to generate 10 % of their own resources .
The Commission is required , in September of each succeeding year , to submit to us a report on the application of funds which the Community has issued to any organization , together with an assessment of whether further funding is proposed in this area .
If not , the organizations in question are relegated , as in a football league .
Secondly , we have helped make a decisive change to the structure of administrative expenditure .
No previous budget plan in the history of the European Community has featured a Commission organization chart in which the number of boxes displayed is fewer than in the preceding year .
Our resolution is designed to carry this trend forward and to adopt a similar approach to structural policy .
We can no longer tolerate a situation in which the number of A boxes in the Commission is the same as the number of C boxes .
While the new concept of information technology is making inroads in the Commission , it remains merely a matter of prestige that a C box is assigned to an A box .
For this reason a change is called for in the structure of the chart .
This , Mr Commissioner , is a policy which we are determined to adhere to , not only this year but also in the years ahead .
Thirdly , we have undertaken to prove that we have indeed made preparations to enlarge the Union .
Neither Council nor Commission have taken account of what they themselves proposed in Agenda 2000 , namely to begin negotiations with new partners , how ever many they may be , from 1st January 1998 .
For such negotiations we need a structure .
We have made a proposal for making this structure pluralist .
On this issue let me just state clearly and frankly , and here I refer to a discussion which took place in Brussels on the Notenboom procedure , that if a body like DG I is incapable of managing the Yugoslavia programme , the Phare programme and the Tacis programme to our complete satisfaction , then it should not be put in charge of the enlargement programme - unless we want to wait 25 years for the first new member to join .
One thing must therefore be clearly understood : the resources which we have set aside for a new administrative structure will only be available on the condition that the Commission organisation chart is a fully functional structure and is organised differently from the current model .
We surely cannot allow this task to remain in the hands of those who are still incapable of administering the funds concerned .
I have deliberately focused my remarks on a subject which encompasses not just the issue of employment policy and the other matters already discussed .
The debate in this budget procedure was very encouraging , since it raised a considerable number of points , including new institutional issues .
Speakers have quite justifiably pointed out that in the mandatory functions we have found a process which would have been unthinkable some years ago .
Letters of amendment after the first reading of the budget in Parliament , no voting motions being placed during the first reading in Parliament , and then a joint procedure in the trialogue prior to the budget 's second reading in the Council - from an institutional viewpoint , that constitutes a decisive step forward .
Let me just add the following : yesterday evening in the Committee on Budgets I quoted the words of Bertolt Brecht : times are not so or are not always so .
The problem is that we now have a Council Presidency with which we can genuinely cooperate .
Unfortunately , the time may also come when we are again faced with presidencies which are either untrustworthy or lack the strength to carry through in the Council those policies which they themselves have drawn up .
The process which we are initiating here today is therefore an invitation to the Council to make interinstitutional changes to the framework conditions and ultimately to modify the treaty , so that we are at last given clear guidelines - and this should also include the agricultural policy .
Mr President , at the moment Europe is experiencing deflation , and that is the wrong way to go about preventing unemployment .
This deflation is happening as a result of the influence of the EMU criteria .
And , furthermore , Parliament is on the deflation bandwagon .
That is what Mr Tillich meant when he said that Parliament has done its homework and its housework too .
Actually , Parliament 's employment initiative will do nothing to affect unemployment in Europe in any noticeable way .
About ECU 1 a month will be spent in aid of unemployment .
This is the feeding of the five thousand . But that was then , and I don 't think it is going to work this time .
That is why the summit conference on unemployment has been condemned as a propaganda conference and it will fail unless more money gets to be spent .
Let us turn to Mr Tomlinson 's report .
He has done important work in the area of structure and , in doing so , has described the interests of the European Parliament well .
There are two things I would like to draw to your attention . He refers to defence aid for a European political defence machine , and he has changed the bases for parliamentary appropriation so that it can be used as aid for a general European defence machine .
I think this is a dangerous basis for the independence of nations and the preservation of freedom .
Furthermore , this Parliament ought to take a firmer stand on the revision of the expenses claim system , which Mr Tomlinson left unsettled .
I get , after paying all my expenses , ECU 12 , 000 a month cash in hand salary and expenses , and that is much too much .
In the Nordic countries we cannot tolerate such inflated rewards .
When we start to re-examine the pay scheme we must sort things out with Elmar Brok and other such representatives who are in the employ of private companies at the same time as working as Members of Parliament .
Mr President , although the employment initiative is the main topic of this debate , the European Union cannot really make a significant contribution to employment with ECU 150 million .
At most the Union can , for instance , contribute to the exchange of information between Member States .
Employment policy should remain primarily the responsibility of the Member States . I am not at all happy with the procedure by which the European Parliament is trying to deal with employment legislation through the Council .
Parliament is exceeding its powers .
The proposal to add all the category 3 amendments together into one large amendment is at odds with the spirit of the budget procedure .
At second reading all the budget headings amended by the Council should be on the agenda , not a whole category of expenditure .
The information is still too much like propaganda for the federal model .
It is therefore to be welcomed that the explanatory statement on budget heading B3-300 states that the information and communication policy should take more account of different ideas of European integration .
An objective information source should in any event be independent .
I am therefore strongly opposed to including Euronews in European information .
I also think it is undesirable that the ECU 1 billion from the structural funds which the Council cancelled should be reinstated .
This is not justified by the scale of 1997 spending .
In the Council 's draft budget payment appropriations are already 4.18 % higher than in 1997 .
Mr President , while not wishing to belittle the good work of the rapporteur , I must say that the draft budget represents nothing more than an extrapolation without any clear consideration of the main political priorities and with no real initiatives for reform .
The most serious problem , as we all know , is the high unemployment figure , particularly youth and long term unemployment .
This muchvaunted initiative to combat what has become a problem of serious proportions , while in itself a remarkable achievement , is still far from satisfactory .
It is still particularly regrettable that the ECU 3.5 billion allocated to research and technological development still represents less than 4 % of the total budget .
It is hard to conceive of another area which is as important for long term employment as research and development , especially in view of the fact that the EU is continuously losing ground to the USA and the Asiatic countries in the field of technological development .
At the end of the day , real jobs can only be created by a healthy and competitive European economy .
Mr President , I will start with Mr Tomlinson 's excellent report , on which I should like to congratulate him .
It is the result of a great deal of work . I shall therefore vote in favour of it this time , which I did not do in committee .
Nevertheless , I should like to take this opportunity to point out that this work has been flawed , even plagued , by a series of populist and demagogic amendments , which can only act to reinforce the prejudices which were seen , for example , in the television programme we were talking about yesterday in this House , and which end up damaging the institution 's prestige .
Parliament is paying for the consequences of the Council 's lack of political will in considering it unnecessary , until Amsterdam , to have a Members ' statute .
There was an Officials ' Statute , a Commissioners ' Statute , a Statute for Members of the Court of Auditors and a Statute for the Advocates-General of the Court of Justice ; but there is no statute for Members of the European Parliament .
This has had a series of adverse effects on the system by which parliamentarians are paid .
I think it is high time this was resolved once and for all , throughout the whole system .
Any half measure will only create dissatisfaction and unfairness .
That is all I want to say on the matter .
Ladies and gentlemen , I come now to the general budget .
I want to thank Mr Tillich for his work , but there are too many ad hoc procedures .
There are proposals for amendments in the resolution but not in the budgetary section ; there are too many letters of amendment ; and there is the Council 's commitment to approve a legal basis for actions against unemployment , which have still not been approved in time for the first reading ; and so on , and so on .
In any case , my dear Mr Tillich , Mr President , if we were to ask a normal person whether they had understood any of this , I think the answer would be no .
Therefore , I believe that this budgetary procedure provides evidence that the Treaty of Amsterdam left a lot to be desired , in not updating article 203 .
I think that is very clear .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am not going to harp on about the question of the Meda programme , but I will say that I find it surprising that two weeks ago we voted to congratulate the Commission unusually warmly on having implemented the programme so well , and now in the budget , we are trying to put part of its funds in the reserve .
As for the structural funds , I think this year 's formula is a good one , since we can now count on having enough money to provide for the structural funds in full . I should like to thank the European People 's Party for changing its mind since last year .
In this sector the structural funds are spending objectives , and an attitude like that seen last year could result in a very grave future commitment .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to conclude by mentioning the employment initiative .
I congratulate the Luxembourg Presidency for the initiative itself and for its commitment , and I have complete trust in President Juncker .
But I hope you will not mind me saying that I do have a lot of doubts , and am worried about the attitude of some members of the Council . I would not like to see Parliament sacrifice part of the non-compulsory expenditure which it has at its disposal just for the sake of a news story on television the day after the extraordinary summit in Luxembourg .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think our amendment on this point is just a sign of our misgivings , as Mr Fischbach so diplomatically said .
We hope that the Council 's decision in a month 's time will show us that our misgivings were unfounded .
Furthermore , ladies and gentlemen , it is now time to mobilize the whole Community budget , to unblock other initiatives directed against unemployment which have been blocked by the Council for some time , so that the whole of the Community budget can be proemployment , and so that we can motivate the people of Europe and prepare the Union for enlargement .
Mr President , I believe that Mr Tillich , Mr Tomlinson and Mr Samland and all on the Committee on Budgets have done a sterling and exhausting job .
But I think it is a game , played out each year , which has its technique , its skill , its difficulties , its fun , but essentially does not give the European Parliament the power to set its own course and to question some of the more basic aspects of the move towards integration within the European Union .
That said , I think that the first observation that I would like to make is that the 1998 budget shows that we have a European Union with feet of clay , with big aspirations , big possibilities , but without the essential finance mechanism to enable it to act in a world that is beset by rivalry and competition .
The second point that I wish to make is that , while we welcome the initiative on employment , we cannot forget the experience we had of the Europe-wide networks and of the fact that they had no substantial effect on stemming the growing tide of unemployment within the European Union .
We would also like to say that , unfortunately , if we divide ECU 150 million by 20 , 000 , 000 jobless people , we are talking peanuts .
Unfortunately , Mr President , I must stop .
Thank you .
Mr President , I would like to refer in particular to the Tillich report and to the further two years ' extension for the peace and reconciliation fund for Northern Ireland .
Members of this House will be only too well aware of the very delicate position within my constituency at the present time with regard to the talks process .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Tillich and the other members of the Committee on Budgets who came to Northern Ireland to witness for themselves the support that exists for peace within that constituency and to see how people are working together from diverse backgrounds to achieve a consensus .


To Mr Samland , Mr Tomlinson , Mr Wynn and Mr Tillich , our thanks go out to you for your initiative in coming to Northern Ireland , seeing for yourselves and giving up your valuable time .
The peace and reconciliation fund began from scratch and there are many elements to that funding mechanism .
If I had to make a criticism , it would be that there is too much red tape involved .
For the next two years it must be made more user-friendly .
On a positive note , the district partnerships have been a resounding success and have brought together all the social partners working together to build a future for everyone .
This has been no mean achievement in our divided society , an example set that I believe we can not only build upon , in Northern Ireland , but which can also be developed and brought to other areas of the European Union , especially as we expand towards Eastern European countries .
While I and my colleagues have concerns , I wish to state my support for that programme and to reiterate my thanks to the Committee on Budgets .
I am aware that there is an argument between the Committee on Budgets and the Commission .
We understand their argument .
We understand the position of the Committee on Budgets , we are supporting you in that argument with the Commission , and it will be sorted out .
Mr President , time constraints mean that I can only make a brief comment on the budget , and I am going to talk about cultural policy again , as I have done for the past five years .
At last , after almost two years of conciliation with the Council , the Community has witnessed the birth of a new child - the cultural programme christened Raphael .
We hoped and longed for the arrival of this child , but unfortunately it is a little sickly for lack of sufficient financial support .
In fact , this child does not have much of a chance of completely fulfilling its destiny .
When we talk about social cohesion , I wonder why we do not include culture ?
When we talk about economic development and the problem of unemployment , I think to myself : surely culture is a source of employment and economic development ?
There has to come a time when this House 's declarations of goodwill are reflected in the budget .
Next year , as budgetary rapporteur , I hope to be able to treat Raphael as a true son , and not as a stepson .
Mr President , the draft general budget which has been presented is relatively restrictive .
I think it is good that it is a very tight limit .
It ought to be possible to keep it so in future , particularly if there is success in bringing about real reforms in the areas of agricultural policy and regional aid in the coming years .
I also think the initiatives which are included to release money for an employment initiative are positive .
But then it will , of course , depend on what political content is put into this initiative , which is entirely unclear today .
I get a little doubtful when I see how it is to be financed , since there is a risk that not very much new will actually happen , and that it will instead just disappear in another direction with similar effect .
I am opposed to the proposal for a publicity campaign which is in practice a form of political propaganda in favour of , for example , the euro or the Amsterdam Treaty .
It is unreasonable for the EU to make propaganda for a particular opinion , such as in relation to the Amsterdam Treaty , when it is a controversial political issue in many countries .
I also think that Parliament should take the opportunity to gain credibility by reforming its own system for travel expenses , for example .
I have therefore taken part in drawing up such an amendment .
Mr President , I am going to speak on the satellite agencies .
Firstly , I would like to thank Mr Liikanen and through him his colleague Mr Mingasson for the way in which we have moved to harmonize the regulations .
With the appointment of a financial controller , surpluses should be returned to the European budget and we have made great strides on the control over discharge .
I am very pleased to see the package you are putting to Council for their approval .
Thank you for your help on that : common sense prevails .
Secondly , we are now moving towards having an efficient and transparent agency system as reported in the budget .
We are moving towards management by objectives ; transparency whereby both staffing , administrative expenditure and substantive expenditure are now exposed in the budget remarks .
That is a good move .
In conclusion , I would like to say that establishing and developing agencies is not a one-year job .
The European Parliament must maintain its commitments to existing bodies when redefining budgetary priorities .
Finally , thank you for your very kind remarks which were reported to me by my visitors ' group .
At the end of the story I come to the moral .
I want to talk about this Parliament 's credibility in a number of Member States .
I do not think it is as bad as a journalist from your country suggested to me recently when he said to me that it is difficult to talk to fraudsters about fraud but the fact is that I find the European Parliament is being taken less and less seriously .
The debate about our system of allowances , especially the travel allowance , which has been going on for over a year now , and now , in the Netherlands , about our voluntary pension fund , has a lot to do with this .
Sometimes one is justified in blaming the press , as happened yesterday with a Dutch TV programme about signing in on Friday .
But sometimes we ourselves should also make more of an effort to be credible .
I know it is hard in a Parliament in which fifteen countries are represented and the members receive different salaries and also have to work with highly-paid European officials .
All the same the Tomlinson resolution is correct in my view in trying to persuade the Bureau to take further action than it has done up to now .
In the opinion of the Partij van de Arbeid members this resolution still does not go far enough .
We have therefore tabled an amendment with a number of others , including representatives from other countries , to sharpen up the text .
We also think that the pension fund should be further examined and that the burden should shift from Parliament to the parliamentarians .
What is ultimately needed - we do not have any regulations at present - is a supplementary pension .
I know that it will not be possible to have proper ratios as quickly as all that .
That is why we need regulations .
The same work , the same pay , everyone the same .
We decided that for the British in Culham and for staff other than the European officials .
We should also have that for ourselves .
We must have regulations .
I think in fact that it is important in the long run for the Union 's legitimacy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can only say on behalf of the Flemish Socialists that I entirely agree with Mr Dankert .
I find this budget positive to the extent that we have managed to focus the discussion and the drafting of the budget on employment .
I also think it is positive that the budget translation ensures that at the second reading we will be able to evaluate the results of the Luxembourg summit in budgetary terms .
I would like to emphasize that the evaluation must be a general evaluation and that is what I think is lacking in the resolution before us .
The resolution places too much emphasis on the problems relating to the legal principle .
That is an important problem but it is only one aspect .
We must therefore be able to assess the results of the Luxembourg employment conference in the light of everything that Mr Van Velzen has had approved by this Parliament here today .
At the second reading we must try to reevaluate the political role of the budget instrument and we can only do that by seizing the unique opportunity with the assessment of the employment conference .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all the Members of Parliament who have spoken in this debate .
The quality of their speeches is a measure for the issues in the Union .
Parliament 's initiative with regard to employment shows to what point its Members are desirous of finally seeing the economy put back into the service of man and not the reverse .
Thus the expectations of success , which the Presidency wants at all costs , is largely shared by Parliament .
But our troubles are not over and we must continue to work flat out in order to achieve the desired results .
That said , Mr President , the debate which I have just listened to has personally enriched me .
It has enriched the Presidency and it will inspire and guide its future directions .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 10 a.m.
Government procurement
The next item is the report ( A4-0309 / 97 ) by Mr Tappin , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission Green Paper on public procurement in the European Union : exploring the way forward ( COM ( 96 ) 0583 - C4-0009 / 97 )
Mr President , it gives me great pleasure to present the report on the Green Paper on public procurement to Parliament .
The Green Paper is a policy paper .
It is not legislation and therefore Parliament 's response must reflect that .
There are things we can get the Commission to tackle now and other measures which will require a change in Council regulations before they can be enacted .
What can we do in the short term ?
One of the first things the Commission can and must tackle is the need for clarification of the rules , procedures and the language of the directives .
This aspect of the amendment should not create any difficulties for my colleagues .
Logically , neither should the calls for clarification of procedures .
At the moment it is quite legal for a contracting entity to specify the nature of the product or service they wish to be supplied with as long as the specifications do not cause a distortion of competition .
This seems a reasonable position .
Yet some colleagues on the other side of the House wish to deny or limit that basic right .
Amendments have been tabled calling on the Commission to explain how criteria other than that of price can be included in the prerequisites of a procurement contract , to enable contracting authorities to tailor the product to their needs , including qualitative , environmental , social or any other criteria which does not distort competition , if they wish to .
I repeat ' if they wish to ' .
No one can force anyone unless there is a change of Council regulations .
Under the current directives the possibility of choice already exists .
The problem is that due to the complicated nature of procurement legislation and the comparative lack of expertise , many contracting entities are nervous of relying on anything other than price in case they fall foul of the law .
So , if Parliament votes against these amendments , they are not changing any laws nor are they advancing the cause of the free market unless ignorance and fear is what they want the free market to be about .
Because the lowest price is not always the best value , they are preventing the citizen getting the best deal .
Also , lowest price criteria can favour big businesses over SMEs which are normally based in the region where the contract is being offered .
Parliament wants to do something to encourage SMEs to participate in this ECU 720 billion market .
We are committed to encouraging SMEs to create jobs and prosperity in the regions and to promoting the diversification of wealth creation .
We have a chance here with this report .
Bearing in mind the problems with understanding current directives , we have asked Member States to identify or establish one or more procurement centres .
These are places where official information can be obtained on procurement .
This is not another layer of bureaucracy because an existing office , centre or network can be used .
What it does is identify where you can go for accurate advice and information .
There is no control function and this proposal represents subsidiarity .
From the central or regional points of information I hope there will be a flow of good information through informal centres such as libraries , one-stop shops and so on .
To complete the chain of good advice , I have suggested that Member States should establish national procurement accreditation examinations .
This would enable procurement officers within companies or business centres or members of law or accountancy firms to become accredited advisers .
This is a private sector scheme and is therefore self-funding , non-bureaucratic and totally efficient .
This idea has been welcomed by large and small firms alike as well as government and other organizations .
The need is evident .
One utility reported that 75 % of tenders from SMEs had to be binned due to bad submissions .
We need to enable European SMEs as well as bigger business to be competitive .
This is a global market in which we work .
Therefore dissemination is important .
In the longer term we also have to put down other markers for future revisions and this will be a matter for legislation .
We must insist that future revisions take place according to the timetable , that they are full revisions and not a rubber stamp , that there will be a time and opportunity to decide which sectors should be included , how procedures can be simplified and how we can achieve enforcement without tying everyone up in rules and regulations .
There must also be discussion of time and detail .
We can ask the Commission to look at ways that enforcement can be made more efficient and less long-winded , ways of improving communication through the Internet , investigations into sustainability , actions on raising thresholds .
Some of these cannot be tackled by the EU alone .
We are already a partner to the GPA Agreement and the WTO .
Amendments putting down strong statements on the way negotiations should go are tabled and I hope we have cross-party support .
Finally , I should like to thank the Commission , colleagues and the secretariat for all the assistance they have given me on this report .
The EU 's problems with procurement will not go away .
It is the black hole of the internal market and through this report I hope Parliament has shed a little light .
This report 's aim was to set the parameters for a future debate and I thank colleagues for their support in helping us to achieve this aim .
Mr President , is the fact that the Member States have approved the Community 's directive on public procurement only a question of paying lip-service ?
People ask themselves that question when they see how the Member States have followed up the directive or , rather , how they have neglected to do so .
Last year the Commission was obliged to deal with 148 matters concerning complaints against the Member States .
The new co-ordinating directives have been implemented so badly that in the spring of 1996 the Court found three Member States guilty of not taking measures .
Several new cases are in progress .
This is only information about when nothing has been done .
We have many examples of things being done wrong with 29 cases in progress .
It is therefore not only a question of a lack of clarity , but also unwillingness .
I cannot help feeling an urge to adapt Machiavelli 's saying about the relationship between morality and law : ' Without morality there is no law ; without law there is no morality . '
In this case : ' Without will there are no objective rules , but without rules there is also no fair procurement . '
The cure cannot be for the Commission to take on further direct powers and tasks in the Member States and for bureaucracy to be thereby increased , as one of the questions in the Green Paper asked .
There are more cost-efficient ways of implementing what we have agreed on in the Union .
It would increase the risk of serious economic consequences , as the Committee on Legal Affairs also suggests .
Discussions about the relationship between the single market and high levels of protection for the environment and industrial safety are dominating the debate today .
I share the view of the rapporteur , Mr Tappin that it is possible to combine these rules .
We shall have experts in the area of procurement who can set up fair , non-discriminatory conditions and who know how to buy environmentally-friendly buses or environmentally-friendly washing powder .
But what I think we have forgotten , even today , is that the rules on procurement are designed to treat everyone equally , to in fact prevent corruption , to prevent certain groups from gaining advantage at the cost of the general public and to prevent officials from granting contracts as a reward for services .
That is the most important part of public procurement for the benefit of the citizens .
We should not forget that .
Mr President , the report as such is excellent , but I consider it my duty to point out some areas on which we should continue the debate .
The debate on supply and demand must be based upon a number of facts .
We have created the internal market and are working on completing it .
We have established free competition ; we have liberalizations over a wide range of areas .
Both have taken place at community level .
At the same time , a very wide variety of traditions exist which must be taken into account in the different countries .
Creating something shared and something that is reasonable , whilst taking account of the subsidiarity principle , is a huge task .
In the report a new role for the Commission within the supply sector is mentioned .
The Commission will have the same access to the supply sector as to the area of competition law , and this is something that I find alarming .
The Commission will be able to impose penalties with a delaying effect and to suspend supply .
The question of penalties and suspension is in my view a matter for the national law-courts .
A change of this kind will conflict with the subsidiarity principle .
The decisive factor within this area is that the Member States set up national and regional control authorities .
I am thinking here not only of actual appeal bodies , but also of a supervisory authority such as we know from countries such as Denmark , Sweden and Holland .
In public sector supply , parameters other than price must be included .
There has to be room for environmental and other quality requirements , for public sector supply .
Through requirements of this kind , it will be possible to ensure genuine competition and not only competition on price .
The opinion of the European Parliament is playing a big role in the debate on public demand , and I think that with this report we have made a good contribution to the discussion within this sphere .
I look forward to further debate which will come on the basis of the Commission 's green book and Parliament 's recommendations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , why do we need a European legal framework for public contracts ?
This is an important part of the European internal market and in the Green Paper the Commission has tried to carry out a stocktaking exercise .
But we also need it to ensure the rational deployment of public funds , a transparent and fair contracts system , competition among suppliers and maximum access by companies to the enormous procurement market , which is worth over ECU 700 billion .
If we cannot guarantee a competitive system , then will shall face the threat of corruption , excessive prices , unfair treatment of competitors and even bad investments .
It is therefore important that we should address ourselves to this matter .
The Commission has described its experience with the previous system .
Only 3 % of public contracts were awarded on a transborder basis .
The conversion of legal provisions into national law has become bogged down and even the European system of mutual legal recognition is lacking in equivalence .
These procedures are bureaucratic and are not easily understood , particularly by SMEs .
As a result , the internal market does not function correctly in this area and it is now important for us to make practical proposals to remedy the situation .
What are the Commission 's proposals here ?
Initially it has adopted a relatively pessimistic stance by citing the legal recalcitrance of the Member States as the reason for the lack of stimulation in transborder public contracts , and proposes integration with other target areas , such as environment , social and consumer protection .
It also wishes to acquire additional powers of sanction , such as the establishment of a central body to deal with fraud and corruption - which is surely the responsibility of the Member States .
On a more positive side , it wants to promote education and the introduction of information technology in order to improve transparency for the benefit of SMEs .
No proposals have been made to develop the legal framework , for instance article 8 of the sectional guideline relating to telecommunications .
I wish to congratulate and thank Mr Tappin for his excellent work .
However , the report of the Committee on Economic Affairs contains a number of inconsistencies which do not concur with what we have discussed in Parliament and indeed in the hearing .
It does not for example set reasonable targets for raising threshold values in the services sector .
It proposes an accreditation procedure in the area of technical dialogue , which is surely nonsense .
No proposals are made for handling telecommunications in a liberalized and privatized market .
If the internal market is our real objective , then we should not be making the regulations more stringent and more difficult for SMEs .
Alien rules only serve to confuse , more bureaucracy only pushes costs higher and impedes transparency .
Guidelines are becoming more complicated , rather than less .
We do not want to have a super-bureaucracy in Brussels , we just want the Member States to do their homework .
Those are our party objectives .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the public procurement sector in our countries represents ECU 720 billion per year , or if you prefer , 11 % of the gross domestic product of the European Union .
Following the implementation of European legislation , this sector is open to community competition , and this is a good thing , both for consumers and for businesses .
If the European Union has already made considerable progress in the implementation of its policy in the area of public procurement , the directives also need to be monitored and more efficiently implemented by putting in place , if need be , significant sanctions for those who do not respect the rules , for example , by forbidding offending companies from bidding for tenders for a certain period of time .
On an international level , the European Commission must act in such a way as to enable third countries to have access to public procurement contracts , certainly , but on the basis of complete reciprocity .
Similarly , with the prospect of the future membership of eastern and central European states to the Union , it is essential that the candidates for membership accept the current regulations applied to public procurement contracts within a reasonable period of time .
It is also essential , in the interests of our small and mediums sized enterprises , that the Commission , within the context of the WTO , fights to obtain an increase in the limits upon which the implementation of the directives are conditional .
Lastly , Mr President , our group requests a separate vote on paragraph 5 of the report , to which we cannot give our agreement .
In fact , we consider this issue is not relevant here .
But , in conclusion , may I thank Mr Michael Tappin for the quality of his report and for the work he has accomplished , and also for having taken into account our thoughts and comments in the formulation of his text and in that of the explanatory memorandum .
Mr President , I would like to thank the chairman , Mr Tappin , for his painstaking work with this report .
He has been very receptive to the various political views in this area .
I agree , of course , with the chairman that there is a need to evaluate the situation for public sector supply within the Union .
Unfortunately , there are many countries - as we have also heard in the debate here - which have not yet implemented the existing directives , and this is a huge problem .
It means a nontransparent market and unequal treatment of suppliers .
It is necessary , therefore , in order to obtain better conditions of competition and with a view to completion of the internal market , that the Commission should look at the implementation and execution of the directives .
Another thing which I would very much like to emphasize is the importance of there being no doubt about the interpretation of the directives .
The Commission should for this reason consider a more uniform formulation of the directives in future revisions , thereby excluding the ambiguity .
Consideration might be given also to standardizing the requirements for the reference bases and the reference information .
The Commission must , of course , keep an effective check on the directives and firms must have better opportunities to complain .
Lodging complaints must be an easy and fast process for the individual firms .
But what happens when a public sector supplier breaks the rules ?
Does anything happen ?
No !
Where are the sanctions ?
We must tackle this problem and I would like to invite the Commission to take a look at sanctions .
Lastly , I wish to draw the Commission 's attention to the question of environmental requirements for public sector purchases .
I think the supplier must be allowed to impose environmental requirements in all parts of the production cycle and not only for the finished characteristics of the product .
This will enable us to live up to EU 's environmental policy .
I have a ready ear for commissioner Monti 's views on the question of standardizing the reference base , the question of sanctions and the question of taking environmental questions into account when contracts are awarded .
Mr President , public procurement form a really important part of our financial activity .
The EU spends ECU 720 billion every year on the public procurement of goods and services , and these comprise a large portion of the fifteen-country gross domestic product , almost 12 percent .
But I would like to draw your attention to the ecological and social criteria which inevitably have to be given consideration when undertaking public procurement .
I 'd like to mention , for example , that many local authorities have begun to implement the long-term development strategy , Agenda 21 , and they really strive to implement ecological criteria in their own areas of activity .
They may also have importance for the solution to environmental problems at Union level .
I think it is just as Mrs RiisJørgensen said : we must ensure that the regulations pertaining to public procurement on the part of the Union enable us to defer to the demands of the environment .
Likewise , the social criteria are terribly important .
At the same time as achieving savings and efficiency , we must create criteria for what constitutes a good deal for human beings .
One day , in a Swedish newspaper there was an article on something that came to light only just recently : a Danish home care firm , which worked in Swedish old people 's homes , had not actually bothered to look after the old people in its care .
Who are we to blame ?
We must be able to ensure that public services also fulfil the quality criteria that people want .
It isn 't enough that we settle for just efficiency .
I am very happy that Mr Tappin , the rapporteur of the report , was glad to hear these views , although , unfortunately , most of our proposals were overturned on the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to thank Mr Tappin for his excellent report , which raises the problems to do with the Commission 's Green Paper on public procurement .
The report is especially important because , as has just been said , public procurement accounts for ECU 720 billion of EU gross domestic product .
Public procurement is paid for publicly , that is , the market is responsible to the consumer .
That is what Mr Tappin says .
Effective public procurement is said to enhance opportunities for industry and business to exploit the common markets and to improve competition for European businesses in world markets .
The Commission has , however , had to admit that the Union 's own public procurement has not worked out as effectively as anticipated .
The main reason for this situation is the Commission 's lumpy administration together with the fact that the Member States did not adopt directives on public procurement comprehensively enough to implement their contents into the law of the land .
Public procurement has proved beyond the reach of small and medium-sized businesses .
These , however , must now be on the receiving end , as this sector is seen as one of the most important ways of easing unemployment .
I fully agree with Mr Tappin 's proposal appealing for the education and training of staff employed in such companies .
Delays in payment to procurement units only help to hinder access to markets on the part of these companies .
We here in Parliament must be able to do something about these problems .
The main weakness in the operational policy on public procurement by the Commission is that public procurement is seen just as tools for establishing internal markets .
These are viewed almost exclusively from the private business angle .
The Commission 's document contains no assessment either of how a policy of competitiveness can promote the availability , quality and cost-effectiveness of public services .
However , public procurement is actually just part of the administration and service of the public authority .
The Commission is also examining the proper procurement process and the problems that go along with it , from the viewpoint of the producer exclusively , and not the private sector .
The customers , that is to say the public sector or public authorities , have not had their needs taken into account .
Competing for public procurement is also absurd from the point of view of staff .
The public procurement process should be improved so that the working conditions and job security of those employed in the procurement service can be taken into account in connection with competitive activity .
There should be an increase in public procurement when there is mass unemployment .
It is then that market forces and the labour market should be taken into account ; and employment , social , and environmental policy must be included in this process .
Mr President , both tenderers and those who issue invitations to tender for public works have their problems .
A Dutch organization in the construction business recently described European tendering as nonsense and extremely expensive .
The main complaint of anyone who has anything to do with the directives is their lack of clarity .
On just those points where it is important to be clear the text leaves you in the lurch .
Take a region with serious unemployment that has to put a project out to tender .
Can the region require tenderers to take on a number of local or regional unemployed people to carry out the work ?
Nobody knows .
Can a government inviting tenders impose stricter requirements , environmental for example , on tenderers from its own country than on foreign tenderers because it can , as a government , impose those requirements ?
Expensive tenders which can cost thousands are thrown out because one little copy is missing and sometimes small and medium-sized businesses miss the boat whereas at one time they could easily have walked off with the orders .
The bureaucratic procedures are such that they have no chance .
So there are many questions that the European Commission needs to answer .
Up to now , for instance , some countries have complied with the directives and others have ignored them .
It should be self-evident that they are to be treated in the same way , in this area too .
What is the Commissioner going to do about it ?
For the building sector the directives are proving disastrous .
The Aitkins report warned that unrestricted competition for the building sector does not mean lower prices or higher quality .
Quite the reverse .
Margins are under pressure , firms are taking work on for an irresponsibly low price and the consumer gets bad work but unfortunately he often does not find that out until ten years later .
In my opinion , and that is not the opinion of the rapporteur , this report was certainly the place to draw attention to sectorspecific matters .
It is said , Commissioner , that there is going to be no White Paper .
So when are the sectors to be discussed ?
And can the Commissioner say who he is going to consult with on the sectors at a later stage ?
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mr Tappin for his report and I would like to concentrate on the building sector with regard to major works .
Clearly , the main objectives , as stated and repeated , relate to transparency , achieving a situation of non-discrimination not only between countries but also with regard to company size .
Surely , as the previous speaker said , there is also the objective of legal clarity and simplification of procedure .
I think that , above all , there is a need for public authorities to be sure that the works will be completed by fixed deadlines and for agreed amounts .
My question is this , Mr Commissioner : does the Commission not think that different forms of guarantees from the usual ones should be introduced for many countries , such as the performance bonds that have already been introduced in America and England ?
There is a substantial difference that should be pointed out , which I will do for those who are not familiar with these things . Nowadays , guarantees are given above all in relation to the company 's capital capacity , while the actual guarantees we are talking about relate to the company 's technical and organizational capacity to complete a work by the agreed deadlines .
This gives public authorities the advantage not of having a late reimbursement for any loss and the work not finished , but of having the work and the use of it within the specified periods , and it gives companies the advantage of not exhausting the funds the banking system may grant them .
Mr President , this debate based on Mr Tappin 's report , for which I offer my congratulations , hinges on one crucial point in relation to the single market : the opening up to competition of a substantial amount of supplies , works and services produced within the European Union , when they are the subject of contracts issued by the general government or by bodies managing services of general economic interest .
As recalled , we are talking about 11 % of the gross domestic product .
The rules on opening public contracts up to competition currently in force have so far had a limited impact on the market .
This situation gives us cause for concern , and it is precisely for this reason that we firmly propose to offer the relevant initiatives with your support , so that the single market will develop its potential to the full in this sector too - the objectives at stake are , in fact , really significant - so that the competiveness of suppliers is strengthened , the quality of supply is improved , prices fall , the services offered by the public sector are always better and , finally , the taxpayer 's money is spent more cautiously , contributing , among other things , towards reducing public deficits .
It should not be forgotten that a rigorous observance of the rules of the game enables us to fight more effectively against corruption in the field of contracts .
For this purpose , the regulations drawn up on the subject should be incorporated into the national laws and correctly applied .
However , for the Community regulations to have the desired effects , it is not sufficient to concentrate on legal texts : we need to change practices and behaviours which in the past have situated the policy on contracts in a predominantly national context .
We therefore need a real desire to achieve the objective defined effectively in English as " best value for money ' , encouraging suppliers to look beyond the national territory and take part in contracts tendered over the whole Union market .
With the Green Paper , we have tried to draw public attention to the sector on a large and profound scale , and we have thus opened a debate on the matter .
The position of the European Parliament is crucial for our analysis .
Your contribution , together with the 300 other contributions received from the various parties - Community Institutions , Member States , purchasers and suppliers - will enable the Commission to fix the objectives and guidelines for a new policy on public contracts in a communication which the Commission will present at the beginning of next year .
The draft report we have in front of us provides interesting ideas and proposals .
Today 's debate and the debates held within the Commission on economic and monetary problems and the industrial policy have focused on the essential points of the question .
I would now like to point out , Mr President , some of the main points that are emerging .
I fully agree with the point made in the report that it is necessary to take measures for the current regulations to be incorporated into each Member State , thereby enabling all operators in the Union to take part in the contracts under the same conditions .
The Commission has drawn up each relevant measure for the Member States who have still not incorporated these regulations to do so as soon as possible .
I would like to recall that , within the scope of the action plan for the single market , to which the European Parliament has given its valued support , we fixed a deadline , 1 October , which was observed by most of the Member States , for them to present the schedule for the incorporation of the directives not yet incorporated , and , in this framework , those on contracts unfortunately constitute a significant part .
We should also ensure that the current regulations meet market requirements .
Owing to several problems , such as the possibility of using electronic procedures , specific amendments to the directives will be required .
Other possible adaptations , where the necessary requirements exist , could affect several special sectors for which a gradual liberalization process is taking place at European level .
The question of a partnership between public and private should also be raised , in the expressions specific to each Member State .
On other matters , such as recourse to negotiation procedures , the debate is still going on .
In other sectors , it may be sufficient to clarify the current regulations in interpreting documents or vademecum .
There is one requirement , which we would like to point out and which seems to me has been pointed out by several parties : a requirement for stability in the framework of regulations .
I would like to add that this is an extremely important message for those markets which in recent years have tried to adapt to the rules on contracts .
Although it is true that the current regulations will have to be adapted on certain points and clarified , ensuring a correct and uniform application in all Member States , it is also true that a series of accompanying measures will have to be taken , enabling the maximum benefits to be obtained from the regulations .
One important accompanying sector relates to training and information , and also the preparation of different markets for the use of electronic trading .
The report emphasizes the important role that may be played by small and medium-sized businesses in the liberalization of the contracts sector .
I fully share this point of view and I am convinced that greater accessibility of information on tenders and regulations , even by electronic means , would be a significant step forward towards the actual integration of small and medium-sized businesses into the sector .
I will be very brief on specific questions that have already been raised , Mr President .
With regard to telecommunications , the same directive on special sectors establishes the conditions for the exclusion of telecommunications from its sphere of application .
The Court of Justice has laid down these conditions , however , affirming that the possible exclusion of telecommunications from the directive on special sectors may actually take place when that sector operates under competitive market conditions .
The Commission will certainly examine the actual market situation in the sense specified by the Court of Justice .
With regard to the important question of environmental policy and contracts , the aim of a genuine policy on contracts is to choose the best product under the most favourable conditions offered on the market .
Contracts do not constitute the appropriate context for pursuing different policies .
However , this does not mean that aspects of environmental policy cannot and should not be taken into consideration .
There are specific possibilities for protecting the environment in the current regulations , such as a definition of the technical or qualitative characteristics of a product , but I could give other examples as well .
With regard to standardization , this is taking place field by field ; with regard to the possible introduction of new forms of guarantee , such as the performance bond , I think this is a good idea and we would have to ensure that it is not detrimental to the conditions of the small and medium-sized businesses ; however , with a study of experiences , including America , I think that progress could be made in this field .
Finally , I would like to point out that , by engaging in the enforcement and application of Community law , which we have made increasingly clearer , attention focuses on the contracts sector ; some of those who recalled the number of proceedings for infringements we have brought and , with regard to the future single market , that relating to the countries of central and eastern Europe , I can assure you that , in the preparations we are making with these countries , we are giving top priority to the problem of contracts .
I will conclude by thanking Mr Tappin once again and the rapporteurs of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , Mr Thors , and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Mr Hughes , for their contributions .
The contributions made will no doubt be absolutely crucial to the follow-up shortly to be given by the Commission with its communication .
The very precise response Commissioner Monti has made to many of the comments from honourable Members required a commensurate amount of time .
And this is much longer than the average length of time we usually programme for Commission speeches .
In this particular case I will not object because I think it facilitated the fullest debate . Perhaps , however , we should bear this in mind so that we can plan our work better .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Financial intermediation services ( FISIM )
The next item is the report ( Á4-0282 / 97 ) by Mr Katiforis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the allocation of the financial intermediation services indirectly measured ( FISIM ) within the European system of national and regional accounts ( COM ( 97 ) 0050 - C4-0138 / 97-97 / 0037 ( CNS ) .
Mr President , the regulation proposal that we are called upon to consider today has its roots in the need for the harmonization of the operations of the statistical services of the Member States , the key word here being harmonization .
This need stems from the fact that there is no unified statistical service for the European Union , though one may hope that there will be in the future .
The Statistical Office of the European Communities bases its operation on the information gathering mechanisms of the statistical services of the Member States .
However , in order to achieve the necessary uniformity in the methods of information gathering and presentation , the office resorts to the issuing of regulations by the legislative bodies of the European Union even concerning matters which a unified , organized statistical service would resolve through established internal procedures .
It is evident that the widespread view has been held in the office that in that way differences of opinion and disagreements among experts on account of the different national services can be avoided , and that these disagreements could cause interminable delays in the fulfilling of the office 's obligations to the European Union .
From the practical aspect , however , while this solution may be attractive , it has the disadvantage in that it subjects technical matters to the judgement of political legislative bodies who are not equipped for discussions of that nature .
Furthermore , it could be claimed that legislative intervention in statistical matters , though there may be no harmful intention , as of course there is not in the present case , violates the principle of the scientific independence of statisticians , which is imperative to ensure the impartiality of their work .
Of course there is no such problem in the matter that concerns us here : besides , our intervention is at the request of the office .
But the matter of principle remains and will remain until we have a unified statistical service , which is of course preferable to legislative regulation of technical details .
And , Mr President , I think that this debate gives us the opportunity to put this important subject of the creation of a unified statistical service for the European Union on the agenda .
Now , as regards this particular arrangement , which the regulation under consideration is hoping to achieve , this refers to assessing the value of products of the financial sector .
The financial sector provides intangible services , some of which are paid for by specially invoiced procurement , while for others the cost is included in the interest on loans or deposits .
For those services that are provided by specific procurement and for which an invoice is issued there is no statistical problem .
The value of these services is clear , it is assessed and added to other data concerning sales of financial sector products .
The problem arises , and indeed exists , for those services whose cost is included in the interest that is paid and does not appear separately in the accounts of the transactions of the companies in this sector .
In the past the statistical service used the following method : it considered that those payments which were concealed within different interest rates were payments for intermediate products and , as is well known to experts on national income statistics , intermediate products are not added to the final products .
In consequence , a part of the services offered by the financial sector was not assessed and was not added to the total national product .
A not insignificant part evaded statistical records .
The method that is now being proposed by the statistical service to address the problem is to debit the difference of the bank rate of interest from the interest paid by the end user and to regard this as representing the cost of services that are not charged to end users by means of specific invoices , just as , for example , when someone borrows money to build a house and pays a somewhat higher rate of interest than the bank rate .
Technically , this is of course an approximate solution .
It is not a scientifically accurate solution , but , as an approximate solution , I consider it to be satisfactory , and I propose that we accept it . Of course there are certain problems concerning the time it will take for the statistical services of the Member States to readjust to this new method , which the Statistical Office of the European Union is putting forward to them , and for that reason I have introduced two changes whose sole purpose is to ease the introduction of the new methods in the Member States .
Mr President , with this qualification I believe the proposal from the Statistical Office is useful and we must accept it .
I must emphasize , however , that it is not our business here to resolve the issues of the Statistical Service , and that the ideal solution is for us to have an independent statistical service for the whole of the European Union , which would be a very good starting point for political cohesion on a relatively simple matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Katiforis for this report .
I would immediately like to state that this is not the place to have a long discussion on the nature and accuracy of statistics .
We know that each country has its own method of calculating certain things and if we want to make comparisons and take decisions on the basis of these comparisons then it is necessary for things to be comparable .
I cannot agree with Mr Katiforis when he raises questions or doubts concerning the way in which the statisticians have made this proposal .
I believe that , if we are going to be absolutely rigorous , no calculation is fair .
We all know that the way in which Member States draw up their statistics is to be treated with caution from the moment you really get into details .
We therefore have to be satisfied with the best statistics available .
For the purpose of our objectives , this is often enough .
The important thing is that there are no distortions from one country to another .
This is why the proposal which has just been made is going in the right direction when it puts the whole world on the same footing by imposing a single method .
Even if this method is not the best , the important thing is that it applies to everyone equally . In this case , I believe we can use different statistics .
This is why , Mr President , our group supports the Commission 's proposal .
We were a little shocked by the rapporteur 's proposal to request a four year period .
This seems a lot to me .
I have spoken to a few people in my country and I was told that such a long time would probably not be necessary .
I do not know the situation in other countries but I would hope the Commission would tell us what it thinks .
It perhaps has information that we do not .
It is highly likely that Mr Katiforis , in making this proposal , was inspired by a particular country that he knows well .
Nor must we ignore the interest in having these documents as soon as possible .
Therefore , I believe that a delay of four years is an absolute maximum .
I would have preferred - but everything will depend on what the Commission says regarding this - to see if , along with Mr Katiforis , we could not agree on three years , or something nearer to this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to speak very briefly to express my group 's support for this proposal . I think it is an interesting example of European economic , financial and monetary progress in different areas .
I think there is a need to move further towards both a European approach to statistics , and improved accuracy .
This is demonstrated by the comments of both the rapporteur , Mr Katiforis , and our colleague Mr Herman : first we need a truly European statistical service , not just a coordination service ; and secondly , it would be useful to pinpoint more accurately what the criteria are in some sectors of the European economy which are becoming more important , such as the service sectors , especially the financial sectors .
As for our rapporteur 's proposal about the timing , our group accepted it in committee , but I think we can reach a consensual agreement on that timing which will really guarantee that the statistical services of all the Member States can offer reliable information for the purposes of this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a Council regulation which is submitted to you today has the objective of modifying the way in which financial intermediation services indirectly measured , known as FISIM , are accounted for in the national accounts .
Mr Katiforis , you have raised the problem of a single statistical service , a wide subject , but one which is not relevant to the debate today .
In itself it would merit a long discussion , in the light also of coherence and the principle of subsidiarity .
So you will understand that today I wish to limit my comments to the problem of FISIM .
These much discussed financial intermediation services indirectly measured are , as you have rightly noted , Mr Katiforis , services provided by financial companies for which there is no explicit invoicing .
Remuneration of the financial company is collected indirectly , by offering to or requesting from the client an interest rate different to that which the company is itself refinancing .
Up to now , these services have been systematically accounted for within the national accounts as an intermediary sale when , as those of you who have spoken have noted , accounting logic would prefer that when services are provided to final consumers , they are divided between the final consumption items .
This is the reason why the Commission is proposing this current Regulation in order to complete the 1995 ESA , otherwise known as the European System of National and Regional Accounting which is currently in force .
The 1995 ESA sets out the accounting rules to be applied in order to have a coherent quantitative description , viable and comparable , of the economies of the Member States .
This 1995 ESA was adopted by the Council on 25 June 1996 , it is Regulation 2223 / 96 , and it furthermore makes provision , in article 2 , paragraph 3 , for a decision from the Council before the end of 1997 on the introduction of a system of allocation of FISIM .
So the proposal for a FISIM regulation being considered today is , when all is said and done , a technical modification of the ESA 1995 document in response to pure accounting logic .
This new regulation will enable the GDP-GNP of each Member State to be measured better and it will also significantly improve consistency between our accounting system and that of the United Nations .
This regulation will have two important consequences .
Firstly , it will permit better measurement of the GDP-GNP of each Member State in the long run .
In any case , this proposal for a regulation will have no impact on the choice of Member States participating in economic and monetary union .
I felt perhaps it was necessary to give some reassurance on this point .
Secondly , as Mr Herman has quite rightly noted , it will substantially improve the comparability of European economies , which is essential in order to satisfy , in the future , the demands imposed by the operation of the economic and monetary union .
This legislative measure , since in this case it concerns a Council regulation , enables the fixing of a reference framework for accounting rules in the area of the breakdown of FISIM .
But the implementation of the breakdown of FISIM remains the responsibility of the Member States , who will need to adapt their statistical systems .
Thus , your House proposes two amendments concerning the trial period of four years for testing this method of calculation .
I can say that the Commission is able to accept this .
In fact , the Commission recognizes that it is useful to establish an obligatory trial period for all Member States , so that the efficiency of the proposed method can be evaluated before finally taking into account this new method within Community legislation .
Mr Herman , you said that four years is a little too long .
It is possible that this period will be accepted and is acceptable given that a certain number of countries are reticent towards the idea of introducing a method in the immediate term and , above all , because some countries , Germany , Denmark and Finland , do not currently have the necessary data .
Therefore I think this timescale is reasonable and , Mr Katiforis , we can accept your amendments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Fight against fraud
The next item is the report ( Á4-0287 / 97 ) by Mr Herbert Bösch , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Commission 's 1996 Annual Report ( COM ( 97 ) 0200- C4-0230 / 97 ) and its Work Programme for 1997 / 98 on the protection of financial interests and the fight against fraud ( COM ( 97 ) 0199- C4-0231 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you will no doubt be aware that the committee responsible is not fully represented , but really this is due to the hardworking approach of the European Parliament in holding committees and part-sessions simultaneously , and I hope that reporters of this House will occasionally take note of how hardworking we Members of the European Parliament are .
The report which I am now presenting to this House deals with the protection of financial interests and the fight against fraud , and in many respects it is a non-report .
My comments are centred on a subject which the Commission has steadfastly refused to mention , namely the corruption , mismanagement and fraud which permeates the ranks of the European institutions .
I regard it an impertinence , at a time when MEPs are being questioned daily by constituents on the subject of apparent and alleged fraud in the Brussels bureaucracy , that the report being presented to this House should contain so many omissions .
It is quite obvious to me that as directly elected Members of the European Parliament , and therefore as representatives of Europe 's taxpayers , we simply cannot accept this sort of deficiency on the part of the Commission .
Ever since the report and conclusions of the Committee on Inquiry into the Community Transit System , it has been apparent that one of the main reasons for the high level of corruption affecting the European budgetary process is the fact that we have on one hand a European body responsible for the internal market , and on the other some 15 more or less reliable guardians of this same internal market , who in some cases are obliged to use operating methods which are practically mediaeval .
In my opinion , and indeed the Committee on Inquiry reached the same conclusion in its final report , the underlying cause of the fraud problem can ultimately only be removed by integrating all these functions at EU level .
We know that there will be many obstacles ahead , but it is absolutely essential for us to ensure that the European Commission , as it prepares for the extended role which we would be only too pleased to give it , is placed above all suspicion in matters requiring absolute integrity when dealing with taxpayers ' money .
For the present I remain unconvinced of this .
How am I supposed to explain to my electors , or to anyone else 's in Europe , that as a directly elected Member of this House , and furthermore as member of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I have been unable , after repeated questioning in closed session , to obtain - either from the European Commission or from UCLAF , the anti-fraud unit - the name of the official responsible signing a certain document or awarding a certain contract .
It is surely indefensible that we , as the body responsible in theory for monitoring the Brussels bureaucracy , are able to , and indeed have to , read about the general abuse of taxes in newspaper articles .
This is a system defect which weakens the credibility of the entire European Commission and the search for greater integration .
It is therefore obvious that we can only fulfil our role as representatives of the people when we finally gain control of the means necessary to achieve this .
The call for a European investigation service , possibly based on the current UCLAF set-up , is therefore of key significance .
To this effect it will be necessary : a ) to grant UCLAF personnel special status within the Community Member State in order to protect them from undue pressure , b ) to give UCLAF greater budgetary independence , and c ) ultimately to make UCLAF politically responsible to this House .
Before moving to set up such an investigation service we must be careful to avoid a repeat of the Europol situation , which last Sunday prompted the Federal Prosecutor to observe , as reported in a newspaper , that this kind of European unification policy on crime control constitutes a threat to the State Constitution .
It is my hope and belief that this report , and the conclusions it contains , will constitute an important and fundamental step towards greater transparency in Europe .
I therefore call upon you to give it your support .
Mr Bösch , I have allowed you to go rather beyond your time because when a rapporteur has put in serious work on a subject , I think he should have the opportunity to express his ideas .
Mr President , I think that this subject of combatting fraud and the inspections we are making this year as well with Mr Bösch 's excellent report provide a litmus paper for measuring the EU 's capacity to develop in a dual sense : one of greater efficiency and one of maintaining fundamental democratic characteristics .
This seems to be the point to me ; the reflections we have made over all these years , and in particular in recent years and months , attempt to identify one of the means of ensuring this efficiency in a framework of essentially Parliamentary control and jurisdictional control in more advanced means of cooperation , certainly among the administrative and investigative bodies , but also among the legal bodies .
Saying this , I think that , even on the basis of this work plan this year , we should recall the efforts made by the study called corpus juris , which identifies the need to achieve a unification of the rules on substantial criminal law and procedural law in combatting fraud to enable the means we have as a democracy , that is , Parliament and the Court of Justice , to participate in their supervisory function in an action that can only become more effective by unification .
And , I repeat , this is why we recall perfectly that the stake is not just one of meeting the citizens ' need for security and the requirements of our finances , but also one of building an efficient democratic structure to combat crime more generally .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Herbert Bösch has addressed the matter both in his report and in his comments . There is basic dissatisfaction within the Committee on Budgetary Control , not only with regard to the control of fraud in general and in the Member States , but also in terms of our dealings with the Commission and our debate on how this problem can be tackled through dialogue with Parliament .
There are many examples of this , and I cannot address them all today .
Time is too short and these matters can be dealt with on another occasion .
Let me just cite one example : As a result of their discontent , the Committee on Budgetary Control decided some weeks ago to send a letter to Commission President Santer asking for talks on the matter .
No response has yet been received , a fact which does little to reinforce our trust in collaboration with the Commission .
This is in keeping with the views of Mr Bösch , namely that while it says a lot of things , the Commission is not too happy to talk about measures which it is proposing to implement when this might also implicate it in fraud and corruption .
This subject is admittedly not part of our remit , but I mention it just the same .
In its communication on corruption control , the Commission covered a wide range of issues , but failed to mention corruption within its own organisation .
That is a serious omission , and we recognise it as such .
It is not just an accidental oversight , it is an increasingly obvious one .
Why is the Commission dragging its heels in an area in which it holds all the cards and where it can set the pace , call the tune ?
The question is neither theoretical nor rhetorical .
More and more of us are wondering just why the Commission is failing to sort out its own affairs .
This is an opportunity to set an example not only to Member States but also to the often criticized executive controls and the rightly criticized system of audit implementation in the Member States .
How much more credible it would be if the two bodies we represent could set a good example here .
Let me cite another instance .
In your work programme you repeatedly state that you will sending us a communication on fraud in the tariff preference systems .
Madam Commissioner , this is all very convincing I am sure , but this particular topic has now featured three or four times in the work programme .
It keeps cropping up .
We know that there is a serious problem in this area , and this is something which is within the competence of the Commission .
The latter has promised to submit a communication to the Council and to Parliament , as this is such a pressing matter .
But we know the matter is pressing - you told us it was years ago !
Mr Bösch is preparing a hearing on the subject and your communication would have been very useful as a reference document .
I now believe that this hearing too has been postponed for a year .
We are still waiting for you !
We initially did it with patience and civility .
While we retain our civility , our patience is now at an end !
Mr President , let me begin by complimenting Mr Bösch on his report .
I think that if there is one area in which we can never do enough it is in combatting fraud and I see the European Parliament as having a special role here .
The fact is that no single national parliament can monitor the European Commission or any other European body under whose supervision or responsibility fraud can occur .
In this whole situation I see UCLAF 's role as essential .
What is our view of UCLAF 's role ?
My group does not believe that we should set up a separate new body in the European Union .
It is not necessary ; what is necessary is that UCLAF should be assigned a highly independent role in the Commission itself .
An independent position which perhaps is only responsible to the President of the Commission and which can act completely independently of any Directorate-General even in the Commission itself .
From this point of view democratic control is essential and I therefore think that from time to time a special debate should be held on UCLAF 's activities in general .
If we talk about combatting fraud and we see what is wrong in this respect , then it is essential that there should be penalties .
I think that the remarks by the Commission , the committee of enquiry , on this point are well worth considering and I also think that the Commission will abide by them , at least that is my impression .
It is also important that the Commission , and again that is from the committee of enquiry , makes much more use of the right relating to the 10 % to be paid to the Member States to exercise control , particularly at the external borders .
If that does not happen , the 10 % can easily be called into question .
That is something that to which in my view the Commission should give a little more consideration .
Mr President , a lot has already been said .
I therefore intend to concentrate only on what relates to internal corruption .
There have been a number of cases which have shown that both corruption and fraud obviously exist in , amongst other places , the European Commission , which is serious .
In spite of that , these issues are not taken up in the Commission 's work programme , which must be seen as a very big mistake .
Or is it the case that people want to keep the stories hidden ?
In view of this , I had intended to present a number of amendments , but , unfortunately , I missed the deadline for that and will therefore propose a small , simple oral amendment .
I would like to add some words to paragraph 11 , namely through increased openness and insight .
Paragraph 11 would then read : ' Believes that internal fraud and corruption in EU institutions can only adequately addressed through increased openness and insight and by an independent European judicial authority ... '
I believe , you see , that openness and insight would be able to counteract the risk of irregularities .
It cannot eliminate the risk , but it is a step in the right direction .
I would like to know Commissioner Gradin 's opinion of such an amendment .
Finally , I would like to thank Mrs Wemheuer for her Amendment No 1 which we in the Green Group are going to support .
I would , of course , also like to thank Mr Bösch for the report .
Mr President , today 's schedule has been rather difficult , with the Committee on Budgetary Control and the BSE monitoring committee both meeting at the same time .
I have just left the talks with President Santer , now that the opportunity has presented itself , and in this respect things have proved quite convenient .
Mr Bösch , who is to be congratulated for producing such an excellent report , is quite right in urging greater cooperation between the Commission and the European Parliament in a number of key areas , and particularly in one which is of great interest to our peoples - namely , what is really happening with Europe 's money and is it being used to best effect .
We fully agree with many of Mr Bösch 's comments , which have cast a critical gaze over the activities of the Commission and , in some respects , over those of UCLAF too .
Let me come back to the BSE monitoring committee . What is apparent here is that it was in no small measure due to UCLAF , which can be and indeed has been completely efficient in this matter , that we were able to expose beef exports from the UK into other Community countries via the so-called Irish connection .
I therefore believe it to be in all our interests to continue down the road of mutuality , while also seeking to strengthen our existing instruments .
In addition to what has already been said , I consider it indispensable in the long run that in the area of criminal law we get to grips with the facts relating to fraud with Community funds .
It is for the very reason that the Community is held in this light that we do not want to see it constantly meddling in areas which were originally the domain of Member States .
However , where this is necessary , and when it is important for reasons of financial correctness , then we should not stand in its way .
Mr President , I agree with what has been said about the problems we are experiencing at the moment with the organization of committees and plenary sessions . We have just this minute arrived from a meeting of the Committee on Budgetary Control , which is supposed to be dealing with this matter .
Now that we have interpreters - good interpreters - I should like to take this opportunity to see whether Mr Bösch and I can finally agree about the content of the two amendments I am tabling .
On one hand , Mr Bösch , my first amendment would make the Committee on Budgetary Control responsible for presenting a report on the independence , role and status of UCLAF , and also a report on the legal procedures likely to protect Community finances .
There does not appear to be any problem with this . There was a problem with the positioning of the amendment , but I think it should come between paragraphs 12 and 13 .
As for the second amendment , I add , in the third line of that thirteenth paragraph , that the document we are calling for from the European Commission should be in agreement with the guidelines formulated by the European Parliament . In other words , it should agree with the report which we will have already produced in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Additionally , in the last line of paragraph 13 , I add the words " within the Community institutions ' .
That is : ' reviewing the chain of accountability in cases of alleged internal corruption and fraud within the Community institutions ... '
In other words , we are not just talking here about cases of fraud which may have occurred in the Member States or in the Commission .
I am including all types of fraud which could occur in the European institutions .
This is because we have often found that a member of one of the institutions has been involved in a case of fraud , and has hindered us from finding out about it .
I think that fact should be reflected here .
As I still have 15 seconds left , Mr President , I should like to stress the importance of this piece of work by the Committee on Budgetary Control . With the help of Parliament 's subsequent vote , we will have made great progress .
The only problem we have - I am just finishing - is that Europe as a juridical area continues to be divided , and this prevents us from completing the process .
While the Member States fail to realize that criminal organizations are international and that we therefore need to construct a single legal area , we will not make any real progress .
Mr President , the taxpayers ' money must be managed efficiently and in a way which protects it from cheating and fraud .
That has always been this Commission 's firm opinion .
As Parliament proposed , we have decided to present the annual report and the new work programme in one context this time .
I believe it is good to be able to evaluate the measures already implemented at the same time as we make plans for future work .
Let me also state , Mr President , that for my part I have endeavoured to have good relations with the committee .
I have always attended inquiries and meetings of the committee .
I have provided Members of this House with a considerable amount of information material .
The Bösch report serves a good purpose .
The report points to the progress in recent years in the Commission 's work to uncover and investigate cheating and fraud .
At the same time it makes the criticism that the resources which we now have for this work are far too limited .
The report then goes into various proposals for improvements .
It is a good way of working .
For my part I would be pleased to listen carefully to new , constructive proposals .
Let me first say a few words about the analysis itself .
It is certainly true that the increase in the number of cases of cheating and fraud uncovered was lower in 1996 than in previous years .
However , it must be admitted that the number is still at an unacceptably high level .
That is true both of the expenditure side and the income side .
On the expenditure side the increased cheating with money from structural funds can be explained by the improved reporting system .
As far as agriculture is concerned , we hope that cheating will decline in line with the shifting of agricultural aid from price support to direct income support for farmers .
The year 's report confirms that organised crime is behind a large proportion of the fraud with EU money .
That clearly shows that we must have the ability to fight cheating and fraud in a more systematic and co-ordinated way , both in the Member States and inside the Commission .
This brings me to the question of cooperation with the Member States .
The Commission cannot fight cheating and fraud effectively on its own .
We will never be able to do that .
It is the Member States who are entirely responsible for the income side of the EU budget .
They are also responsible for 80 % of the spending .
I am therefore very concerned that not one single Member State has yet ratified the Convention on the protection of EU financial interests .
The same applies to the two supplementary protocols on judicial cooperation and corruption .
I welcome the support which Parliament can give us to get these important instruments in place .
This year the Commission has taken several initiatives in the fight against fraud .
One of these concerns tightening up the system of trading preferences .
We have also proposed a special information system to be able to give earlier warning signals when certain players in the market demand increased attention .
In addition , UCLAF has substantially built up its intelligence contacts with corresponding institutions in the Member States .
Within the framework of the SEM2000 programme , we have improved cooperation in the question of taking care of and controlling Community finances .
As far as UCLAF is concerned , I can add that the unit has built up a more efficient and more flexible contact network with the specialised investigative bodies in the Member States .
But in order for its to be effective , the practical cooperation must be complemented by a legal framework .
This is needed to make it possible to present evidence before a court and to be able to prosecute and examine suspected cheats and frauds .
A number of these ideas are found in the corpus juris study which Parliament has had done .
I quite agree that these questions need to be considered further , both from a technical and a constitutional point of view , and not least against the background of the Amsterdam Treaty .
But , unfortunately , this treaty does not satisfy the needs .
I would also like to take the opportunity to say something about UCLAF 's role and functions .
First something about UCLAF having an independent position : it is absolutely necessary for the Commission to have the type of investigative capacity which UCLAF represents in order to be able to investigate fraud and other financial irregularities .
We would be faced with difficult legal and constitutional problems if we were dependent on external institutions to investigate suspected fraud within the Commission .
I entirely share the view that UCLAF must be able to work independently .
The same applies to its work in following up investigations .
To further strengthen UCLAF 's independence the Commission is considering converting it into a task force .
I will inform Parliament as soon as the Commission has reached a decision on this matter .
Parliament has also discussed whether UCLAF should also be given formal responsibility for fraud investigations which concern other EU institutions .
That has already happened and UCLAF has been requested to help in some individual investigations .
I connection with that , I would also like at the same time to stress each institution 's independence and its independent responsibility for its own finances .
That also entails the responsibility to fight fraud and corruption within its activities .
As far as suspected cases of irregularities within the Commission are concerned , we are obliged to follow the staff regulations and the protocol on special immunities .
We also have to respect the basic right of each employee to defend him or herself against such suspicions , but we have absolutely no intention of hiding anything which might have happened within the Commission .
It goes without saying that every decision of the Commission in a disciplinary case must be able to stand up to a judicial review at the Court in Luxembourg .
Of course , the Commission attaches great importance to these issues and to the need to follow up every single case properly and carefully .
The new provisions for on the spot controls give UCLAF the ability to start investigations on its own initiative .
This is a clear step forward , but we are still faced with several difficulties in the area of judicial cooperation , such as in questions of the hearing of evidence and of jurisdiction .
I hope that the Council will address these problems .
I would also like so say a few words about how the Commission 's work on fighting fraud is organised .
It is important to listen to the criticism which is made .
Therefore in the Commission we have followed Parliament 's proposal to set up a separate unit to deal with suspected fraud in the Phare , Tacis and Meda programmes as well as in other aid projects .
This is particularly important with the prospect of the enlargement of the Union .
Preparations for the accession of new Member States from central and eastern Europe means that a substantially increased amount of support has to be given .
More people have already been taken on for this purpose , but we must also be quite clear about the major problems we are facing in the recipient countries in this area .
The Commission has reacted positively to the ideas about judicial cooperation , legal interface .
The same goes for the proposal for a special investigative unit for fraud in customs cases .
Against the background of the Committee 's Report on transit , the Commission took up these recommendations in the new work programme .
I share the view that UCLAF should also be given a role in these cases .
It is important that prosecutors and judges are given all the support necessary for an efficient judicial cooperation in Europe .
Because we do not have a common European customs union , there is a very great need for an effective exchange of information between the national customs bodies .
That is something on which my colleague , Commissioner Monti , and I both agree .
Otherwise we will come off badly in the fight against cheating and fraud in Europe .
However , this requires additional resources .
That can be done either through a redistribution of existing resources or through the institutions responsible for budget allowing funds for new services .
President Santer has been very clear on this point .
During a question time in Parliament on 15 April this year , he explained that UCLAF 's work cannot be expanded simply through a redistribution of resources ; a decision on new resources is needed .
The Commission welcomes the progress which was made in Amsterdam concerning the legal basis for the fight against fraud and cheating .
The new and improved article 209a ( article 280 in the new treaty ) makes it possible to have an efficient and equal fight against fraud in all the Member States .
A decision on this will be taken by qualified majority voting in the Council , and Parliament will be fully involved .
I think that is a clear improvement .
As soon as the new treaty has been ratified , the Commission can , of course , begin to use its right of initiative in this area too .
I 'm sorry that the parallel sitting of the Committee on Budgetary Control unfortunately did not permit the presence of all the Members who might have been in the room for such a serious debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time to the Commission ( B4-0524 / 97 ) .
There is no such proposal as the one referred to by the honourable Member of Parliament in the question concerned .
What is currently under consideration - and I underline , consideration - is the abolition of the so-called non-discrimination rule , which is embodied in some payment systems .
This rule prohibits merchants from imposing on customers a surcharge for using the means of payment offered by their particular payment system .
That means a surcharge on top of the sales price for the product or service supplied .
The issue under consideration concerns the compatibility of the non-discrimination rule with the EU competition rules .
If the Commission takes a position on the abolition of the non-discrimination rules as regards a particular national payment system , it would , of course , apply in all Member States where the system was in place .
As far as Sweden is concerned , Sweden has already abolished the non-discrimination rule in 1995 .
The same is true for some other Member States .
I shall just ask a very short follow-up question .
I am pleased that this is only ' under consideration ' since it is a question of very great importance for consumers in Europe .
I believe that they would take great offence if this proposal were carried out , at least as it has been reported in the Swedish press .
My follow-up question is : how far have these considerations progressed ?
Can we expect a proposal from the Commission some time during next year , or is it further into the future ?
That was my simple question .
Again , there is not going to be a proposal in the classical sense of the term .
There might be , at the end of the procedure , a position taken by the Commission on the basis of competition rules eventually to abolish the non-discrimination rule .
It is under consideration for the time being .
We will discuss this with the national competition authorities concerned , drawing on the experience in some Member States .
As I said earlier , the non-discrimination rule has already been abolished in Sweden and earlier in Great Britain , and apparently the consumer organizations are very satisfied with that .
It has also been abolished in the Netherlands and two other Member States .
The competition authorities of the Member States concerned - Finland and Ireland - are also actively considering abolishing the non-discrimination rule .
The situation is a little more confused in some other Member States , and the remainder still maintain that rule .
It is a rather complicated picture if you look at the situation in different Member States .
We feel that this needs to be discussed and must lead to a conclusion by the Commission at the end of this process .
Then the Commission will eventually take a decision , not on the basis of a proposal , but just as the competition authorities and as we ourselves usually do .
As the author is not present , Question No 31 falls .
Question No 32 by Julio Añoveros Trias de Bes ( H-0709 / 97 )
Subject : Trade in beverages between Member States
Does Community law permit undertakings to purchase soft drinks in one Member State and sell them in another with their original labelling ?
What is the position of the official distributor of the brand concerned in the Member State in which the imported beverages are sold ?
Does the fact that the labelling is in a different language constitute a potential health risk to consumer health in the Member State in which the beverages are sold , despite their recognized international market presence ?
The labelling of food commodities and drinks is covered at Community level by Directive 79 / 112 .
Article 14 of this directive states that information to be shown on the label should be in a language that will easily be understood by the consumer .
It is a matter of ensuring good information for consumers about all the characteristics of the commodity they are buying and thus avoiding any health risk .
This position was interpreted in a Commission communication in 1993 .
This communication stated that the official language of a Member State is , in principle , the language which guarantees a good understanding of the label by the consumer in the country of sale .
Monitoring of the proper implementation of these provisions is the responsibility of Member States .
The monitoring authorities of Member States check that the labelling of foodstuffs on sale in their country is easily understandable to the consumer on a case-by-case basis .
It should also be noted that community regulations allow the use of several languages on the same label .
In conclusion , drinks bought in one Member State in order to be resold in another Member State cannot keep their original labelling unless the information given on it is understandable to the consumer of the Member State in which it is being sold .
Mr President , I am happy with the Commissioner 's reply , and have no further questions .
In Switzerland a decision has been taken to continue the medically supervised distribution of heroin to a limited number of heavy abusers .
The project is aimed at limiting the damaging effects which drug abuse has in Swiss society .
It is aimed in particular at chronic addicts who are in poor physical and mental condition and who have not succeeded with other treatment programmes .
The Swiss Government has ruled that abusers who participate in the programme may only have access to the drugs under strict supervision .
An abuser may not under any circumstances leave the premises with the drugs .
The project is also part of a scientific research programme .
This project was developed for the particular situation in Switzerland .
We in the European Commission cannot judge whether the results are relevant for any other country .
It is my hope that projects like this do not lead to more drugs being smuggled into the illegal European market .
But the condition is , of course , that inspection and supervision are done properly .
The Commission and the Member States are deeply involved in the work against the abuse and smuggling of drugs .
This is a question of taking social responsibility for the citizens of the EU , to use all suitable means to fight drug smuggling .
To have an effective tool against drug smuggling we need a Europol which is fully functional .
I would therefore like to urge all friends in this Parliament to work for the ratification of the Convention on Europol as soon as possible , and to remind the ministers in our respective countries that they have promised to ratify Europol during 1997 .
According to the Schengen Agreement , only Member States of the EU can become members .
The exceptions for Norway and Iceland are the result of a special arrangement which takes into account the freedom of movement of people within the Nordic countries .
I would first like to thank Commissioner Gradin for her answer and to say that , as regards the ratification of Europol , it is no problem for me to work to get all countries to do so , all those which I can influence .
I would also like to say that the answer which the Commissioner has given is a different answer to what has appeared in the press concerning the result of the referendum in Switzerland and what it meant .
I am convinced that her answer is based on accurate facts .
In that case the risk that narcotics could be brought into the European Union by this route does not appear particularly serious .
But it would be important and valuable for the Commission to pay attention to where such risks could arise , so that measures could be taken at an early stage if there is any reason to believe that narcotics might more easily enter the European Union as a result of the type of issues which were raised in the referendum .
I actually had one second of my speaking time left when the President brought his gavel down .
I would be grateful if the President did not use the gavel before my time was up .
The reason why I am keen that we ratify Europol is that when that day comes there will be opportunities for cross-border police cooperation .
I also see a possibility then of having police cooperation with the Swiss authorities too with regard to narcotics trading .
I believe that could be valuable .
Mr President , Mrs Gradin , first let me thank you wholeheartedly for the support you have given to Europol .
My concern is the following : Switzerland is not only a threat from the point of view of drugs , but in another area too .
There exists , particularly in Germany , a smear campaign against the euro and many of the less-well-off , such as pensioners , are being sent letters from Switzerland advising them to invest their money in Switzerland to avert the threat of the euro .
At the same time they are being offered investment funds promising a 30 % rate of return - and that is simply an economic impossibility .
Switzerland is therefore building an investment pyramid in the same way as a number of former-Communist countries did some years ago .
Mrs Gradin , I ask that something is done urgently to warn people of this situation .
Question No 34 by Anita Pollack ( H-0736 / 97 )
Subject : Forest fires in Indonesia
Is the Commission undertaking any evaluation of the medium and long-term global effects of the environmental disaster which is occurring in south east Asia as a result of the forest fires and drought , and what , if any , action is being proposed ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission and the delegations from the Member States in Djakarta have set up a joint committee of European Union experts .
This committee is made up of specialists on forest fires from various programmes of the Commission and of the Member States in Indonesia .
The work of this team of experts is to give information and advice to the local government for as long as is necessary , to monitor and assess the situation on a daily basis , to assess contingency needs such as , for example , concerning equipment for putting out fires , and to improve the effectiveness of measures taken by the local government .
During this phase , the Commission is assessing the medium- and long-term impact of the catastrophic forest fires , both at a regional and a global level , which is being made worse by the El Niño phenomenon .
This forms part of the duties of this team of European Union experts .
The team responsible for the assessment of disasters and the coordination of the United Nations , which also recently arrived in Djakarta , will no doubt do the same .
The Commission is ready to help the government and local populations in whatever way help is requested , within the scope of its competence , of course .
Can I ask the Commission , in response to that heartening reply , if the committee will be taking on board the effects on the climate in Europe as well as locally .
This is perhaps one of the best examples we have of something exacerbating the climate change problem and being caused by the results of the climate change problem in the first place .
This makes it a unique possibility to try and find out exactly what is happening .
Is the Commission and its committee of experts also aware of the problems which are likely to beset our climate here in Europe in the following couple of years as a result of what is similar to a volcano being let off ?
Mr President , I would like to assure Mrs Pollack that , as I mentioned in my reply , the European Commission will direct its efforts and investigations to ascertaining the effects of the phenomenon and of the fires in that region of Indonesia on all nations , at a global level and , of course , in the European Union .
Naturally we obviously share the worries of Mrs Pollack that indeed there are likely to be such effects .
In any event , however , I would like once again to assure you that the experts will direct their efforts to this end in order to ascertain what exactly the future repercussions in Europe will be .
Question No 35 by Caroline Jackson ( H-0717 / 97 )
Subject : Cancellation of CMAF Funding
The European Commission announced to applicants in August this year that it had cancelled the Call for Proposals for Action in Favour of Cooperatives , Mutual Societies , Associations and Foundations ( CMAFs , 96 / C 246 / 15 ) .
This decision was notified to the European Foundation for Osteoporosis by letter of 18 August 1997 , although it had submitted an application to the Commission ( DG XXIII ) in December 1996 and had not been told of any prospective cancellation when it contacted the Commission in March and June 1997 .
Can the Commission state why the CMAF action has been cancelled , and what has happened to the money ?
That is a pretty confusing reply .
I wonder whether I could just ask the Commissioner to confirm that at the end of 1996 the programme we are talking about had not been adopted by the Council of Ministers but that it was nevertheless decided in the Commission to finance twelve projects under the programme which had not been adopted .
His reply was confusing on that point .
If the Council had not adopted the decision at the end of 1996 , why was his office still writing to the European Foundation for Osteoporosis and advising them via DG XXIII in March 1997 that they would be hearing from the Commission in June 1997 ?
If the programme had been cancelled why were you still encouraging applications ?
Why do you say you should not financially compensate an organization which was encouraged to apply for a programme which had been cancelled ?
And what hope can you hold out to an organization such as this in the future when the board of the organization itself is likely to say ; ' why bother to apply for something which is so badly handled ? '
Mr President , I would like to respond to the honourable Member of Parliament that , in fact , the European Commission hoped that , before the end of 1996 , the Council of Ministers would investigate the long term programme on behalf of the social economy , and immediately afterwards , during the following months , we continued to hope that it would be possible , within the first few months of 1997 , to have the go-ahead , albeit somewhat belated , of the Council so that we could use the funds made available for the social economy , on a legal basis which was acceptable to the Council .
That , however , did not prove possible .
For that reason my office , addressing itself to the organization that you refer to , that is the Foundation for Osteoporosis , mentioned to you that within the coming months we would be informing you of exactly what the outcome would be .
The decision of the Commission to withdraw the long-term programme for the social economy was taken in July 1997 and the official announcement was made at the beginning of August 1997 and was officially publicized in all the official documents of the Community .
During the same period , however , we had to take a policy decision on the continuation of certain projects concerning the social economy .
For that reason , therefore , after the cancellation of the invitation of interest , the decision was taken to finance twelve projects .
And to avoid complaints from all who had declared their interest , twelve were chosen out of the 173 for which they had been invited to submit applications .
However , regarding the particular Foundation for Osteoporosis , the reason for the rejection of the request for finances for this programme was that the Foundation for Osteoporosis itself made a proposal , and filed an application with the European Commission with actions that had no connection with the social economy , but which had a connection with other sectors , with programmes concerning public health . They had absolutely no connection with the social economy sector .
For those reasons their request was turned down .
In any event , if there are equivalent foundations which are actually active in the social economy sector and which fulfil the criteria referred to in the budget of the European Parliament in the corresponding section for the programme for the social economy , and especially in the comments of section B5-321 , where mention is made of the conditions for the financing of those works , that is to say that they do in fact strengthen the working of the social economy , create jobs , contribute to the greater competitiveness of those foundations when they are active within the framework of the free economy , then , yes , financial backing could be granted .
In this case , however , and specifically concerning the Foundation for Osteoporosis to which you are referring , there was no such possibility since - and I repeat- the proposals had to do with public health and not social economy .
Rather than trying to shift the blame on to the Council , as we all love to do , would the Commission not agree that this is actually a piece of gross mismanagement ?
First of all , to publish a tender for something which has not received the approval of the Council strikes me as being extraordinary to say the least ; and secondly , to encourage an organization which is clearly involved in the public health sector to apply for a tender which is about the social economy also seems to me to be perhaps well-meaning but nonetheless gross mismanagement .
Would the Commission accept that this is really not the way to attempt to support programmes which perhaps we might all wish to support , as it simply ends in grief ?
Mr President , I would first of all like to make it clear that foundations which are active and submit proposals in the public health sector have the possibility of submitting the same proposals to corresponding programmes of the European Commission and the European Union which are directed at public health .
The social economy concerns associations , mutual aid foundations , foundations , unions , and associations which are active within the framework of the free market and the economy .
The programme of the social economy , as the European Parliament itself has repeatedly maintained , and as the European Parliament itself has committed the European Commission as regards the allocation of the funds of the budget of section B5-321 , refers very specifically to those actions at which those funds could be directed .
The European Commission could not escape from this framework , however much it wanted to .
In this particular case it was unable to escape from that framework .
Now , as regards the long-term programme , this in fact was not approved by the Council , in spite of repeated and unstinting efforts that we made throughout the duration of the last presidencies and especially throughout the duration of the Dutch Presidency .
We had hopes , even up to the spring of 1997 , that this programme could be approved .
In spite of everything it was not approved .
But the deadline for this programme had already passed .
May I remind you that the programme ran until the end of 1996 .
We waited throughout the first few months of 1997 but there was no progress .
We will continue our efforts to present a new long-term programme for 1998 and the year 2000 .
In the meantime , however , there have been budget allocations , which the European Parliament itself has registered - and I wish once again to thank Parliament for this policy initiative and the policy commitment which it undertook - so there were available funds that had to be allocated in accordance with the policy intention expressed by Parliament .
We followed up this exhortation of Parliament to finance some of those long-term programmes - twelve of them - which of course are not included among the long-term programmes as they are autonomous , and , on the other hand , we of course undertook to finance certain pilot schemes to prepare for the presentation of a new long-term programme concerning the social economy .
I repeat that , especially in the social economy sector , on account of the problems cropping up in the Council and the inability of the Council to get to grips with the adoption of a legal basis , the European Commission wishes to work closely with the European Parliament and not just that .
In the case in point we are faithfully following your orders .
As the author is not present , Question No 36 falls .
Question No 37 by Ivar Virgin ( H-0724 / 97 )
Subject : State domination of the electricity market
In its proposal for a new electricity law ( 96 / 97 : 136 ) the Swedish Government is proposing the introduction of new arrangements with a view to giving the public sector Svenska Kraftnät the sole concession to lay new power lines for links to foreign countries and to introduce a notification system so that power generators may use the new lines .
Is this not a breach of Article 30 of the EC Treaty on the free movement of goods and discrimination between nationals of Member States pursuant to Article 37 on state monopolies of a commercial nature ?
Mr President , the operation of the single electricity market within the European Union is regulated by means of Directive 96 / 92 / EC of the 19th December 1996 regarding joint regulations for the single electricity market .
This particular directive came into force on the 19th February 1997 .
Sweden has a period of two years in which to put into effect the legislative , regulative and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this directive .
The European Commission is working closely with all the Member States in order to ensure the timely and correct implementation of the directive .
This collaboration is taking place by means of two-day meetings with national administrations , for example with regulatory bodies among others , and by means of meetings lasting several days with all Member States .
The directive sets out the regulations relating to the organisation and operation of the electricity sector , access to the market , the criteria and implementation procedures when issuing invitations to tender , and the granting of permits , as well as the mechanisms for the exploitation of electricity systems .
However , the directive does not regulate issues relating to the ownership of the electricity network and it does not oblige Member States to open up the construction of new service connections to competition either within the Member States or between Member States .
Nevertheless , article 21 of the directive stipulates that the production of electricity and the utility companies supplying electricity , when Member States allow them to exist , may have their own buildings and may have subsidiary companies and customers linked by direct line .
The construction of direct service connections will be carried out on the basis of authorizations granted according to objective criteria which do not allow for any discrimination .
This authorization may be linked to a previous denial of access to already existing service connections , for example due to lack of power .
Through this provision , which is referred to in article 21 , paragraph 4 , they may avoid parallel service connections when there exists adequate power .
The Commission is monitoring this matter very closely , including of course the proposed system of communication , and in the course of the next two-day meeting that we will have with the Swedish authorities we will discuss the issue that you have raised and , if you wish , we will inform you in writing of the relevant results .
Thank you for your answer , Mr Commissioner , in particular the end , which I believe indicates that you have noticed that something is a bit fishy and needs to be looked at a bit closer .
I see a great risk if Svenska Kraftnät ( the Swedish national grid company ) is the licensing authority and at the same time shall run operations .
There is a great risk that they will exploit monopoly rights .
This is a genuine Community interest , particularly now that we are about to open up the energy markets in Europe .
I therefore presume that you will continue to have control over this , and I really hope that we can get a more comprehensive directive which also pays attention to this matter .
As things appear in Sweden in the area of the electricity market at the moment , things are going in quite the wrong direction .
Mr President , I would like to assure the honourable Member of Parliament that in fact we will continue our efforts to implement the directive in the correct manner , in close collaboration not only with the Swedish authorities but also with the governments of all the Member States .
I would also like to assure you that the European Commission will use all the time at its disposal for mediation in this debate , so that the implementation of this directive will permit full competition in the electricity sector and not the creation of monopolies .
As the author is not present , Question No 38 falls .
As the author is not present , Question No 39 falls .
Question No 40 by Roy Perry ( H-0732 / 97 )
Subject : Nuclear safety
Following the recent suspension of cleaning activities at the Cap de la Hague Reprocessing Plant by the French Government , is the Commission able to give a full assurance of the safety of current operations at the Cap de la Hague insofar as they might impact on inhabitants on both sides of the English Channel and the validity of French national checks on radioactivity and nuclear reprocessing plants .
Mr President , France and the United Kingdom have undertaken to comply with the ban on dumping radioactive substances in the sea as laid down in the 1992 convention on protection of the marine environment in the north-eastern Atlantic .
This prohibition concerns dumping of waste in the sea and not emission of low-radioactivity liquid waste from landbased plants .
Such emissions are subject to stringent approval requirements from the national authorities , however .
It is up to the individual Member State to ensure compliance with the basic standards for protection of the health of the population and of employees against the hazards associated with ionizing radiation .
Therefore , it is the competent national authorities who carry out regular inspection of the control arrangements set up for the purpose .
Moreover , in July 1996 the Commission inspected , in accordance with the provisions in article 35 of the Euratom-treaty , the environmental inspection installations set up on and around the La Hague plant .
A similar inspection visit took place in the Sellafield area in December 1993 .
It was concluded that both Member States had taken adequate steps to monitor the level of radioactivity in the local environment .
The Commission is aware that allegations have been made in connection with cleaning of the pipeline for emitting waste from the Hague and that allegations were also made earlier of unacceptably heavy radioactive contamination of the local environment .
The French authorities have investigated the matter and have issued reports on the circumstances concerning cleaning of the pipeline .
It was concluded that , despite some irregularities , the work was done without risk to the environment .
The earlier allegations of emission of high-radioactivity materials resulted in temporary extension of the existing restrictions of public access to the area around the pipeline , whereas the French authorities had independent tests carried out on the level of radioactivity within the area .
The test report concludes that the radioactivity of the emitted materials lies within the limits set by the competent national authorities and that the radioactivity in the local environment for the most exposed individuals in the population resulted in doses well below the values laid down in the Community 's basic safety standards .
And the more stringent standards should be noted which were adopted in 1996 and which the Member States are to implement as national law , but not before the end of May in the year 2000.The dose for the most exposed individuals in the population , that is to say those living near the plant , is very small , and the dose in the UK will be even lower , so there is even less reason for concern about the situation there .
The question of radio-activity in lobsters in the Irish Sea was addressed in the reply to written query no .
0443 / 97 from Mrs Pollack .
However , the Commission has received data for 1996 from the British authorities .
It is estimated that the highest annual dose for those who eat local fish and fish products has risen slightly , mainly as a result of increased consumption of lobsters ; but it lies below 0.2 millisievert ( mSv ) as in 1995 .
The dose from technetium 99 was 0.018 mSv in 1995 and 0.042 mSv in 1996 .
Even if compliance with the basic safety standards is the responsibility of each individual Member State , the Commission will continue to keep itself well-informed on these topics .
I thank the Commissioner for that reply .
I am not one of those Members who is opposed to nuclear power per se but I accept that if there is to be nuclear power there is no room for a single mistake .
That is why there was concern on the south coast of England and on the Isle of Wight when the French Minister for the Environment not only ordered the suspension of sailing and swimming in the vicinity of Cap de la Hague but subsequent to the July check ordered a close-down in the cleaning process .
I would be very grateful if the Commissioner could perhaps give us further information on the checks she referred to that the Commission undertook in July , and whether there have been any subsequent checks by the Commission or by Euratom authorities subsequent to the French Government ordering a cessation of the cleaning process at Cap de la Hague .
I am sure the Commissioner will appreciate that people resident on the south coast of England , while they may not be facing a serious threat , need to be assured that the European Commission itself is looking into these problems .
I share Mr Perry 's view completely , that it is incumbent upon us to keep a close check on the existing plants , and when suspicion arises that there is something wrong it is our duty , of course , to get it inspected as carefully as we can .
It was also for this reason that I referred to our test report , and I have just learned that we have continued to check the area .
We should not , therefore , exceed the permitted doses , as I said also in my first intervention .
In other words , we are continuing to keep an eye on developments .
As the author is not present , Question No 41 falls .
Question No 42 by Hans Lindqvist ( H-0697 / 97 )
Subject : Used bottle and can return system
Sweden has a long-established and efficient system for the return of used glass bottles and aluminium cans , of which over 95 % are now recycled , and for a number of years has also had an efficient system for the return of used plastic bottles .
Increasingly internationalized trade and the opening-up of the EU 's internal frontiers have to some extent meant that there is a greater variety of products but have unfortunately also caused serious disruption to the Swedish bottle and can return system .
Imported cans are unsuitable , as the original deposit was not paid in Sweden , etc .
The system operated by Systembolaget has virtually collapsed owing to the various types of foreign bottles .
This state of affairs is unacceptable from an environmental point of view .
Are there any plans to standardize bottles and cans ?
Can a Member State , on environmental grounds , require all imported bottles and cans to be adapted for its return system ?
Mr President , we have studied with interest in the Commission the information on the question of Sweden 's return-of-deposit system .
The Commission is aware that these systems exist and that they are generally considered to be a valuable solution for handling packaging and packaging waste .
However , we have not been informed from other quarters that these systems have almost collapsed , as indicated by the query .
According to our information , the return systems are still working extremely well .
We will therefore contact the Swedish authorities in order to obtain updated and supplementary information on this question , which you will , of course , be informed about .
We had understood that the increase in the amount of packaging from other Member States and non-EU countries was taking place gradually and that the return systems could be adapted accordingly .
The Commission has authorized the European Standards Organization to draw up harmonized standards for packaging which can be referred to as documentation for compliance with the most important requirements of the directive .
A general standard is to be adopted for recycling , and this can be accompanied , where applicable , by subsidiary standards for special types of packaging .
However , it is not anticipated at the moment that this will lead to restrictions on the design of the bottles so that they have to be adapted to particular return-arrangements .
Within the framework of Directive 94 / 68 on packaging and packaging waste , the systems for handling packaging and packaging waste should in any circumstances provide a high level of environmental protection and ensure that the internal market functions correctly .
The Member States can thus promote schemes for re-use of packaging , provided it takes place in accordance with the treaty .
There is nothing to prevent a Member State 's recycling system from applying to all products , whether they be domestic products or products produced in other Member States or in Non-EU countries - provided , of course , that these systems apply to non-domestic products on non-discriminating conditions .
If a given system is in accord with the treaty , an investigation must be made in each individual case in order to ensure that any trade barriers and distortion of competition bear a reasonable relationship to the environmental benefit .
It must also be mentioned that the court of law in the Danish bottle case announced that a return-of-deposit system was a fully acceptable system for recycled packaging , and it is also a possible solution , of course , for non-recycled packaging - as is the case in Sweden .
Thank you for your answer , Commissioner Bjerregaard .
I think the system we have in Sweden works well .
It is working well even after 20-30 per cent of the bottles are no longer recycled as before .
Of course , you don 't see that in the recycling process itself .
There you only see the bottles it is possible to recycle .
All the other bottles are lying in garages , in refrigerators or at home in pantries and are not seen , but they are seen on the rubbish tips around Sweden .
We certainly see that , but perhaps you don 't see that in offices when you are looking for information .
So I want to ask whether this is such an important issue that , for environmental reasons , with reference to the environmental guarantee , a Member State would be able to demand that imported bottles , cans and the like are adapted to the country 's own system ?
In other words , should a country , in order to keep its own system , be able to point to the environmental guarantee , which according to the Commission and the Council of Ministers has been strengthened in the Amsterdam Treaty ?
First of all , I would like to say thank you for the confirmation that the Swedish system is working extremely well .
I had some doubts when I saw the formulation of the question , so it was nice to learn that it is working .
Regarding the possibility of preserving existing systems , and implementing the environmental guarantee , this is a choice made by the individual Member State , and it is not possible for me to take any decision here today as to how right or wrong it would be for Sweden to do something like this or say something about the outcome .
As I mentioned in the reply to the question , the situation will be that we evaluate the different schemes that exist , quite individually , and nothing of a general nature can be said about these schemes .
It is also connected with the fact that quite a lot of different schemes exist in the Member States .
As the author is not present , Question No 43 falls .
Question No 44 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0713 / 97 )
Subject : Violation of directive on drinking water
According to public health inspectors , recent tests in Greece revealed that half the water supply networks were unsuitable and that some samples of bottled water contained concentrations of bromine ions over ten times more than the 10 mg / l limit laid down by Directives 80 / 777 and 80 / 778 / EEC .
Will the Commission say to what extent Member States have complied with the above directives , and whether Greece in particular has failed completely and correctly to transpose the directives regarding drinking water into national law ?
What sanctions will be imposed for a failure properly to implement the above directives where detected , and in particular a failure to respect the maximum permissible concentration for bromine ions and a violation of Article 12 of Directive 80 / 778 / EEC which provides that ' Member States shall take all necessary steps to ensure regular monitoring of the quality of water intended for human consumption ' ?
Mr President , the Commission understands the two honourable Members ' concern about this question regarding something as vitally important as the quality of drinking water .
Natural mineral water and spring water are covered by Directive 80 / 777 , the directive on natural mineral water that was amended by Directive 96 / 70 .
All other types of water , whether bottled or not , are covered by Directive 80 / 778 .
This is what we call the " drinking water directive ' .
None of these directives contains provisions on bromate .
The reason for this is that bromate is normally not expected to be present in raw water , as it is a by-product of disinfection .
Bromate is to be found particularly in ozone-treated water .
The present drinking water directive is based upon the knowledge that existed in the 1970 's , and at that time there was no reason to suppose that bromate might be present in drinking water .
In the light of WHO guidelines for drinking water and in the light of present knowledge of bromate 's carcinogenic effects , the Commission has included bromate in its proposal for revision of the drinking water-directive with a proposed standard of 10 milligrams per litre .
So far as I can remember , the WHO guideline is 25 .
As far as natural mineral water is concerned , disinfection is prohibited under the directive on natural mineral water , and I refer here to article 4 .
It should thus not be possible for bromate to be found in natural mineral water .
The Commission has not been officially informed that certain types of bottled mineral water in Greece should , according to the press , contain bromate in amounts several times the recommended standard for drinking water .
During the next few days , the Commission will send a letter to the Greek authorities to find out whether it is a matter of contravening EU legislation and whether further steps should be taken in a given case .
As part of the information on 13 water directives on which the Commission will publish a report next year , an evaluation is at the moment being made of the information on drinking water-quality in Greece and other Member States .
Madam Commissioner , I did not understand all the technical details you mentioned but I imagine your services will know more about them than we do .
Nevertheless , the question concerned two issues :
Firstly , as regards Bromine ions , we have reports and information on at least eight makes of bottled water which exceed the well known 10mg / kg .
In this regard , I would like you to tell me what precautions the Commission can take and what more it can do , since it appears that you have not been fully informed about what Greece is doing to protect the quality of the drinking water it provides for consumers , which is provided for in Directive 80 / 778 / EEC .
Secondly , we have in the past asked your General Directorate many questions , and myself personally , about the quality of our water supplies : there is lead and asbestos in urban supplies . I also requested to know what measures the Commission was going to take .
Perhaps you could bring me up to date on that score .
As I mentioned in my first reply , the situation is that the Commission has not been officially informed about this problem , which clearly appeared in the Greek media .
But on the basis of the question posed by you , Mt .
Papayannakis , we will contact the Greek authorities to ask them to investigate the matter .
This is normally the procedure we use in cases of this kind .
If the Greek authorities find substances in mineral water which should not be there , then we will assume first and foremost that the Greek authorities will themselves rectify the undesirable situation that has arisen ; otherwise , you know as well as I do that a procedure will then be started which in the extreme case can end in a court of law .
I also mentioned to you at the end of my first reply that we are in fact in the process of investigating drinking water-quality and , taking it all together , our water directives and implementation of them in the Member States .
We expect to be able to publish a report by next year , and then we will be able to see , of course , how things are in the Member States .
Question No 45 by Bárbara Dührkop Dührkop ( H-0727 / 97 )
Subject : Amendment to Spanish hunting law
On 26 September 1997 the Spanish Parliament adopted an amendment to Law 4 / 1989 on the conservation of rural areas and wildlife .
This amendment enables birds to be shot ' in the places in which they are traditionally found , in limited numbers , under strict supervision by the authorities and within specific limits in order to ensure that species are preserved ' and during their spring or pre-mating migratory period , i.e. when they migrate from the Iberian Peninsula to central and northern Europe in order to nest .
The European Court of Justice has previously condemned Italy , France and Germany for allowing the hunting of wildlife species during their migratory period .
Is the Commission aware of this change to Spanish law ?
Does it not contravene article 7 ( 4 ) of the Directive on birds , which stipulates that migratory species may not be hunted during the period in which they return to their nesting place ?
Mr President , the Commission knows of a proposal to amend the Spanish Law No 4 / 1989 concerning preservation of natural species and also wild animals and plants , which would probably permit the hunting of birds on their migration back to their breeding grounds .
The Commission has already informed the Spanish authorities that the adoption of such a measure would contravene the provisions in article 7 , paragraph 4 , of Council Directive 79 / 409 from April 1979 concerning protection of wild birds .
We have warned the Spanish authorities that this measure would clearly result in infringement of the above-mentioned directive .
The Spanish authorities replied on 1 August 1997 , explaining that the purpose of the proposed amendment of Law No 4 / 1989 was to adapt it to a decision of the Spanish Constitutional Court , according to which Spain was bound to take account of the distribution of powers between the Spanish central government and the individual autonomous regions .
According to the information available to the Commission , there was great risk that the amendment of Law No 4 / 1989 would come to include permission to hunt birds during their annual passage back to their breeding grounds .
The honourable member now confirms that the Spanish Parliament has already approved the amendment of Law No 4 / 1989 concerned , including this unlawful permission .
If this amendment comes into force , the Commission will take all necessary precautions , including the procedure in article 169 , to ensure full compliance with the directive .
Madam Commissioner , I think that answer might surprise the Spanish Environment Minister , because she herself said in the Spanish Parliament that it was the European Commission which had demanded this amendment to the Spanish law , in order to regulate the exception to the prohibition on hunting birds during their breeding period .
Perhaps the Commissioner could tell us what she thinks about the Spanish Minister having justified the action in this way .
Secondly , what is the Commission 's view of another change to the same law , which makes it no longer compulsory to have passed a test in order to obtain a hunting licence ?
I understand that the questioner was remarkably satisfied with the reply that I gave , in which I stated that we do not , of course , accept breach of the adopted legislation .
With regard to the regulations for hunting , I must say that this lies outside my competence .
I do not know what Community legislation applies in this area , so the question must certainly be put to someone else .
Madam Commissioner , I should like to point out that all this change involves is the incorporation into Spanish Law No 4 / 1989 of an exception under precise conditions , as provided for in European Directive 79 / 409 .
In fact , the changes are even more restrictive than the directive itself .
The European directive provides for these exceptions to apply to all types of birds , whereas this case is limited to certain game birds and unlisted species .
Furthermore , it is limited to small numbers .
The Court of Justice itself has not interpreted this expression in absolute terms , but rather as being of a relative nature . Monitoring would be carried out by the governments of Spain 's autonomous communities , which are the competent authorities for regulating and checking such exceptions .
Therefore , given these circumstances , I should like to ask the Commissioner specifically if she appreciates that this change to the Spanish law is therefore actually more restrictive than the European directive as regards exceptions , and whether she agrees that if these small numbers are regulated , and if the monitoring is correctly controlled , then the European Commission should have no reason to place any impediment in the way of this Spanish law being passed .
I can hear that we are now about to get into a Spanish domestic argument .
I do not intend to enter into this argument ; I will rest content with referring to the reply which I gave earlier to the question from Mrs Dührkop .
I said that we had already pointed out , in a provisional communication with the Spanish authorities , that we did not think that the amendment was in accord with the directive .
According to the information available to the Commission , there was great risk of the amendment to the above-mentioned law including permission to hunt birds during their annual migration to their breeding grounds .
It will be necessary for us to investigate this , of course , since if this happens , it will contravene the adopted directive on birds , and Spain must , of course - like other Member States - conform to the adopted legislation .
It will therefore be necessary for us to contact the Spanish authorities again in order to get this question settled .
Question No 46 by Heidi Hautala ( H-0744 / 97 )
Subject : Natura 2000 and military zones
The EU Member States have drawn up their proposals for Natura 2000 sites on the basis of the directives on birds and wildlife .
However , some Member States have opted not to propose certain areas as Natura 2000 sites because they lie within military zones .
Could the Commission clarify the Community legislation and indicate what provisions apply to Natura 2000 areas if they lie wholly or partially within military zones ?
Mr President , Natura 2000 consists of two parts : specially protected areas designated in accordance with Directive 79 / 409 on protection of wild birds - the directive , incidentally , about which we just spoke under the preceding question - but also special conservation areas in accordance with Directive 92 / 43 on preservation of natural species and also wild animals and plants .
The community has adopted a list of such areas on the basis of lists drawn up by the individual Member States .
For specially protected areas , the EC Court has confirmed that the designation must take only ornithological criteria into consideration .
For special conservation areas in accordance with Directive 92 / 43 , the directive contains scientific criteria which are to be used in drawing up the lists of the Member States and of the Community .
The Commission takes the view , in principle , that neither of the two directives enables military areas to be excluded from the Natura 2000programme if the areas fulfil the above-mentioned criteria .
Mr President , thank you for that reply , and I would like to ask something else connected with the definition of the Natura 2000 area in Finland .
Something has astonished me .
The Deputy Mayor of Helsinki has said publicly that he was assured by the Commission that the city of Helsinki could have built a gigantic harbour , although , as you well know and as you yourselves have publicly stated , the importance of bird-life in this area is very clearly grounded on the directive on birdlife .
Is it possible that the Deputy Mayor of Helsinki is telling the truth , or what is actually going on here ?
He says the Commission assured him this harbour could be constructed .
I may say that both Natura 2000 and the directive on birds can lead us to many places .
The question which I have to answer here today concerns military areas , and the supplementary question put to me concerns the port in Helsinki .
I cannot answer this , of course , without having studied the matter beforehand .
If it was found that we had a certain number of restricted areas which ought to be set up and it was found that a country had , for example , put forward a proposal for the protection of a species under the bird directive , so that it could be said that the stock of that species was then sufficient , would there not be the possibility then , Madam Commissioner , of recognizing that the species was sufficiently protected and that the area could then be exempt ?
This could be for various reasons .
In any case , the country has put forward such a proposal after it was established that we have these areas which fulfil the criteria .
A choice will be made between them later , after a scientific analysis has been carried out .
I shall not discuss further the selection of Natura 2000 areas that has taken place in Finland .
I know that it has prompted a very comprehensive and lively debate in Finland .
Regarding quite concrete choices in relation to the other plants , we will come to a decision on this if we come across an infringement or if we get a request from the Finnish Government to find alternative solutions .
I have not inquired into whether , in connection with the question here today , such a request exists , or what , if it does , the possibilities would be .
The allotted time for questions to Mrs Bjerregaard has now expired , so Questions Nos 47 and 48 will be dealt with in writing .
As the Commission understands the question , the honourable Parliamentarian wishes to know whether the United Kingdom 's Child Support Act could infringe Article 6 of Council Directive 93 / 104 , which is the Working Time Directive .
I have stated in a reply to Written Question No 1175 / 93 : ' Questions concerning maintenance payments for single women with children , made pursuant to the Child Support Act , are a matter exclusively for the United Kingdom ' .
The Community has no powers to act in this field .
However , according to the information available to the Commission , the Child Support Agency has no power to force anybody to work a certain number of hours .
Furthermore , although it is understood that the automatic , periodic review of child support assessments in general only takes place every two years , Section 17 of the Child Support Act expressly provides for the parent concerned to apply for a review at any time if his or her circumstances have changed .
It is the Commission 's understanding that child support assessments are determined in proportion to actual income , the only exception being the emergency rate applied when the parent without care refuses to cooperate and give details of his income and outgoings .
Moreover , it is also understood that if a parent who has been made the subject of a child support assessment is dissatisfied with the child support officer 's determination , that decision may be appealed to a specific , independent tribunal and thereafter , on points of law only , to an independent child support commissioner , to the Court of Appeal and ultimately to the House of Lords .
In the light of the foregoing considerations there seems to be no link between the practice of the Child Support Agency and article 6 of the Working Time Directive .
I would like to thank Commissioner Flynn for his reply .
I hope that he will continue to monitor individual Member States ' implementation of the directive , although it may be down to them in detail to implement it .
I should just like to clarify that he is suggesting that in his view , in this case , a child support agency should not be including overtime and bonus payments within the 48-hour working week .
Is he also saying that in his view , if there is a dispute , then there should be legal recourse in the UK ?
You will be aware that the whole question about the implementation provisions will not be in force in the United Kingdom until about April of next year .
But we will certainly do as you say .
We shall continue to monitor the implementation .
But as I have tried to make clear , appeal is available , right up to the House of Lords .
One would hope that it would never have to go that far , but that route is available to somebody who is dissatisfied .
They can go to the independent tribunal and afterwards , to the other areas of recourse as well .
We would look forward to the early implementation , finally , in the United Kingdom .
You will be aware that a consultation document went out when the last government was in office .
That is being assessed with a view to putting the matter into law at as early a date as possible .
We will be pursuing that as rigidly as possible as well .
Question No 50 by Anne McIntosh ( H-0627 / 97 )
Subject : Unemployment in the European Union 's service sector
What assistance is specifically available to help combat the effects of unemployment in port and tourism-related industries under the European Social Fund ( ESF ) ?
Would the Commission consider extending those initiatives designed to assist service sector industries in the forthcoming review of the structural funds , for the period after the year 2000 , so that the problem of unemployment in port and tourism-related industries can be effectively tackled ?
The European Social Fund is the European Union 's main tool for developing human resources and improving the workings of the labour market throughout the Union .
It is not sectoral in its approach but covers a broad range of activities aimed at improving the employability of people for the local labour market by training them to fill the jobs available or by giving them access to new employment opportunities .
Such activities centred on people may relate to service sector industries , including tourism .
In fact , improved vocational qualifications and management skills are basic requirements for developing the tourism industry , which is acknowledged to offer considerable prospects for growth in job creation , already accounting for some 6 % of the total employment in the Union .
Because the social fund assistance to service sector industries is included in the general human resource development programmes , it is not specifically and easily identifiable from programming documents .
However , some social fund programmes are set up in several countries to underpin existing regional efforts to develop tourism - two examples would be Portugal and Greece .
In this regional context , social fund assistance for improving qualifications related to tourism amounts to more than ECU 200 million for the period 1994-1999 , and it covers more than 100 , 000 participants .
The total impact of social fund actions in this area is , of course , enhanced if one takes into account the scope of general programmes for dealing with human resource development .
For the period after the year 2000 , the Commission 's document Agenda 2000 has outlined a new framework based on two regional objectives and one horizontal human resource objective , implying a consistent transversal approach with regard to human resources development .
The priorities in the new human resource objectives are very similar to those which are pursued at present : vocational adaptability , continuous training , social inclusion and a preventive approach to unemployment .
Activities in service sector industries dealing with human resource development will , therefore , continue to remain eligible for support from the social fund in accordance with the principles outlined .
Finally , I wish to add that the reference to ' port-related industry ' is not understood and it is not possible to deal with this aspect of the question on its own .
However , the points I have already made in regard to tourism , and especially that point about the horizontal as distinct from sectoral nature of the social fund support , would apply equally to most , if not to all , industrial and service activities in ports .
I appreciate the full reply that we have received tonight from the Commissioner .
Representing , as I do , an area which does not include any part of Portugal or Greece , perhaps you will understand my impatience .
If I could just explain , port-related activities relate to activities in a port area , in my own case , Harwich - although it could be the port of Athens or indeed the port of Hamburg where people have lost their jobs because of a decline in port activities and a general decline in the maritime transport sector .
Perhaps the closest parallel we can draw with is the success of the Konver programme , which of all the European social fund and other programmes has actually brought most human resources and training money into the counties of Essex and Suffolk ; also , in relation to tourism and the Adapt programme as well , to Felixstowe , which I do not represent .
All that we are asking is that the Commission should , under the programme Agenda 2000 , be a little more flexible so as to incorporate the ideas included in the Adapt and Konver programmes to other ESF programmes .
I would like to reply to Miss McIntosh by saying that what would be applicable in one particular country is applicable to all of the Member States .
I just picked out Portugal and Greece as examples of how tourism activities can be helped .
They can be helped in any country .
You are quite right to say that there are areas of decline and areas that have suffered greatly because of lack of activity and changing circumstances .
Certainly the social fund does apply in a horizontal way to activities that would retrain people and get them back into the labour market .
Such assistance and support is available .
It would certainly be available to your area , just as it is to other areas in the United Kingdom .
Question No 51 by Graham Watson ( H-0667 / 97 )
Subject : Europe against cancer
In the ongoing battle against cancer , does the Commission agree that far greater emphasis should be afforded to strategies of prevention ?
What plans does the Commission have to reduce the number of new cancer cases over the next 10 years ?
Cancer has always been one of the main issues of public health policy in Europe .
About one-third of European citizens will be diagnosed with cancer at some time in their lives .
One-quarter will die from the disease .
Thus the Commission 's current third action programme particularly stresses the importance of health education and information of the public in the field of cancer provision as it is generally accepted that around 70 % of cancer-related deaths have their origins in individual choices affecting lifestyles and environments .
One major tool which the Europe Against Cancer programme uses in its communication campaigns is the European Code against Cancer , which is a series of recommendations containing the key messages for cancer prevention established by leading European cancer experts .
Every year the Europe against Cancer programme organizes the European Week against Cancer , which is a campaign aiming at the public at large and focusing on one of these prevention messages .
This year 's theme , for instance , is the prevention , early detection and screening of breast and cervical cancer .
The Europe against Cancer programme has also been at the forefront for making recommendations for the organization and quality assurance of screening programmes for breast and cervical cancer , which can lead to an important reduction in the incidence of these diseases .
Moreover , the programme supports and coordinates one of the world 's biggest epidemiological studies in the field of cancer and nutrition , which involves more than 400 , 000 subjects and will identify diets which can reduce the risk of certain cancers .
With regard to the second part of the question , mainly because of the ageing population in Europe , experts predict a continued rise in cancer incidence in the coming years .
Individual choices also contribute to this increase .
For example , the fact that a large proportion of women in southern Europe started smoking in the last decade can be expected to lead to a sharp rise in lung cancer incidence among women there in the years to come .
The cancer prevention activities which the Commission is at present carrying out or supporting include information , health education and early detection activities .
These are designed to slow down the rate at which cancer is progressing and to prevent it occurring at earlier ages .
I welcome the Commissioner 's response and , indeed , the action the Commission is taking , because this is a terribly important subject and one where we can do a lot at European level .
This year we have had the fifth ' Europe Against Cancer Week ' , and priority number two for that was destined to be health , education and information .
Commissioner , as part of this ' Week ' I went to visit one of the local hospitals in my constituency - indeed the biggest cancer unit of all the local hospitals - in a medium-sized town , precisely because it was Europe Against Cancer Week .
I was very sorry to note that this hospital had never even heard of Europe Against Cancer Week , despite the fact that we were in our fifth year , and that the hospital had certainly not heard of the ten-point plan which I was due to launch on my visit .
I wonder whether the Commissioner would look into the extent to which this information is getting out .
I read in some of the Commission 's documentation that it issued a public invitation to tender and selected a professional communication agency with offices in nearly all the Member States .
I can only conclude , Commissioner , that this agency is not doing its work properly in the United Kingdom .
Firstly , I thank Mr Watson for the information .
I regret that he found this particular problem .
It is a little distressing and I intend to pursue the matter .
I am grateful for his interest .
I should like to say that we do not have a lot of money , as he knows very well , for the programme : about ECU 11-12 million a year , spread over the 15 Member States is very small money .
However , we carry out an in-depth evaluation of the European Week Against Cancer .
That is organized , as you know , for the second week in October every year .
The campaign happens every year and more than six million leaflets are printed and distributed across Europe , along with advertisements in the press , and we also get some television and video spots .
I am told that they have created somewhere between 300 and 500 million contacts with European citizens every year .
But , even with all that cover , it can still find its way to the bottom of the pile and the leaflet that comes in the door is not put on display .
The impact of the campaign is measured by Eurobarometer , which does surveys before and after the campaign .
It is interesting to look at the 1995 campaign where the survey results were passed to the European Parliament .
That shows for instance that by the end of the campaign over 20 million more Europeans were convinced that cancer is preventable and that the various risk factors - for example smoking and lack of fruit , vegetables and cereals in the diet - were better known after the campaign .
That is all I can say .
There seemed to be a good response from that point of view but we are relying on the experts , as you say .
I would be particularly interested if you could give me the name of the hospital privately , without making any fuss about it , and I would be glad to see whether they were in fact on the list of contacts , because they should be .
For we women the prevention of cancer is an important topic and it has been in the news this year .
What is worrying is that people say that bad prevention is worse than no prevention .
Unfortunately there have been signs that we have laboratories in Europe which carry out tests and checks to screen women for cancer in a way which is not scientifically thorough or correct .
What guidance does the Commission intend to give the Member States in this regard ?
It is clear that we need some kind of quality control of the laboratories which check the tests .
My second question is : how does the Commission see the chances of getting really thorough screening systems in the Member States ?
I believe this is vital in order for us to succeed in the fight against cancer .
You are quite right to highlight the question about quality control and the whole question of screening .
Quite a lot of what we recommend in this area does in fact refer to the quality that is absolutely necessary where any of these screening processes is concerned .
I would recommend to you a booklet which we have about the Code against Cancer , which outlines all of the recommendations together with the ten points which have been drawn up by cancer experts from all over the Union .
It is a very useful document and it deals both with the primary and the secondary elements .
Insofar as the primary area is concerned , we are talking about exclusion and risk factors , e.g. smoking and drinking and too much exposure to sunshine , and the secondary area deals with early detection which is where the whole question about routine examinations and checkups comes in .
We do very much concern ourselves with promoting good quality control and screening , but of course it is a matter for the Member States how they organize their own screening activities .
But we would wish that they would share best practice that is available and we try and make that available to them .
Excuse me , Mr Commissioner , but this discussion prompts me to make a small inquiry . Do you not sometimes think it contradictory that the Commission should on one hand behave so admirably in informing us of the dangers of cancer , while at the same time providing substantial funds each year , and in fact probably more , for the promotion of tobacco growing - an industry which even from an employment point of view hardly justifies such rewards ?
The short answer is that you are correct .
There is a contradiction here , about which I have expressed myself on a number of occasions .
When you are supporting a product that , in my view , is harmful , there is implied support for the whole industry and I regret that .
I wish it were not so and I look forward to the day when it will not be so .
You will be aware that the Commission adopted a report on the organization of the tobacco market simultaneously with its communication on smoking prevention .
That was last December .
By taking this parallel approach it demonstrated that reform of the tobacco market and the promotion of public health must be seen together .
A huge reform was carried out after quite a struggle which I actively support ; and , in my opinion , the decision that was taken at that time will lead to an improvement in the situation .
It was possible to get some further money as 1 % was levied off all the subsidies for use by the Community fund for tobacco research and information ; and I would hope to apply that to good advantage .
However , you are quite right and I support you .
I look forward to the day when this Union will not be supporting by way of subsidy the growing of a product that causes injury , harm , sickness and death .
As the allotted time for questions to the Commission has now expired , Questions Nos 52 to 89 will be answered in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
Agreement with FYROM - agreement with Slovenia
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :

A4-0296 / 97 by Mr Nikitas Kaklamanis , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the conclusion of an Agreement in the field of transport between the European Community and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( COM ( 96 ) 0533 - C4-0310 / 97-96 / 0260 ( AVC ) ) -A4-0275 / 97 by Mr Francesco Baldarelli , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the conclusion of an Additional Protocol to the Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Slovenia in the field of Transport ( COM ( 96 ) 0544 - C-0144 / 97-96 / 0261 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , the European Association Agreement with Slovenia contains a section relating to the transport sector .
It is a mixed preferential agreement intended to replace the Agreement on Trade and Cooperation , which provides for the creation of a free trade area following a transitional period lasting a maximum of six years .
It lays down provisions on the freedom of movement of goods and workers , on the right of transport companies to set up establishments and the freedom to provide services .
Economic cooperation is then contemplated in the transport , post and tourism sectors as well .
Finally , financial cooperation is established by Slovenia taking part in the Phare programme and in the loans granted by the EIB .
At the same time as this mixed preferential agreement , a political dialogue will also be opened , which is very important .
The agreement contains specific provisions on transport : the provisions of the transport agreement between the European Union and Slovenia with regard to the overland system , the rules on the freedom to provide transport services and the right to set up establishments remain in force .
It should be recalled that this latter provision does not apply between the European Community and Slovenia , because the relationship between Member States and Slovenia remains subject to bilateral agreements .
It should also be pointed out that , on the basis of article 46 of the protocol , and this point is rather lacking , the agreements on the air transport , internal navigation and maritime coasting services are not applied .
These are points that should be dealt with later , at the time of full accession .
We obviously hope this agreement will contribute towards the full accession of Slovenia to the European Union ; we are , however , aware that the European Union consists of a delicate area , the Alpine area , afflicted by major problems , including environmental ones : it is not by chance that this agreement contains a specific reference to Slovenia and Austria and , with regard to goods traffic and road traffic , the eco-points system is specifically mentioned , and will have to be assessed and be subject to access between individual countries .
This point relates to environmental protection , in particular .
Another argument I believe to be important is that of the infrastructure .
This agreement provides for great investment in this sector ; Slovenia undertakes to pay 50 % of the estimated cost of the infrastructure works , while the remainder should come from international financial institutions .
We are still faced with a general statement and one of principle on this point , however : we know , in fact , that , while Slovenia has already committed a substantial part of its budget to the construction of infrastructure , the remaining 50 % borne by the financial institutions has not yet arrived .
We have holdings that only amount to around 12-15 % ; the international financial institutions have therefore not yet met the expectations contained in the agreement to obtain maximum freedom of movement of goods and persons .
From this point of view , the European Union actually has a deficit which , although it makes statements in treaties and confirms and organizes several important issues , in reality , when it is a question of implementing financial business , has problems executing commitments assumed with regard to those countries .
Consequently , with regard to the financial aspect , I believe it important to insist that these infrastructures be constructed as they are fundamental for penetration into other CEECs , through Slovenia : I am referring to Hungary , the Czech Republic and the other countries connected with Slovenia by trade relations consolidated in the past .
To conclude , I believe this to be an important agreement , which should be approved .
Naturally , we will also have to ensure that the Commission contributes the necessary information .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after the words of criticism , let me now say something positive about this agreement .
The agreement between the European Community and the former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia - a long name , but I prefer it to the somewhat synthetic label FYROM - is for me a ray of hope in this economically and politically unstable part of Europe .
We should for this reason support the agreement .
The promotion and extension of the transport infrastructure is in my opinion critical for the continued economic development of the area .
However , the EU has not been entirely selfless in concluding the agreement .
It will , for one thing , help complete the structure of the internal market by providing better north-south European traffic links to Greece and by improving connections between Macedonia and Greece .
Furthermore , its interregional possibilities will strengthen the latter 's economic and political position within the crisis region of southeast Europe .
The Commission is now called upon to ensure that the transport projects are planned not in an isolated way , but rather in close collaboration with neighbouring countries , particularly the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , so as to help promote the economic recovery of the entire region .
From a trade point of view it appears to me of fundamental importance that we should improve the conditions for access to the internal market by products from the former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia .
In this respect we should immediately commence talks on an agreement to simplify controls and conventions affecting the transport of goods , in order that barriers to trade might be reduced .
Finally , I also consider it important that this agreement should not only pay lip-service to environmental issues but that it should include practical environmental measures along the new transport routes , including priority status for rail-borne and combined transport solutions .
Mr President . I would have been most unhappy , indeed I would not have been able to sleep , had you not given me this opportunity to speak .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have here two agreements which I consider to be extremely important .
I am pleased that Commissioner Van den Broek is here , since we are not really discussing detailed transport policy issues in the narrower sense , but rather are dealing with transport infrastructures , both remote and close to home , which are adapted to the needs of the last enlargement process as well as to those of the next .
Last week I travelled to Slovenia to attend the joint sitting of the European and Slovenian Parliaments .
Being unable to catch the early flight from Vienna , due to my own travel schedule , I was obliged to fly from Vienna to Frankfurt and from Frankfurt on to Ljubljana , the train journey being so lengthy that I would have missed my evening rendez-vous in Ljubljana on Sunday evening .
This illustrates that complicated , protracted and not at all environmentally-friendly routes still have to be used to travel from one adjoining country to another .
It is therefore important , and this agreement lays the cornerstone in this respect , that we should extend the transport infrastructure in a way which meets the needs of today as well as those of tomorrow .
Slovenia , as a prime candidate for admission to the EU , is naturally important in this respect .
But even though that particular country 's economy is doing well , we must extend the transport infrastructure to promote the economic structure of Slovenia , which is in need of reform .
There is not much to say on the subject .
An extension of the transport infrastructure will naturally be one of the elements of EU partnership .
May I also say that we asked the Slovenians to focus on developing links to Croatia , and that this should not be forgotten .
The second agreement concerns the FYROM , or Macedonia . Here the situation is naturally different , since EU entry will take much much longer in this case .
Nevertheless , I believe it to be important , particularly in the interests of Greece , that the transport infrastructure - both rail as well as road -should be extended accordingly , since Greece 's link with the rest of Europe will , if I can put it this way , primarily be through the FYROM , and everything which helps improve this connection will benefit not only the FYROM but also the European Union as a whole .
In this sense , Mr President , and in spite of the lack of available information , I would recommend that we approve both reports for transport policy as well as foreign policy reasons .
Mr President , I would first of all like to make just two points with regard to the two agreements , that is the agreement with Slovenia and the agreement with FYROM .
The first thing I would like to say , and I am very glad that Mr Van den Broek is here today , is that Rule 90 has not been observed , that is , that the Commission would make an announcement when it received an instruction from the Council to work out an agreement , as prescribed by Rule 90 .
Rule 90 of the Rules of Procedure came about as a result of the well-known standing agreement between the Commission and Parliament , an agreement to which we assigned a great deal of importance immediately after the signing of the Treaty of Maastricht .
This agreement has not been observed and indeed the non-observation of this agreement has placed the rapporteur in a compromising position as regards the agreement with FYROM since his report was delayed and many Members began to wonder what the reason for this was and why there was this delay , as it had been established that a letter had been sent to the Commission and the Commission had not answered .
In other words it never wanted to inform the Committee on Transport about the negotiations , nor about what had happened , nor how agreement had been reached and what the content of the directive was .
That is one point .
The second point is that both these agreements must be put to the vote . They follow along the wellbeaten track of those agreements that the European Union has made .
You may remember , Mr Commissioner , that in 1990 an agreement on transport was signed with the former Yugoslavia .
The Third Finance Protocol was also signed .
Unfortunately , it was never implemented .
It was suspended at the very beginning , so essentially this protocol which , as I remember , provided for around $ 800 million for the whole of Yugoslavia in 1990 , does not exist .
The second issue I would like to talk about is that , in the countries of former Yugoslavia , a rather strange transport situation has developed .
It is true that , as I pointed out , we are making progress and we are ratifying these agreements , and , all right we are ratifying them in a rather piecemeal way , but there is , I would say , no common ground .
I shall start with the agreement with Slovenia . You know that there is great conflict between Slovenia and Croatia over the famous Maribor junction .
It is not possible for us to move slowly , country by country , and then suddenly to see that these countries cannot use to best advantage the money that they are getting from the Community , since there is this difference of opinion between Slovenia and Croatia .
In other words there must be a superordinate multilateral agreement , mainly concerning the railways and not cars , to enable these countries to one day sort out their rail network .

I would like Mr Van den Broek , who deals with other foreign policy matters , to convey these matters to the officials of the directorates general responsible , for example , Mr Kinnock , who is a great orator , but I sometimes think that these details have great significance in the service of an effective Community foreign policy in the Balkans .
Mr President , I would like to point out the great importance , perhaps the example represented by this proposed opening to Slovenia , a dynamic country that is not just a door to central and eastern Europe , as our rapporteur rightly pointed out , but perhaps even a model to be followed to try and understand how and how quickly some central and eastern European countries can be incorporated and fall into line with the countries of western Europe .
It is not just a door because , if we look at its flourishing and active economy , Slovenia is already is line with the Maastricht criteria , almost all of which focus on becoming a partner like all the other countries .
It should be said that an economic agreement is already in force which has given it a great hand , but there is a well developed private initiative .
Today , according to our rapporteur , 90 % of Slovenian products are exported , which is also facilitated by the presence of large connecting structures .
There is a desire to work , both in the road sector and in the rail sector , which may lead to a further 200 km of roads and 700 km of railways by 1998 .
Having said that , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that has aroused my curiosity and has led to me a particular thought .
On page 7 , where the report mentions frontiers , it says that it is planned to complete the construction of terminals for heavy vehicles using Phare and other structures .
I would like the Commissioner to be aware of a problem that is not particular but unique , which has been of concern to us in this Parliament in the last two months : that is the problem of Gorizia and Nova Gorica , two cities divided by a boundary , or rather a single city , the last little Berlin of Europe : the boundary dividing these two cities is destined to fall between 2002 and 2003 .
What will happen ?
There is the danger of a sensational case of unemployment , 2 , 500-3 , 000 more unemployed in a city of around 30 , 000 people .
In this double city , there is an airport that is one of the largest in Europe , built highly intelligently several years ago ; there are in fact two airports , one Italian and one Slovenian , divided by a fence that is ready to fall and there will then be two perfectly matching structures .
Before constructing new plant , I would like to point out the presence of this large airport with all the collateral services which the two mayors of the twin cities are now thinking of converting with a European project .
It would provide a good example to use what already exists without spending more money .
I see that we want to copy the Austrian model .
I recommend we copy it in full as regards the eco-points but not as regards the motorway tolls !
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen still in the Chamber .
May I first of all thank Mr Baldarelli and Mr Kaklamanis for their reports .
While I do not share the conclusions which Mr Kaklamanis has drawn from today 's meeting , both Members have gone to some trouble to prepare their reports and I believe that the claim that interested Members have attempted to delay the agreement cannot be upheld .
Commissioner Van den Broek , and my remarks are also addressed to Commissioner Kinnock , we simply must devise a new system for informing Parliament of the negotiations which the Commission logically is required to conduct . This sort of communication problem between Parliament and Commission cannot be allowed to continue .
In spite of the information breakdown , Mr Kaklamanis , we should be pleased that Parliament is to ratify both agreements tomorrow , one hopes with a large majority .
These agreements are important not only for rebuilding and opening up the two countries concerned , but also for helping our Greek partners , whose transport and trade links with the rest of the Community have been seriously affected , to put it positively , by the war in the former Yugoslavia .
How important it is for us to come to the aid of Macedonia and Slovenia , and indeed Greece too .
The third pan-European Conference on Transport , which was held in Helsinki in June of this year , served to indicate that we need greater European cooperation in the transport sector , both from an infrastructure point of view as well as with regard to transport and communication .
In this respect we should be pleased that both reports are being debated here today and will be voted on tomorrow . Neither of the two countries concerned will have cause for complaint against Parliament .
Let us voice our approval so that both agreements can take effect .
Mr President , I too would like to express appreciation of the two reports by Mr Kaklamanis and Mr Baldarelli .
But I shall begin by saying something about the transport agreement between the Community and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
This agreement is an important part of the Union 's more general approach to relations with this former Yugoslav republic .
As the rapporteur , Mr Kaklamanis , rightly points out , this agreement is a contribution to resolving that country 's economic problems and thus also to resolving political difficulties .
The agreement is also of great importance for the Union in that the flow of goods between Greece and the other Member States via former Yugoslavia , which was suspended at the beginning of the crisis in the region in 1991 , can now be resumed .
This agreement follows on from the Community 's 1993 transport agreement with Slovenia and when the political situation allows will be supplemented by similar agreements with Croatia and in time we hope also with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
Essentially the agreement is more or less the same as the Slovenian agreement .
In view of the very positive experience with the implementation of the Slovenian agreement since 1993 the Commission cannot therefore entirely share the rapporteur 's concern about some of the provisions of the FYROM agreement .
I can , however , assure Mr Kaklamanis that the Commission will take care to ensure that if the special provisions of the agreement to which he refers are invoked , we shall see to it that it is fully justified and that in any event it will have as little effect as possible on Community interests .
An important element of the agreement is of course the choice of priority routes referred to , which is taken into consideration for financial assistance from the Community to develop the infrastructure .
I would also drawn attention to Mr Swoboda 's comments , which I fully endorse .
This aspect will be particularly important in improving the new pan-European tenth transport corridor , linking Greece to Austria via the countries of former Yugoslavia .
The agreement is a first step towards the establishment of full relations between the Community and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and I welcome the fact that the report by the Committee on Transport and Tourism proposes to your Parliament that the agreement be approved .
Certainly I do not want to ignore the criticisms of the rapporteur and others as to the way in which Parliament is kept informed of the progress of the negotiations .
Clearly the European Commission wishes to respect both the letter and the spirit of the interinstitutional agreement .
We have therefore already proposed to the Committee on Transport and Tourism that a proper exchange of views be held in the committee on matters relating to foreign relations .
This also satisfactorily answers the comment by Mr Sarlis , who I think has unfortunately since left the room .
That seems to us the most appropriate way of informing Parliament regularly and promptly , whilst at the same time avoiding the difficulties that might otherwise arise from the fact that the Commission 's agendas are always over-full .
That also caught us out in this case - Mr Kaklamanis knows that the negotiations on the agreement were completed within three months and that that presented a few problems in terms of finding time to place this important agreement on the Commission 's agenda .
But again I hope that the proposed procedure on that point will also dispel Parliament 's objections and I regret that this situation has arisen in the past .
In saying that I know that I am speaking for my colleague Mr Kinnock as well .
Mr President , might I now say a few words about Mr Baldarelli 's report on Slovenia ?
It is clear from this report that the scope of the proposal is limited since it relates to an amendment to the 1993 transport agreement with Slovenia to take account of the fact that since 1 January 1995 special transit regulations for lorries have applied in part of the Union 's territory , namely Austria .
This is a special situation which applies only to Slovenia , since the Community had signed no other comparable agreements before Austria 's accession .
The eco-points system has been applicable to lorries from Slovenia on a de facto basis since 1 January this year , pending the signature of this protocol .
The signature of the protocol will now formalize the situation .
I naturally appreciate the recommendations of the two rapporteurs , Mr Kaklamanis and Mr Baldarelli , and I would very much like also to express my appreciation and that of my colleague Mr Kinnock , not only for the contents of the reports but also for the speed with which they have been submitted in part-session .
The Commission really appreciates this gesture by Parliament .
Thank you very much , Mr Van den Broek .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.17 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like to point out that on page 11 of the Minutes , there is a reference to my opposition to the urgency that came through yesterday .
The Minutes do not accurately reflect my concern which was that the document ( COM ( 97 ) 0247 ) made a number of extreme statements about the use of nickel coins , saying it had important consequences for health and so on .
Yet , just last week I received an answer from Mr De Silguy pointing out that this was absolute nonsense , that nickel does not pose a threat to health .
But here we are about to insist that nickel is not used in the new euro coins .
We have fifteen days to stop the European Union - the Council , the Member States , this Parliament and the Commission - making itself look very silly .
I hope we can react accordingly .
The services will take note of your point .
Mr President , I rise in respect of the Minutes and the remark which is reported from my colleague Mr David who said that my complaint to you at the beginning of the week was made in a personal capacity .
I wish , through you Mr President , to assure him that it was not made in a personal capacity but in my capacity as a Member of this House where I have certain democratic duties .
It was not made from any personal sense of grievance whatsoever but in pursuance of my parliamentary duty .
I promised you on Monday that I would report to you what happened when I finally received the letter from the General Secretary of the Labour Party , Mr Sawyer .
I received this letter yesterday morning after enquiries had been made .
In fact , it was a very conciliatory letter but insisted on remaining with the code of practice of which I complained .
The problem is that subsequently I received a letter from the Labour Party Whip , threatening disciplinary action .
Mr President , this is a very serious matter ...
Mr Coates , it is a very serious matter but it is not a matter on the Agenda today .
I will give you an answer by letter this morning but not now in the part-session because it is not on the Agenda .
I will not have a debate on the matter .
Thank you very much , Mr Janssen van Raay .
There were three matches , and it has to be said that they were quite entertaining .
I enjoyed them very much , especially in view of the reason for them .
Mr President , I should briefly like to point out that my name is not on the attendance register for yesterday , probably through my own fault .
Perhaps I forgot to sign , but I would ask for it to be recorded that I was present .
That will be corrected .
Mr President , this is about the same problem .
Yesterday I spoke on the budget but it appears as though I was absent .
Perhaps I did not sign .
Could the Minutes please be corrected .
Very well , that will be verified and corrected .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , before the Minutes were approved I tried to catch your attention concerning a point of order that was raised yesterday by Mr Imaz .
I understand the Rules are quite clear .
You can only ask one supplementary question during the course of Question Time .
My group was told that was the case .
However , the Minutes state that , in response to both Questions Nos 46 and 51 , Mrs Thors was allowed to ask two supplementary questions .
Could we have clarification on this ruling ?
Very well .
I take note of your point , and I shall give you reply as soon as possible .
Mr President , also on the Minutes , I would draw to your attention a report in this morning 's Times newspaper which suggests that four of our colleagues have been given an ultimatum to sign a document by 3 p.m. this afternoon , failing which their rights as Members of the House will be infringed .
Could you give me guidance , Mr President ...
Mr Mather , I have already said that I was not going to open a debate on this subject .
I said that to all your colleagues .
State of the Union and the Commission 's annual programme for 1998
The next item is the debate on the state of the Union including the main policy priorities of the Commission 's annual programme for 1998 .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , today we are holding one of the most important debates in the life of any democratic parliament : the debate on the state of the nation , or in this case , the state of the Union .
This is a special occasion , an opportune moment to look up from the trees and see the wood , to devote some time to considering aloud , taking an overall view , the phase that the European Union is going through and the prospects that are opening up .
This year , for the first time , we wished to separate clearly the global consideration of the Union 's policy priorities from the debate on the detail of the European Commission 's legislative programme for next year .
Indeed , it is appropriate to assess this programme , in due course , in the light of the main policy priorities that will determine the Community 's political action over the next few years .
At the end of the day , the legislative programme is only part of that action - a very important part , of course , but one which has to be consistent with the rest and set within a time frame broader than a single year , precisely because of its great importance .
Similarly , we have modified the system traditionally used in these debates and reduced the number of speakers as far as possible .
I wish to thank the Presidents of the Council and the Commission for the facilities that they have provided to make possible a debate which I am sure will be rich and useful to everyone .
The European Parliament 's growing role in the tasks of legislation and control must also be reflected on occasions such as this .
Each institution has a specific part to play in that debate , and ours is to voice the priorities , objectives and concerns of our fellow citizens , whom we represent .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we wished to summarize the demands that our fellow citizens are currently making of the European Union in a single word , that word would be " security ' .
In a world in constant change , in a Union that never ceases to evolve , our fellow citizens are feeling , for the first time in a many years , insecure .
If anything has contributed to the Community 's success over the last forty years , it is the fact that it has been able to provide security : securing peace when the echoes of war could still be heard , developing an effective agricultural policy when memories of rationing and starvation were still vivid , designing a new single market system when the interrelationship of our economies made it appropriate , introducing new solidarity policies when internal disparities made clear that market forces alone could not ensure the Union 's cohesion .
In each period there were needs , and our Community was able to help meet them .
And it did so using a method that was as simple and effective as it was prudent , and which is summed up in the brilliant phrase contained in the Declaration of 9 May 1950 .
I recall the original French text : " L 'Europe ne se fera pas d 'un coup ni dans une construction d 'ensemble ; elle se fera par des réalisations concrètes créant d 'abord une solidarité de fait ' .
End of quote .
This method made it possible , ladies and gentlemen , to create , in the latter half of the Twentieth Century , an impressive number of ties of solidarity between the peoples of the Union , a fabric which has given its citizens security .
We cannot , without great risk , abandon this method , when new challenges call that security into question .
Over the last few years , negative events such as the rise of unemployment and the calling into question of social security systems , and positive events such as the fall of the Berlin Wall and the development of new technologies , have instilled a feeling of insecurity amongst the people of Europe , to the extent that important steps forward such as those relating to economic and monetary union are viewed with suspicion , which is no less real for being unjustified .
The security that the people of Europe are demanding of us as the century draws to a close is at once economic security , internal security and security vis-à-vis the rest of the world .
With regard to all three , it is our obligation to present them with clear projects that match their needs , projects which demonstrate that we know where we are going and why .
I should now like briefly to address these three aspects of security .
Economic security - what we call welfare - has a lot to do with employment and the development of sound and competitive national and European economies .
I shall not address at present the question of employment , on which we had a substantial debate yesterday , but I should at least like to underline the fact that there is a direct relationship between the creation of wealth and investment , and stress how the latter has been increasing as important unknown factors such as the fate of the single currency have been removed .
In this sense , launching the euro , along with job creation , is our top priority , because of the contribution that it will make to both boosting the Union 's economy and promoting its political development .
The introduction of the single currency will represent an historic step forward in the history of European integration .
For our fellow citizens , the euro will be a clear symbol of the fact that they belong to a united Europe .
When all Europeans are using the same currency , a large number of psychological barriers will fall .
With the euro in their pocket , the people of our countries will feel a little more European , will appreciate Europe a little more .
Much of the legislation relating to the introduction of the new common currency is already in place or awaiting adoption by the Council . However , two decisive steps remain to be taken : the selection of the countries that will be allowed to join the third stage of economic and monetary union , and the appointment of the President of the European Central Bank and the other members of the Executive Board .
The treaties provide for consultation of the European Parliament before each of these decisions are taken .
We are currently considering how to organize these consultation processes in such a way as to ensure that they enhance the decision-making process and do not upset the operation of the financial markets .
The people of Europe will be able to find out via their representatives what criteria have been used to select the countries that join the single currency in 1999 .
Parliament 's participation in the appointment of the President of the European Central Bank and the other members of the Executive Board will also give the people of Europe an opportunity to find out beforehand about the people who will be responsible for the Union 's monetary policy .
The use of a transparent procedure based on objective criteria will undoubtedly help to increase the people 's confidence in the future common currency .
All currencies need the confidence of those that use them .
It is that confidence , which , at the end of the day , determines their value .
Parliament has a duty to foster and strengthen that confidence .
The introduction of economic and monetary union will confer enormous power on the Community 's institutions .
The people of Europe will demand the democratic control of that power , and Parliament , as a democratically legitimate institution , cannot remain on the sidelines of that control .
The greater the transparency and control , the greater the people 's confidence will be in the thrust and decision-making of the common economic policy .
Now is not the time to examine in detail how that control might be effected .
The Maastricht Treaty provides for a number of possibilities in this regard , which can be developed in practice , in some cases , and by means of the interinstitutional agreement , in others .
The only thing that should be made clear , in order to avoid malicious interpretations , is that , with regard to monetary affairs , this control must be effected with the strictest respect for the European Central Bank 's independence .
Parliament has been devising , by agreement with the European Monetary Institute and the national central banks , a set of practical solutions which will ensure transparency whilst respecting the ECB 's independence .
In the coming months , it will also be necessary to perfect a system of parliamentary control of the most important economic decisions provided for in the Maastricht Treaty and the Pact on Stability and Growth .
In this regard , democracy cannot be put on hold for the sake of a misconceived effectiveness .
Ladies and gentlemen , another factor of economic insecurity for the people of Europe concerns the need to revise the financial perspectives .
This revision must be carried out with a view to the essential enlargement of the Union .
There is very broad consensus on the need for enlargement .
Since 1989 , the conviction has been growing that this is an historic challenge , which must be met in order to secure our future - the future of all Europeans , inside and outside the Union .
In the interests of our own security , it is essential to strengthen the new democracies of the applicant states and prevent at all costs the emergence of a fragmented or divided Europe .
It is vital to give those countries a clear signal that the accession process is under way , and under way for them all , although at speeds that will vary according to their different circumstances .
Like all the other challenges that we have met during the past half-century , this challenge must be tackled with the philosophy that has enabled us to achieve what is now the Union : gradually creating - as Jean Monnet would have said - the greatest possible common interest amongst all the men and women of Europe , those of the Member States and those of the applicant countries .
This means , ladies and gentlemen , that this common interest cannot be created at the cost of loosening or undoing the ties of solidarity that we have been establishing during the past half-century almost of labouriously building the Community .
Enlarging the Union at the cost of curtailing or jeopardizing the policies on which the cohesion and prosperity of the Union rest would be a vast error , a disastrous change of course in relation to previous enlargements , an about-turn that would endanger the very survival of the Union .
It is essential for the revision of the financial perspectives to remove this danger once and for all and guarantee to all the people of Europe - present and future - that what has been achieved so far - the " acquis communautaire ' which makes the Union attractive to those who do not yet belong to it - will be preserved .
Ladies and gentlemen , another cause for anxiety for the citizens of Europe is undoubtedly the insecurity created by the constant rise in crime of all kinds .
The results of the Intergovernmental Conference in this regard fell short of what might have been expected .
Many of the advances envisaged ultimately failed to materialize .
But there were advances , and it is our duty to exploit them .
The Luxembourg presidency of the Council and the Member States have shown the way forward by anticipating the entry into force of a number of these provisions , including the systematic consultation of the European Parliament on a substantial proportion of the decisions concerning justice and home affairs .
This represents a step forward which we must welcome and applaud .
Let us use to the maximum the opportunities provided by the treaty to convince the people of Europe that the Community way is the only way to overcome the opposition to combatting crime and terrorism jointly , and the only way to lay the foundations for an effective and coherent immigration policy .
At stake here is the ability to enjoy peacefully the freedoms which cost so much to achieve .
The feeling of security that we must give to our fellow citizens will only be complete if we are able to demonstrate that we also know where we are going with regard to the Community 's foreign policy .
It is not necessary to recall past events which severely shook the people of Europe 's confidence in the Community 's ability to contribute to peace : we all remember them .
The matter of urgency is to establish the main joint strategies called for by the Amsterdam Treaty and endow them with the necessary resources , utilizing the possibilities of strengthened cooperation if there is no other solution .
It is better to have clear objectives that are accepted by all and underpinned by the instruments of a credible foreign policy in a small number of areas than to disperse efforts with little or no effectiveness and end up being dragged along by other powers and interests .
Parliament has been contributing to the formulation and implementation of these strategies for some time , via the interparliamentary dialogue .
It will undoubtedly support any steps forward in this field .
Ladies and gentlemen , the fall of the Berlin Wall did not mean the end of history , but its rapid acceleration .
Only now are we beginning to channel this force .
The winds of change are blowing hard , and in gusts , but they will only catch unawares those ships which are unable to steer because they have lost speed or because their navigation instruments are not appropriate for their size .
The first supposition does not apply to us .
Despite everything , Europe has maintained its drive .
The adaptation of our economies to the requirements of the single currency is a good example of that .
The same cannot be said of the Community ship 's navigation instruments .
Designed for a smaller vessel and for sailing in calm waters , they have scarcely been able to cope with the historic storm that has engulfed us .
It is essential to modify them , to adapt them to a ship which is growing in size and which has to sail through waters that are usually rough .
It is therefore unavoidable to pick up the work interrupted during the final stage of the recent Intergovernmental Conference and begin preparing without delay the arrangements for carrying out the impending institutional reform .
It is highly likely that it will not be possible to do this in the next few months .
The uncertainties to which I referred in the first part of my speech , and which weighed so heavily on the final stage of the Amsterdam Summit , still exist .
We must hope that they will be removed .
But if this time we are going to finish the job , we cannot simply wait for the right moment .
We must begin preparing now , implementing a method which is different to that adopted hitherto .
We do not have to invent one ; we have one already , and it has continually proved its effectiveness .
It is no more nor less than the Community method , which reserves the right of initiative for the European Commission and makes the adoption of proposals by the Member States subject to prior consultation of the European Parliament .
Applying this method will enable us to discuss coherent texts based on the common interest , something which does not always happen in the case of traditional intergovernmental negotiation .
I sincerely believe that a good service that Parliament could render to the people of Europe would be to promote the future institutional reform of the Union , in such a way that the forthcoming European elections could serve as a sort of referendum on this project .
I am therefore confident that we can complete the first part of the journey before our current term of office ends , and I cordially invite the European Commission , here and now , to begin this work .
Nevertheless , it is not enough to use a good method and choose the right moment .
We must also give up our attachment to institutional systems that were useful in their day but are no longer adequate .
A Community of several hundred million people , which is one of the world 's great economic powers , cannot be managed effectively by a Council of twenty or so ministers with a presidency that rotates every six months .
We have to opt for one of the two systems that have worked successfully for other large groups : the presidential or the parliamentary .
In fact , the Maastricht Treaty provided the blueprint for the evolution towards a parliamentary system .
The Amsterdam Treaty continued this trend by strengthening the European Parliament 's legislative powers and requiring the President of the Commission - whose position was also strengthened - to have the confidence of Parliament .
This is the course to follow , and this is the direction that relations between Parliament and the Commission have been taking in practice .
It is therefore good that an attempt is being made to make the operation of the Council more workable and continuous and that the obstacles to decision-making are being removed .
But this must be done without going down the road of directorates or adopting other inappropriate formulas of an intergovernmental nature , such as the proposal to turn the Commission back into a smaller college with predominantly administrative tasks .
The Commission is a political body , and it will always be so .
Ladies and gentlemen , achieving the enormous task that must be accomplished over the next few years will only be possible if we prove capable of restoring the values that inspired those true revolutionaries who founded the European Community on the basis of two golden rules : the replacement of confrontation with agreement and compromise ; and the promotion of dialogue as a means of achieving greater freedom and equality .
The fact that so many millions of Europeans are waiting for us to open the doors of the Union to them should serve to make us appreciate anew things which today we take for granted , but which forty or fifty years ago seemed like unachievable dreams .
It is five decades since we ceased being enemies and become loyal partners in an enterprise in which all either win or lose .
On 20 June 1950 , Robert Schuman opened the first Intergovernmental Conference in the Salon de l 'Horloge at the French Foreign Office .
Without wasting time , on the following day , Jean Monnet described the change of mentality needed to make the Union , today 's Union , possible .
This is what he wrote in his memoirs :
We are here to work together , I said , not to negotiate benefits for ourselves , but to seek benefit in the common good .
The sixty delegates present did not know they would have to listen to me for more than ten months , and start this lesson over again , one of the most difficult lessons to learn that there is , for men trained up in the defence and conquest of purely national interests .
( Applause ) Forty seven years on , we must go on tirelessly repeating that message .
In order to meet the challenges facing us , in order to give the people of Europe security , we must think in terms of a joint enterprise .
Not in terms of negotiating our own prosperity , but in terms of achieving that prosperity through the prosperity of all .
May this debate serve to renew that spirit .
Thank you .
( Applause ) Mr Juncker , President-in-Office , has the floor on behalf of the Council of Ministers .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , my responsibilities have brought me to this rostrum to speak twice in less than twenty-four hours .
I am concerned not to generate a sense of weariness in those kind enough to listen to me this second time round , and I shall be brief , something which I am not , incidentally , accustomed to .
I shall limit my words to an analysis , which I hope will be concise and realistic , of the state of our Union .
This third debate on the state of the Union is taking place 23 days after the signature of the Amsterdam treaty , 30 days before the European Summit on employment , exactly 51 days before the European Council of December devoted to enlargement , and seven months before the final decision on economic and monetary union .
These meetings have given us , and the meetings that lie ahead will give us , precise information on the future of the Community concept and action , and hence , on the way ahead for our common projects .
This project should remain firmly based on a sense of purpose and on a methodical approach , and on the binding solidarity of all members .
We aspire progressively to create a political entity of federal vocation , driven onward by the institutions which are guardians of the common interest , working ever more closely together .
The decisions recently made , or which will be made in the meetings that I have just mentioned , will in the light of the actual stances adopted , demonstrate how far this ambition is still shared by all , and whether our project remains a pertinent one .
Mr President , I shall not repeat here what I think about the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I did so publicly on the day of its signature .
Let me simply remind you that the treaty , which will have gone through the meanderings both known and unknown of its ratification , is a good treaty .
It represents an undeniable step towards the aspirations of our citizens .
It contains virtualities and potentialities which open up areas of endeavour for community action .
Last but not least , Amsterdam has made substantial progress in the institutional field .
Your Parliament will acknowledge this in all objectivity , although the treaty is still too timid and insufficiently conclusive in that respect .
Let us acknowledge that this new treaty , despite its shortfalls , in spite of its weaknesses , is a major step forward in the long road towards achieving Union .
Let us beware of an over-hasty and over-summary judgement .
Let us give this treaty its chance , and remember this two-fold fact : perfect treaties may give rise to imperfect results .
But imperfect treaties , and the treaty of Amsterdam very likely merits this description , may lead to perfect results , if such is the collective will of all those who have responsibility for its implementation .
Treaties are important , of course , but it is the ambition of the actors involved , and the willingness of those who inspire those treaties , which are fundamentally more essential .
Hence , let us have real ambition .
Let us overcome the cleavage between those in favour of a national sovereignty , who at one point nearly prevailed , and the federalists , their opponents , who by no means had everything their own way !
As for economic and monetary union , it has continued , almost imperturbably , to move on methodically , according to the scenario approved and articulated around a whole plethora of new legislative provisions .
Let us say so , and say so proudly , the Maastricht method has been remarkably successful .
The progress towards convergence , in our countries , has been and remains impressive .
Monetary union will see the light of day , as expected , on 1 January 1999 .
The monetary revolution will take place , not withstanding all those , both inside and outside , who sought to discredit the single currency .
Remember the undesirable propositions of those who felt they had authority to divide up the Member States into two groups , the virtuous , and the Club Med countries , an insulting description .
Remember , the repeated injunctions of those who never left off having us believe that monetary union would be better put off for a few years more .
If we do not achieve the single currency before this century is out , we shall have lost it forever .
Be mindful of the failure of the European Defence Community !
The presidency , for its part , has done everything to further reinforce the credibility of the euro .
The recent decision of the Ministers of Finance to fix parities , on the very day the list of participatory countries is set , is a step in this direction .
The provisional figures published by the Commission follow the same path .
The good economic and budgetary results of the Member States give me reason to believe that a great number of Member States will be ready to join the euro from 1 January 1999 .
The time for decision is nearly upon us , but we must remain vigilant .
Let us not , between now and the decisive spring of next year , allow those nostalgic supporters of the nation state to impede the process underway .
It may be possible to win elections by opposing the euro .
But in so doing we would certainly compromise the future , by killing off the last great European ambition of this century .
( Applause ) Mr President , on 21 November , the Heads of State and of Government will meet to talk and to decide , as I hope , on employment .
I hope that 21 November will become a great European meeting .
If we go our separate ways having simply stated that unemployment is an evil and that it must be combatted , without deciding on concrete , quantified , and verifiable instruments to combat unemployment effectively , the employment summit will be a failure , and I shall say so .
Enough of words , enough of statements , enough of analysis , enough of literature ...
( Applause ) We have to act , and act together .
I propose the application of the Maastricht method , that of economic and monetary convergence , to the policy of employment .
I hope that we will , in the field of employment , be won over by the same pressure for convergence which has been ours for the last few years in the field of economic and monetary matters .
Let us prove that the summit on unemployment will have been more than a mere summit .
Let us act to make it a turning point .
My wish is that on the morning after 21 November , the European project will have become comprehensive , and that in becoming concrete , it will have made both mankind and the dignity of mankind central to our concerns .
If we are successful with employment , and equally so several months later with monetary union , confidence will have once again become a European virtue .
What Europe today most lacks , is confidence in its own destiny .
So let us demonstrate that we are up to our task , and by we , I mean ourselves , the Parliament , the Commission , the national and regional governments , the local decision-makers and social partners , whose responsibility is on a par with our own .
European history , Mr President , does not stop short at monetary ambition and social concern .
We must establish a new frontier for the European Union .
This will be its enlargement to the countries of central , eastern and southern Europe .
As we enter the home stretch leading to the century 's end , European history and geography have converged .
We must now reconcile them and resolutely and unhesitatingly go down the avenue of enlargement .
Enlargement is a burning moral obligation .
Men and women who , at the price of a thousand deprivations and so many sacrifices , have freed themselves from Communist oppression , and have given body to the new hopes that we had believed lost for always , now place a very simple question before us . Are you ready to grant us the place which is ours within the sphere of European solidarity ?
Or not ? Our response should not and must not be complicated .
It must be simple , it must be yes .
Our response must also be honest .
Membership of the European Union will not solve all the problems which the candidate countries have to confront .
Sometimes , when I listen to our friends who were , for too long , separated from us by the iron curtain , which fortunately no longer exists , I have the impression that the prevailing sentiment is that the European Union would be the best of all possible worlds .
No , that is not so , and major efforts of adjustment are still required in all candidate countries .
But I hasten to add that we too must prepare for the entry of new Member States .
Agenda 2000 , presented by the Commission , is a work of analysis and of conception of a rare quality , and it demonstrates that enlargement requires not only the future , but the present members of the Union , to make a considerable effort .
At the European Council of December , we need to be driven by a concern for all the candidate countries .
Our message must be clear : all candidate countries have a vocation for membership of the European Union .
All will be part of the enlargement process , from the moment that it has been launched .
We shall reject no one , we do not have the right to exclude a candidate country from our European family .
( Applause ) It is highly likely , ladies and gentlemen , that we shall begin negotiations with the countries that are the best prepared .
These will be bilateral negotiations between the European Union and the countries concerned .
There will be no group negotiations .
The central and eastern European countries do not form a group .
They are independent and proud nations , justly proud .
To consider them as forming part of a group would be to revert to Soviet logic .
Year by year , we shall re-examine the situation of the various candidate countries .
Those that have made sufficient progress shall be offered the opportunity to enter into negotiations .
It will doubtless be difficult to begin negotiations with everyone on the same day , and they will not be completed on the same day for all either . However , it will be essential to act in such a way that on the eve of the December European Council , all of the peoples of Europe will have the certainty , and the assurance that Europe will never again be divided .
Mr President , may I say in the wake of the considerations inspired by Agenda 2000 a word about a debate which is of passionate interest to those involved , and which , if we are not careful , may be a cause of considerable irritation .
I wish to speak about this new , and old , question of the national contributions to the community budget .
I perfectly understand the reactions of those who believe that they are asked to make too heavy a contribution .
We will need , at the appropriate time , to devote thought to a new articulation of the system of our own resources , one which would take into account the desiderata of some , and the needs of others .
But until that occurs , I would like to say three things .
The first is that we should give no credit to the idea that the benefits of the European Union can be measured on the sole basis of budget inflows and outflows .
( Applause ) The union budget amounts to 1.2 % of gross national product of the European Union . It is not possible to reduce the European idea to 1.2 % of its GDP .
That is not acceptable .
( Applause ) Second comment : among the numerous achievements of European construction , there are intangible elements that cannot be quantified .
There is no quantifiable response possible to the only question which is of real importance : what is the price of an hour of peace ?
Third comment : let us not fall into the errors of a still recent past .
We lost four precious years at the beginning of the 1980s because of the budget battle which brought us into a conflict and ended up by paralysing our policy in all respects .
But now that we are on the point of crossing over into a new century , we have no time to lose .
Europe , Mr President , ladies , gentlemen , cannot be sufficient unto itself .
We have a role to play on the international stage , a position to occupy , a vocation to live up to .
The forthcoming century will not be European .
We shall share that century with other actors .
We must therefore entertain and develop balanced relationships with the United States , and reinforce the relationships that we have with the countries which will tomorrow be the direct neighbours of an enlarged Europe .
Here , I am speaking of Russia and Ukraine .
Nothing which is Russian or Ukrainian over the next thirty years will be really foreign to us .
We must also reinforce our presence and our commitment in the Middle East .
We must have an influential presence .
We want to be players , not just payers .
( Applause ) We must pursue a direct and multi-faceted dialogue with the Asian countries , and must turn our eyes to Africa , that unhappy , but so frequently courageous continent , to that Africa where on closer inspection we see , alongside regrettable and untoward events , arising here and there , new , young , democratic , capable and generous leaders , who deserve our trust .
In short , Mr President , although I do know we have weaknesses and sometimes lack courage , I cannot understand why , in the final analysis , we give in so easily to the ambient depression which is the distinctive state of mind of our continent , as compared to other continents .
All is not perfect , of course , but we can at least be proud , and should be proud , of our success since the end of the Second World War .
I am part of that first European generation which did not know nor live through the war .
When my father was born in 1924 , he too was in the post war generation .
When I was born , thirty years later , my father had once again become part of the post war generation .
Our parents represent a generation who were a post-war generation twice over .
So , yes , let us apply ourselves to perfecting European construction , but let us be grateful to those who went before us who , in circumstances far more difficult than those of today , were able to draw the true lessons of history .
Let us , we who have grown up in peace , act in such a way that in the next century war will not be , as it so frequently has been in our past , a European option .
Those who want peace , want Europe .
( Sustained applause )
Thank you very much , President Santer .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President of the Council , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 1997 was certainly a turning point for the European Union .
The Amsterdam Treaty is certainly another milestone in the constitution and development of the European Union .
How can we forget the Agenda 2000 package , for example , presented by the Commission to commence all reform procedures for accepting new countries ?
In a month 's time , the European Council will be faced with an even more urgent problem that affects our citizens at close quarters , that of unemployment with a good 20 million out of work .
The Union 's activities have undoubtedly speeded up considerably in the last twelve months ; however , although on the one hand the action to strengthen the Union can only receive our applause and our support , we wonder whether the institutional and democratic establishment of the Union is adequate enough .
We note , for example , that the recent Intergovernmental Conference showed the limits of the current process of amending the treaties .
This Parliament has the duty and the right to claim an institutional role which can have a political effect , particularly with regard to future amendments to the treaties themselves .
The Union is aiming for new goals and the legitimizing function of this Parliament , the only democratically elected Institution , can no longer be deferred indefinitely , on pain of entrenching a belief already held by our citizens about a Europe of governments and government officials ever more distant from their interests .
With regard to the single currency and expansion , for example , the Union 's decision-making process has demonstrated its failings , even if we share the final objects . This Parliament has been complaining of problems such as unemployment and economic development for some time , paying them just as strong and determined attention as that reserved for the monetary union , but we , and the Commission in particular , have had to wait for the initiative of a Member State .
I come now to expansion : this is an historic process , possibly owing to the geopolitical implications and possibly owing to the number of countries involved and the impact on our countries .
For a process of such scope , Parliament was informed of the Commission 's decisions in the press , and then had to wait a long time for a reasoned document .
As decisions of this nature should be typically political , as they are , I wonder whether it is possible and acceptable for such responsibilities to be assumed by the Commission .
Perhaps , Mr President , that is the paradox of this Europe : establishing highly ambitious objectives without having an adequate political and institutional structure to take into account the wishes of its citizens through the Parliamentary representation it already has .
I would like to point out , however , concluding on the subject of expansion , that we very much appreciated the vote in favour of Mr Barón Crespo 's resolution , which recognizes the principle whereby the checking and pre-accession procedure should be applied to all applicant countries at the same time as being more appropriate .
I will pass on to the great political priority for 1998 , employment .
I agree with Mr Van Velzen who , in the resolution passed yesterday , commented on the futility of inventing something new if it is useless and possibly harmful : I am thinking about the 35 hours , for example .
I believe that , with a reorientation of structural funds , passing a stability and social cohesion pact , encouraging and ensuring that member countries have appropriate budget and tax policies for an economic revival , unemployment may be fought in the medium term .
Many of us do not believe that the monetary approach alone is adequate and sufficient , on pain of excluding and marginalizing various strata of the population .
The single currency . We believe that in the spring of next year , alongside the technical evaluations required for accepting countries into the single currency , we should not lose sight of the objective of the single currency which is just a tool at the service of a political objective .
I wonder on this point about the reasons for the decision taken by the Bundesbank and the Bank of France to raise discount rates , which leaves me somewhat perplexed .
Agenda 2000 and enlargement : the points I made earlier apply here .
Moreover , I am delighted that the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Italian Republic has expressed doubts and reservations over the exclusion of certain countries .
We have asked for an in-depth parliamentary debate on this matter and I think that this House should make it one of the political priorities of the next few months .
The reforms contemplated by Agenda 2000 will be a reason for a full and exhaustive debate in our Institution , but from now one we can say that we will give our entire support to completing the single market , to reviewing the problem of indirect taxation , to better finalizing the efforts made to make our economy more competitive , to continuing hastily with regard to trans-European infrastructural networks , to reassessing the scientific and technological potential and to a qualifying review of the structural funds .
Everything will have to take place in a framework of economic and social cohesion for the sole , direct benefit of the citizens of the Union .
This presupposes a new medium term financial framework commencing as from 2000 that can guarantee adequate resources for the ambitious objectives we have set ourselves .
There are two requirements which are fundamental to us which I fail to see mentioned in the document drawn up by the Commission : a serious fight against fraud and greater control and an effective rationality of the Union 's expenses .
These two financial resources are significant , taking into consideration the 1.27 % limit of the gross domestic product , as a contribution to the financing of own resources .
The Union 's presence on the international scene . This is a very delicate point .
Although , on the one hand , the absence of a political union prevents us from having a strong and unique representation at international level , having recently opted for a faceless structure , on the other , we are applying a foreign policy , albeit limited , consisting of aid , contacts , roving delegations , bilateral agreements , representative offices of the Commission and anything else .
A policy once again left in the hands of an institution of officials , the Commission .
I do believe that our institution should recognize the quality of the Commission 's work , but it should also , having the citizens ' mandate , establish an objective in the political priorities for next year : the commencement of a Euromediterranean Parliamentary Forum , desired by this House and warmly welcomed by us , as some of the convinced proponents of it .
However , we consider greater involvement of the European Parliament in foreign policy to be essential to and certainly functional in the Union 's ambitions .
Citizens ' quality of life .
The improvement in the quality of life of European citizens is not just one of the Commission 's objectives but also a priority of this Parliament .
Presidents , I believe that , at the dawn of the third Millennium , the European Union is preparing for an unprecedented challenge , that of achieving the design of the founder fathers of Community Europe , a political design in which the European ideal takes the form of a union of objectives in a strong and solidary common motherland .
Mr President , may I begin by welcoming the President-in-Office of the Council on behalf of my group .
Mr Juncker rightly criticized the lack of self-confidence in Europe .
I would like to say on behalf of my group that we all have confidence in the Luxembourg presidency and the qualities of this President-in-Office .
Early next year the European Council is to decide which countries are to participate in the European currency .
The offer by the strongest country in Europe , Germany , to share its greatest source of strength , its currency , with neighbouring countries is a historic step .
The euro is essential for all Europeans who , in the words of Thomas Mann , prefer a European Germany to a German Europe .
Secondly the euro is necessary to counterbalance the shift from the centre that will result from enlargement .
The Union 's decision-making rules had to be adapted to allow for enlargement .
Unfortunately this was not done satisfactorily in Amsterdam , partly because this Parliament still does not have the right to approve treaties .
That means that the euro is at present the only project for strengthening the Union .
The economic advantages of this currency are also clear : less disruption of exchange rates , more price transparency , low inflation .
But is Europe ready for the euro ?
In many countries the public still have very little confidence in the new currency .
Instead of making an effort to win public support for the euro , some governments are evading the responsibility , the Swedish and British Governments for example .
But how can the public have confidence in the currency when politicians are not courageous enough to back it ?
A second risk concerns interest .
The bigger the EMU becomes , the more stringent the central bank 's anti-inflation policy will need to be .
The bank cannot hesitate to increase interest rates when necessary .
But this is likely to cause conflict between the bank and national governments .
It is after all to the advantage of governments to have low interest rates .
This makes it cheaper to finance deficits and debts and is also better for employment .
The euro can easily be made the scapegoat for unemployment .
This is all the more true in that the Member States themselves will still have to take a number of unpopular measures .
A permanently low interest rate requires permanently low government debts and deficits .
Countries like Germany , France , Italy and Spain have still not dared to implement the necessary reforms .
In order to create employment , labour costs must come down , there must be greater flexibility in wages and working hours and the unemployed need more incentives to find work .
These reforms will be needed even without the euro .
Governments must have the courage to explain that , if this does not happen , then many people will turn against the European currency and the euro will encourage nationalism rather than contributing to European unity .
Monetary policy , Mr President , is one of the traditional areas of national sovereignty .
By sharing its currency a country is sharing power .
The concentration of power resulting from the introduction of the euro has to be coupled with stronger democratic control .
But that is not all .
This Parliament must use its own powers more effectively .
That calls for a number of reforms .
Firstly I think that we should work much more closely with the national parliaments , which are an essential part of democratic legitimacy in Europe .
There should be annual consultation on such matters as foreign policy , monetary policy , domestic affairs and justice and combatting fraud .
Then there are parliamentary enquiries .
Our two committees on enquiry , on BSE and customs fraud , have had excellent and impressive results .
This work has to continue .
We should consider the justification for setting up a parliamentary enquiry into areas such as the aid programmes for Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean or the Commission 's internal administration .
It is important that we make democratic control in the Commission as strong as possible .
Of course Parliament has to meet the same standards of transparency in its own operations as we ask of the other institutions .
The continuing negative publicity about members ' travel expenses damages Parliament 's reputation .
The reforms the Bureau decided on in July must therefore be implemented without delay , before the end of the year .
Internal management action is also needed .
Serious errors have been made in areas such as building policy , office equipment , security and informatics and an independent investigation needs to be set up in the short term to prevent mistakes of this kind in the future .
The organization of our parliamentary work also needs improvement .
No parliament in Europe has as many meetings as the European Parliament .
But quantity does not necessarily mean quality .
All too often our agendas are overloaded , our debates tedious .
Parliament must have the courage to set priorities .
Less time for voting , less time for undisputed matters , more time for political debate .
The art is knowing how to set limits .
We must use our powers to the full , we must have the courage to assert ourselves more often .
I do not think that the Council and the Commission are the only institutions responsible for the Union 's public image .
In this debate the focus is on the Council and Commission representatives .
Parliament too has a responsibility for the Union 's reputation .
Parliament must do its best to improve the Union 's image through its own activities as well and that is why I wanted to draw attention to this aspect in this debate .
Mr President , we were concerned about this debate , because the debate on the state of the Union , which we are now holding for the third time , must not be either a matter of rhetorical or superficial routine .
But I have to acknowledge that beginning with the opening speech of the President of Parliament , and continuing with the other speeches , important points have been raised and a forward-looking approach has been adopted .
So we want to register our delight .
Nevertheless , we must strike a balance .
To use the medical simile of the state of the Union , it is necessary not only to take the supposed patient 's pulse , but to give him a genuine health check-up , a thorough examination with diagnoses and proposals for cures .
And in this sense , the main problem , the main illness - which we have all identified - is unemployment .
Employment is rising - it has risen during the last year - but only very insignificantly .
Casting our gaze back - as some poet such as Antonio Machado once said - we see the jobs that have disappeared as well as those that have been created .
I am thinking now of the tragic case of Vilevoorde , which was debated in this House , and of other equally important cases .
On behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left-Nordic Green Left , therefore , I wish to say that we support unequivocally the integration of the European Union 's employment policies .
We believe that the reduction of working hours must be a fundamental component of employment policies . And , in this sense , the commitments of the French Government and the recent decision taken following a debate in the Italian Parliament give hope for the future , make it possible to have a genuine debate and achieve positive solutions .
And it has to be said that the debate in those two countries has gone far beyond the debate in this Parliament or the other European institutions .
Naturally , we attach great importance to the Luxembourg Summit and we back the efforts of the President of the Commission .
We especially support the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Juncker , in his drive to defend and take action in favour of real convergence - what he called the convergence of employment .
And we also support the idea of allocating ECU 150 million from the budget to employment programmes .
If we do a simple division exercise , however , we see that this works out at only ECU 8 for each unemployed person in Europe .
We wish those employment programmes the best of luck .
In my country , the leader of my political group repeats continuously that " programmes , programmes , programmes ' are essential .
And I should like to commend this employment proposal to the European Parliament with the words : " employment , employment , employment ' .
Let us see if by saying it three times we can increase the resources and mechanisms that need to be implemented in favour of an employment policy .
With regard to the euro , we all agree that we are on the final stretch .
The more countries join the euro the better .
It will be better for everyone to share the responsibility .
Nevertheless , we are critical of the Maastricht criteria , and we are sceptical of the view that the euro will automatically generate growth , which will automatically generate employment .
Nor do we believe that the Stability Pact will be good medicine ; we fear its consequences for European society .
And in this check-up , we wish to consider not only the physical state of European society , but also its state of mind , the state of its soul .
As has already been said , there is anxiety and uncertainty .
And much of this anxiety and uncertainty exists because we have no clear model for enlargement .
We are in favour of enlargement , but we fear that the wrong approach , a lack of foresight , could have negative effects on both the countries that accede to the Union and those already in it .
The greatest danger is that of turning the political union to which we aspire back into a vast free-trade area .
Added to this is the problem of the revision of the financial perspectives and the effects that it could have on existing north-south solidarity within the Union , with the reduction of the structural funds and repercussions for the common agricultural policy .
As has already been said today , it is necessary to count in all the countries requesting accession and not to classify them strictly as suitable or unsuitable .
Within this new framework , however - and I am echoing the words of Mr Martens , whose political position and ideological views are completely different to mine - there is a need to ensure that Europe 's foreign policy has a genuine identity .
In his speech today , Mr Juncker moved from considering the European subcontinent to examining our ambitions within a Eurasian continent .
But we shall never be able to achieve those ambitions , not even within the European subcontinent , if Europe 's identity is subordinated to the policies of the United States .
We must be friends , but never subordinates .
Faced with these challenges - and I am coming to an end , Mr President - the Amsterdam Treaty is inadequate to the task of carrying out the essential reform of the institutions prior to enlargement .
A Spanish journalist defined it as a colourless , odourless and tasteless treaty . Describing it in the same terms as treated water is perhaps being too generous .
In conclusion , I wish to say that if these key problems are to be resolved , the problems of democracy must also be resolved .
I believe that I am in tune with European public opinion here . Who decides in the European Union ?
Who is responsible ?
To whom are they accountable ?
Perhaps the time has come for the Council to start being politically accountable to the European Parliament , which represents all the Union 's citizens .
Mr President-in-Office , Mr Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is an interesting Belgian radio programme called ' Situation hopeless but not serious ' .
Transposing this to the European Union , I would say that the situation is worrying and could become hopeless unless the main parties concerned take some action .
The disappointing results of the Amsterdam summit did not equip the Union for the task ahead .
Even Commissioner Van Miert stated publicly in September that Amsterdam was simply ' marking time ' .
So the Union is not ready for enlargement because it has not made a start on institutional reforms itself .
The muchneeded and complete political union which has to be in place to provide a social and ecological counterbalance to a deregulated market does not exist .
As a result of the strict monetary policy , the euro is already associated by millions of Europeans with social breakdown and job losses even before it has come into being .
Amsterdam did , it is true , help create the employment agreement but the weak point was always that Europe was not putting any money on the table to help create jobs .
If the employment summit in Luxembourg fails to reach a breakthrough and just puts forward recommendations without any commitment , there will be great disillusionment .
My group therefore particularly deplores the fact that no measures have been taken to stop the taxation race between the Member States .
The trend for labour to be more heavily taxed all the time and capital less heavily taxed so that jobs are lost just when new ones should be being created is continuing .
It seems to me that the Luxembourg presidency is particularly well placed to address the difficult problem of tax harmonization .
My question to you , Mr Juncker , is whether you are going to take any action on this .
We see not only in the results of Amsterdam but also in the work of the Commission that there is no impetus towards lasting cooperation , or at least very little .
There is no energy tax and the Commission itself is not managing to take advantage of its strong position in public procurement in this area to make production more ecological - an important area which is not being exploited .
Finally , and on this point I agree with Mr Santer , we cannot help but say that foreign policy seems to have serious shortcomings , for instance in Bosnia , Algeria , Palestine ... we could go on .
Europe makes no difference in supporting the peace processes in these countries properly and effectively .
How well-meaning we are towards Africa can be seen in particular this week in the chocolate directive .
At any event , without a convincing democratic political plan both internally and externally Europe remains nothing but a bureaucracy .
Mr President , in this autumn of 1997 , the state of the Union appears to be one of contrast .
On the one hand , there are positive elements .
One of these , already mentioned , is the single currency .
There is reason to believe that the euro will go into circulation , that the timetable will be respected , that the number of countries participating in EMU from the outset will be large , as countries such as Spain and Italy , which were a cause for concern , will very probably be members of the leading group .
As such , the euro is a good thing for the financial and economic power of Europe , and indirectly - it is to be hoped - for employment .
In itself , the euro is also a very good thing for the reinforcement of political union , which remains our objective .
I finally add that the considerable efforts made by the various parties - and I am thinking here in particular of Italy - to ensure convergence among their economies and to successfully launch the euro are a sign of a political will which must be commended .
This determination very fortunately contrasts with the depression and the moroseness that we deplore elsewhere .
Indeed , the state of the Union also has its areas of darkness .
I shall not return to the darkest point , which is unemployment , as others have already spoken on this .
I will speak of enlargement , which is a matter , as you rightly said , Mr President of the Council , for the whole future of Europe .
Until now , the question has indeed been treated , but without enthusiasm or dynamism , and the Council as much as the Commission has given the impression that it was simply resigned to opening a dossier which was an embarrassment and came at the wrong time .
How comfortable were times past , when the eastern European countries were behind the iron curtain and outside the fold of European affairs !
I hope that in a few months , when the euro is on track , the Council and the Commission will really take enlargement on board at last .
We still do not have enough of a political objective .
Do we want a strong political union for the new Europe , or a simple free trade area ?
The question has not truly been settled .
We lack a political strategy .
Hence it is difficult to accept without protest the imprudent presentation proposed by the Commission , which consists of literally separating the candidates into two categories .
The European Conference proposed by some countries - including France - risks being no more than a palliative . It will certainly be better than nothing , but will reveal itself to be insufficient , like all palliatives .
We also need institutional reform of the Union , which would allow the Union to bear the consequence of enlargement without disintegrating under the pressure of numbers .
From that point of view , the Treaty of Amsterdam is a failure , and illustrates exactly this lack of political will which is characteristic of the way the enlargement process as a whole has been handled .
In addition to enlargement , there is another question , which is not unrelated to it .
This is the financial question .
Everybody , in the Council , the Commission and the Member States , seems to be delighted at the prospect of a zerogrowth budget , with a ceiling strictly capped at 1.7 % of GDP , with the hope of remaining below that ceiling .
This budgetary dogma is not consistent with the new tasks of the Union , whether they involve enlargement , of course , but also the struggle for employment and keeping up the policies of solidarity .
Finally , Mr President , the European Union has got some colour back over the last few months , with a return to growth , albeit very moderate , and has shown a real determination to launch the euro successfully .
But aside from such progress , there remains an enormous amount to do . For this , we require the political will that I wish and hope for with all my might .
Mr President , the first two priorities of the Council and the Commission for the year to come , namely employment and the euro , appear to be fairly broadly contradictory .
The euro will by definition involve unity in terms of monetary policy and the harmonization of other economic policies , in such a way that they cannot necessarily be adapted to the special features of every country .
We have seen this clearly , with the raising of interest rates at the beginning of October , as a precursor of monetary union .
My country has followed suit with a rise in interest rates , although it did not need it , as rising rates risked dampening down the recovery in growth .
More generally , all the while there is no optimal monetary area at the Union level , the euro will impose a monetary rigidity which is contrary to the idea of flexibility , which some claim to seek in other quarters , and which will be costly in employment terms .
Furthermore , as was said in the debate yesterday , the procedure of coordination of employment , with its guidelines and , very likely soon , its sanctions , intends to be an exact copy of the procedure used for economic and monetary union .
In both cases the procedures are dominated by a key word , convergence , a word frequently heard , incidentally , in the speeches today .
But convergence seems to have become a real ideology in Brussels .
It has to be admitted without any discussion that in all fields promulgating a unified standard for all is far better for growth and employment , than differentiation of policies to suit the requirements of each .
While it is possibly true that , in a Union based on solidarity , it is desirable to avoid the sort of substantial contradictions which means that one country might cause great damage to its neighbours , in pursuit of a petty advantage to itself , it is on the other hand wrong to believe that convergence , understood as systematic mutual alignment , is good in itself .
A moment ago Mr Juncker spoke about the ' virtuous ' process .
For my part , I would talk about a ' vicious ' process .
The Europe of Nations Group , for its part , believes that the optimum in terms of employment would be better achieved through freedom for nations , rather than obedience to a uniform rule handed down from on high .
Mr President , 1997 should have been the year of reforms and the signal for the start of a new stage of unification , characterized by the restoration of the institutional structure , by the increase in the skills of Parliament , by the specific definition of the commencement of the political union .
These were our hopes when the Intergovernmental Conference began its work - to take steps forward towards democracy within the Union and to establish the bases for the definition of appropriate rules for creating the political union and for meeting the conditions required for expansion .
Never have we been as disappointed as we have been here .
The Amsterdam Treaty , signed in the silence of the press , crowned the failure of the work of the Intergovernmental Conference .
The late effort by the French , which was also joined by my compatriots at the last minute , to call a European Council on 21 November dedicated to employment , was not enough to dissipate the fears for our immediate and long term future .
What future , Mr President ?
The future of economic and monetary union on its own or the future of the whole Union , which also comprises countries that have not been able to obtain immediate access to the euro ?
Two speeds could add further problems to those we are already experiencing , for which we still have no exhaustive solutions .
The problems of employment and expansion which , together with the euro , will be the political priorities of the forthcoming year , comprise a stake of exceptional significance for the future of the Union , for , if it is played badly , it may risk shattering what little remains of the Community before it becomes simply a large free trade area .
That is the fundamental problem : either the Union , under the influence of the single currency , will manage to establish a political status , or it will be destined , from crisis to crisis , from expansion to expansion , to become a trading area for 400 million consumers , subject to political decisions that will be decided by other countries , based on strong , economic and financial relations prevailing from time to time .
We should not forget the increasing weight of the Pacific rim , including China , in world affairs , and the current inactivity of the Atlantic rim , of which Europe is partly the cause .
To allay these fears , we ask our governments , the Council and the Commission , to speak up and make the voters understand that the development or decline of our countries is the same as the development or decline of the Union which , if it mistakes the methods and timing of enlargement , if the employment problems are not sorted out soon , if for these reasons we do not manage to keep the citizen 's consent , he will change his vote and Europe will become what none of us wants : a highly bureaucratized , somewhat laissez-faire body somewhat in favour of state intervention , which will move like an elephant between the crystal vases of international politics , without any shared security and defence , without a policy of justice , without what it takes to perform the political role of a body of that size .
We will have to restore the same dashed hopes in the motions presented to combat unemployment .
For the time being , we are faced with a long list of hopes and nominal affirmations : dialogue between the parties , united Europe , social Europe , fight against marginalization , but no new policy has been announced , no medium or long term strategy has been presented .
Where will the new jobs come from ?
Will the rigid regulations of national job markets , real plaster casts for the mobility and appointment of new employees , come to an end ?
Or will recourse be had to public budgets - as a certain government tried to do - to generate a temporary euphoria ?
Jacques Delors , in his White Paper on Employment , stated , with regard to the insistence on miraculous methods for growth , that untying the purse strings may generate temporary euphoria , in the same way as drugs do , but the awakening will be all the harder when the damage caused by inflation and by internal imbalances has to be rectified .
The greatest damage , he concluded , would be the increase in unemployment . This seems to be something no-one wants , but which no-one is doing anything about .
In the same section , Delors said no , just as Monti and Bangemann are saying no today , to a general reduction in working hours , to which it seems that some governments refer .
A similar point should be made for expansion : in the absence of a more than substantial financial effort , there will be a constant reduction in the resources currently intended for regions of the Union that benefit from the policy of cohesion - objectives 1 and 5 - and a probable increase in the imbalances between rich regions and poor regions .
There is no policy on growth ; without it , however , the resources would not be produced to give rise to the development of possible new members and the current 15 .
I would now like to raise several questions : what would our future be if the United Kingdom really took a step sideways and London , one of the leading financial markets , remained outside the euro ?
And what cynical indifference will enable us to continue to ignore the Mediterranean ?
Europe must be Mediterranean or it will not exist , because we will not have the strength to withstand an ever more desperate immigration .
Europe must be political or it will not exist !
And so , Mr President-in-Office , it is true that we have obligations , as you said yesterday , including obligations to the countries of the former eastern republics , but above all we have obligations to the 20 million European unemployed : obligations to control the relocation of companies , obligations to reconcile the freedom of the market with solidarity and , finally , to build political union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I began to despair as I listened to you , for the moments when I had the impression we might be in disagreement were rare indeed .
I would not want to fall into the bad habit of paraphrase and confirm what you have just said by repeating what I said when I opened this debate .
Fortunately , towards the end , some voices were raised to speak about things which are finally so much in opposition to my own thoughts and words , that I am pleased to seize this opportunity to reaffirm what I believe .
There should be no opposition between enlargement and the priorities attaching to it on the one hand , and the priority to be given to employment on the other .
I think these are two priorities which are not antinomic or contradictory one to another .
We have to pursue both aims .
Unfortunately , the lady who prompted me to this response has left the room , and she will not be able to profit by it .
A question was directed towards me - it almost caused me some amusement - relating to a Luxembourg initiative in the field of tax harmonization because , it appeared , Luxembourg would be especially well-placed to launch such initiatives .
I would urge Mrs Aelvoet to be kind enough to look at the financial pages of all the European papers since the beginning of July , which will give her ample information on the detail and the solidity of the many Luxembourg proposals in the field of tax harmonization .
Yes , we are well-placed to speak about and discuss tax harmonization in Europe , having devoted a meeting of the informal Council of Ministers of Finance to this topic , and after organizing the debate at the Ecofin Council of 13 or 14 October last .
I must say that we are fifteen of us specialists around the table , because from the mouths of my fourteen colleagues I heard many arguments which they had always previously been fearful of using .
At the time when the Luxembourg presidency has just proposed a more wide-ranging approach , so that the debate is not focussed on the taxation of savings only , but drives on strongly towards tax harmonization so as to avoid unfair competition in the matter of tax advantages , and therefore includes all aspects of taxation , I note that , contrary to what some people fondly believed only yesterday , there is not one tax haven in Europe , but there are fifteen of them .
There are fifteen of us specialists around the table , all able to discuss taxation questions , and I hope and feel that this ecumenism at the Council level cannot but have profound repercussions in this Chamber , and that it will lead to even more broad debate and so towards successful tax harmonization in Europe .
At all events , the Luxembourg presidency will continue to deploy every effort between now and the end of December to reach agreement on this point .
Thank you , therefore , for the two or three interventions which , although a little discordant , were not excessively so , and gave me the opportunity to speak to you again .
I thank the other speakers for the in-depth analysis they displayed .
I like that adjective , because I am in deep harmony with what they said .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are confronted with a period of decision-making , and when President Gil-Robles began in the early stages with Robert Schuman and the Treaty of Paris , I had the impression that decades of European development had reached their culmination .
Ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty , expansion and its concomitant institutional and financial reforms , all these will allow us an opportunity to finish this work in broad areas .
We must ask ourselves , however , if we really do have the means for this , and for that reason we must concentrate on a number of things .
The main points mentioned by the Commission concerning the euro , employment , expansion , the role in the World , and citizens ' rights , are , I think the correct ones .
I think it is right when the President of the Council says one should use Maastricht methods for employment as well , because those countries that then do not participate in such a coordination of employment policy will , because of poor results , end up having a problem justifying their actions to their electorates .
I think that is a good start !
Our unbelievable success - which two years ago no one would have imagined possible - concerning stability in preparation for the euro is , I think , proof that this method is the right one .
This European Union has turned into a stable community such as no one would have imagined possible .
When we approach expansion , however , we must be equipped with the right instruments for us to accomplish the tasks and responsibilities .
It is of no consequence the European Union collecting responsibilities , but not having the instruments to control them so that the citizen can perceive ability and results .
For this reason one important prerequisite for the expansion is the extension of the qualified majority decision .
If we do not achieve this , and if this is not systematically prepared over the next few years , then we shall not have a strengthened Union .
The Commission , the Council and we ourselves , therefore , are under challenge to do a great deal in this area .
It is not so much a matter of obtaining new responsibilities for Europe , but of our needing instruments with which to meet existing responsibilities .
And where the Amsterdam Treaty offers opportunities for it , we should establish a sensible method .
For this reason , Mr Commission President , provision must be made , for example , for making the Planning Unit for foreign policy not into some new for m of Council activity on the Coreper pattern , but it must be so designed , with the participation of the Commission , that it provides added communal value .
The Commission must prepare itself for a future where we have a new troika , in which the Commissioner for foreign policy plays an important role .
Thus , the Commission should be thinking now abut a reorganization , in order for it to be fit for the new opportunities , for it to build an operation on this base .
The treaty has potential , but this potential has to be utilised by preparing oneself for it accordingly .
As for our role in the world , we are approaching the next WTO round .
We were unable , however , to make the necessary decisions in the Amsterdam Treaty , so we must now prepare ourselves to see how we can nevertheless achieve our tasks and serve our mutual interests .
One might perhaps consider a fast track solution to make the Commission capable of negotiation .
Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we need a cost-benefit analysis of the European Union .
If we talk about costs you all rush to point out that you pay too much , receive too little , and must have more !
But we want at last to have the benefits of the European Union quantified for each country .
Once this has been made clear , then we can hold a balanced debate to find a fair balance here .
I think the Commission should give us this .
As a result of the expansion this European Union could become a community of peace for the whole of Europe .
It could achieve stability and balance , and thus have economic and socio-ecological value for all of us in the long term .
What we have to learn together is that we can only achieve the future together , and that common value for each of us is better than that we insist on individual apparent values .
We should establish a federation of institutions in order to achieve these tasks !
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is exciting , because it demands of us that we think for a moment about everyday matters .
What does this Europe really need , if it is to be the Europe of its citizens and is not to hide itself away in an ivory tower ?
Above all Europe needs to be taken over by argumentative people .
Literati , for example , like Günther Grass , who display responsibility when they get mixed up in politics and describe defects .
That is exactly what Europe needs ! Not quarrelsome , narrow-minded politicians who would like to banish art and culture to the dungeons .
Europe needs vision !
People have to know exactly why they should want Europe .
They need visions like those described as the not-yet-existing by Ernst Bloch : something worth fighting for .
The only thing that makes change possible .
The Amsterdam Treaty is no vision , but a lumpen , legal edifice which fails to meet the central requirement of the treaty , that is , guaranteeing European democracy .
Only that can make Europe capable of existing into the future .
EU reform on the lines of more Europe - less democracy , is a dangerous error , because European democracy is the prerequisite , the necessity for existence , and not a vision .
Europa must exist . The perception of what we have in common , rather than what divides us ; the meeting of equals , rather than the separation ; the demolishing of barriers which keep us apart .
Europe must not define its borders , whether they be geographical , ideological , religious , male versus female , young versus old , rich versus poor .
European peace policy in its best sense means overcoming barriers .
Europe is in urgent need of a fresh wind , blowing as it does in Great Britain and France since the changes of government .
But above all Europe needs a change of policy to one which will really attack the scandal of mass unemployment , and which will at last bid farewell to the neo-liberal creed and become a Europe of people , not of moneybags .
Europe needs social democracy .
Europe is pan-European .
People must be convinced of this .
Honestly and truly , Mr Juncker said this morning .
Yes , honestly and truly .
But then one has to say that a Pan-European Europe cannot be financed out of petty cash .
Europe needs all that , and only then will it regain acceptance and trust .
Europe needs that , Mr President , and I really need more time to speak .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in this debate on the state of the Union it is obviously interesting to see whether the Treaty of Amsterdam , which has after all been the most important development in the Union in the past year , has had any appreciable influence .
What is the Commission 's view of the treaty ?
Did it , like us , find the result disappointing ?
And if so , what conclusions does it draw from that ?
But to my surprise Amsterdam is conspicuous by its absence in the Commission 's plans , just when I would expect the Commission to have announced specific new initiatives in its plans , either to achieve the further institutional reforms that are needed before enlargement or by exploiting the possibilities that the treaty will in fact offer practically and creatively .
We expect a little more initiative from the Commission , just as we do from some parliamentary committees , including the committee of which I am chairman , which are now being consulted beforehand on ratification .
The Commission should therefore perhaps anticipate the entry into force of the treaty .
But if it does not wish to do so it is all the more necessary , pending formal ratification , to address a number of matters which have been under discussion for so long .
I am thinking firstly of the free movement of goods and persons , the Monti proposals .
These are not discussed at all in the 1997 annual report and in the 1998 report are only mentioned in the light of the opinion by the Veil consultative group .
The Council is not dealing with these initiatives either , apparently awaiting ratification of the treaty .
Apart from the fact that the Monti proposals go further and are stronger than the provisions on the free movement of persons in the Treaty of Amsterdam , it is surely unacceptable that nothing is happening in this area .
In 1993 our Parliament urged the Commission to act on this point .
So I now want to know what the Commission is going to do , or does the Parliament have to take legal steps to force the Council to act ?
Moving on now to a more general problem facing the Union , namely the decline in public confidence in the Union , I see the Monti proposals as a good test case .
How can the Union complain about the lack of support for the European project , when the Union is not able to implement such an essential component of Union policy , the free movement of persons .
It is surely illogical that beans can cross internal borders freely whilst people have less and less freedom of movement .
In the people 's Union , and I put this point specifically to the Commission , more attention should be paid to closing the gap between the institutions and policy on the one hand and the people with whom it all started on the other hand .
National policy makers , national finance ministers , are always warning that Union policy is too costly and that they should receive as much nationally as they pay in contributions .
The renationalization card keeps being played , something we obviously oppose as a Parliament .
But the Commission will surely agree with me that it is naive to assume that we can stop the renationalization trend unless we have concrete European results at the same time .
Mr President , the essential purpose of this debate this morning is to take stock of where we are today in the European Union and to map out a way forward for the future ; a way forward which is practical but also inspirational .
Today , if we are objective , we have reason to be optimistic .
A new treaty has been agreed , a treaty which extends democracy , which deepens the Union and which clarifies many of our structures and procedures .
We have Agenda 2000 , which provides a framework for enlargement and a new financial perspective .
At the same time , all the indications are that we are on course for the creation of a single currency on 1 January 1999 .
Having said that , we should not be complacent - far from it .
What needs to be done is immense .
Two issues , I believe , need to be emphasized above all others .
First , there is the issue of enlargement .
I believe it is essential that the enlargement negotiations begin as soon as is practicable .
If we are to see swift progress we should begin those negotiations with five of the applicant states in central and eastern Europe , plus , of course , Cyprus .
However , the other countries who aspire to membership must not be excluded from the process .
We have to be inclusive , not just sending out the right message , but also making practical proposals to facilitate this process .
At the same time we have to be mindful of our responsibilities with regard to economic and social cohesion within the existing Member States .
I am encouraged by many of the comments and proposals that the Commission is making in this respect .
The second issue is the issue of unemployment .
Frankly , the situation where we have between 18 and 20 million people unemployed in the European Union is unacceptable .
Our goal should be nothing less than full employment .
We should be careful that we do not simply engage in the rhetoric of full employment , but at the same time we come forward with the proposals which will actually attain that goal .
I hope that the special employment summit will be an ideal opportunity for national governments to pool their experiences and to come forward with a set of practical propositions which we can all implement in our different ways throughout the 15 Member States .
We have to be clear that there are no shortcuts to creating jobs for our people .
We have to make sure that the emphasis is on competitiveness for the European economy as a whole .
We must ensure that we have radical policies to guarantee that our workforce is employable , as far as possible .
We have to continue to put the emphasis on education and training right through our entire educational systems .
At the same time , we must ensure that we have policies that stimulate sustainable growth in those sections of the economy which will produce the greatest number of jobs .
One area stands out : the small and medium-sized enterprise sector .
If we want to create jobs , that is where our emphasis should be .
Let us not forget that although we have the single market on paper , we are a long way from having that single market in reality .
Let us make sure that that single market is actually in place , as many people claim it is already , even though we know that in reality it is not .
Let us make sure , in other words , that we have a practical agenda , one that is relevant to the people and one that sets out a vision for a genuine people 's Europe .
One moment , Mr Santer .
I ask for silence from all .
The President of the Commission is speaking .
Have the courtesy to enter the room in silence .
At all events , Mr President , I shall soon be reaching the end of my brief intervention .
I wished only reply to those members who raised a number of questions in order to ensure that the debate took on its full substance .
We have made proposals for the reorganization of the Commission to the intergovernmental conference .
You know that the heads of state and government did not adopt these proposals .
On the other hand , in a declaration contained in an annex to the Treaty of Amsterdam , we undertook to reorganize our services , particularly those involving external relations .
We have already worked over a long period on this reorganization , and the decision was taken , on a collegiate basis , to set up a common service for all external relations , which should be operational no later than 1 July 1998 .
In other words , all of our external services will be reassembled into a common service with a view to reorganising our external relations under a single vice-president , as I proposed at the Intergovernmental Conference .
On the other hand , of course , I agree with the lively criticism from Elmar Brok , but I have already replied to some of his questions .
As regards foreign trade , one of the faults , it appears to me , of the Treaty of Amsterdam , was the insufficiency of the reform of article 113 .
In the field of foreign trade , when the Union speaks with a single voice it is successful , both in the Uruguay-Round and in other fields relating to the World Trade Organization .
I believe that Member States have not perceived the full extent of the advantages they might have gained by extending the powers of the Commission into sectors such as services and intellectual property .
They will repent when the forthcoming negotiations take place at WTO level .
Mrs d 'Ancona is certainly right to ask the Commission 's opinion on the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I have said and repeated , this very morning in my address , that effectively this treaty has made a number of real advances possible , while realising full well that , on the institutional level , we did not progress as much as we would have wished .
In the final analysis , we should take into consideration the real advances of the Treaty of Amsterdam and the President-inOffice is certainly right to say that the Treaty of Amsterdam is a good treaty .
That does not mean that the treaty fulfils all the ambitions that the President of the Commission in the first instance , and you yourselves , had placed in the Intergovernmental Conference , but I have often remarked in my political life that Europe always reacts in response to external political pressure .
That is why I am convinced , as regards institutional reform , that Europe will react , and it will proceed to institutional reform prior to enlargement .
This is the reason why the Commission has proposed calling a new intergovernmental conference after the year 2000 , but at all events , prior to enlargement , in order to implement all the institutional reforms necessary to ensure that our union remains a strong and effective European Union !
Thank you , Mr President of the Commission .
With that we come to the end of this debate , and I should like to thank all those who took part in it . I especially wish to thank the Presidents of the Council and the Commission for the facilities that they provided to make it possible for us to hold this genuinely political debate on the state of the Union .
I think we should all be very pleased .
Mr President , you called for silence in the House .
I wish to refer to another call for silence under Rule 2 of our Rules of Procedure .
I have written to you today to point out that four Members of this House have been invited to accept , by 3 p.m , the code of conduct imposed by the Labour Party in London preventing them from speaking to the press and that , in my view , this constitutes an infringement of the Rules of this House .
I understand that you have written to Mr Coates .
However , I also understand that the letter says it is not a matter for this House .
I submit that it is a matter for this House , that freedom of speech should be absolute and it is the duty of the Bureau to maintain it .
Mr McMillan-Scott , I will not allow a debate on this matter .
I am sorry , it is not the item on our agenda - it is another point .
That is what I said this morning .
That is why I replied to the Members concerned who wrote to me on the matter .
Mr McMillan-Scott has asked me to put the matter before the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
I will do that so no one can have any doubt about the right interpretation .
This House is not the place to have a debate on this matter .
Mr David , I am sorry I will not give you or anyone else the floor because I do not want to raise again a matter which will be put before the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
Votes
I shall speak on Amendment No 1 .
Very well , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , but allow me to state that Amendment No 1 is out of order , and I am giving you the floor because I assume that you do not agree .
Mr President , I do indeed dispute your point of view , founded I imagine on Rule 125 of the Rules of Procedure , and more precisely paragraph 1a ) .
You intend to apply the Rule under which the amendment is out of order because it applies to 1997 instead of 1998 .
I specify first that the full text of my amendment was not exactly the one that was proposed to our Chamber .
I would also like to remind you , referring to page 24 of the Minutes of our meeting of Monday , as approved Tuesday morning , that you yourself proposed not adding a part-session to the 1997 calendar , but adding one to the 1998 calendar .
The deadline for tabling amendments to this proposal was noon on Tuesday .
There was therefore a possibility of amending your proposal .
This proposal was a double one , and Mr President , I have done no more than take up the terms of your letter of 8 October sent to all group presidents .
You said there that after checking all the information , there should be an item on the agenda for the October part-session in Strasbourg on setting dates for a twelfth session in Strasbourg , from 3 to 7 November .
I have done no more than defer to the opinion of the legal department , and you know very well that if the Parliament does not introduce this twelfth session , it will also be acting against the decision of the Court of Justice .
As Jean-Claude Pasty said only the other day , Parliament would also be contravening the financial rules of our institution .
I know , Mr President , that you have come under considerable pressure not to put this amendment to the vote , but you are President of the Parliament .
It behoves you to ensure that the institution is respected from without .
Respect for our institution depends on respect for a decision of the Court of Justice .
It is for this reason that I request you to put this amendment to the vote .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I consider your amendment out of order for two reasons .
The first is that the agenda says : ' Votes : change to the calendar of the European Parliament 's 1998 part-sessions . '
It is therefore not a question of 1997 , as you yourself stated .
But there is another far more important reason , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
After my letter , I was able to check that it would be impossible , in practice , to hold that part-session .
Just yesterday , after my first reaction , which was to declare your amendment in order , I was able to check with the Commission that it would cause insurmountable problems for its members too .
I consequently believe that it would be incompatible with the seriousness of a Parliament to adopt a resolution in that it cannot put into practice .
There must be no doubt about it , that is the reason why I have decided to declare this amendment out of order , knowing full well that the decision would be criticized .
Mr President , on a point of order .
You have assured me that you are committed not only to respect the Court decision on our sessions here in Strasbourg but that you are equally committed to applying the whole of the Edinburgh package to the meetings of Parliament .
In that case , I withdraw my amendment .
Now we have to vote on the proposal of the Conference of Presidents which is the only proposal put forward .
The Socialist Group has asked for a recorded vote .
( Parliament adopted the proposal )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the question raised by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , over and above the strict problem of whether the amendment is in order , is nevertheless a question which should be posed .
When this house voted on its timetable for 1997 , it violated legality , violated treaties , violated the Edinburgh compromise and violated its Rules of Procedure .
( Mixed reactions ) This legal violation was condemned by the highest judicial body in the European Union , the European Court of Justice , on which the duty of stating the law is conferred under treaty .
Now 1997 , as far as I know , is not over .
It is therefore consequently perfectly possible even now to comply with this decision .
And the question which is raised is how we are , between now and the end of 1997 ...
Mr Gollnisch , you have gone beyond your minute and at all events you are aware of the fact that the Court of Justice did not make a decision for 1997 .
It made a decision for 1996 , that is exactly what it did in the judgement , which it suffices to read .
Therefore , for the time being , there is no decision relating to 1997 .
The Court is free to take a decision , and legal action is furthermore underway .
The Member States which took the initiative to institute that action are perfectly free to continue it or , as I hope , to suspend it , in the light of the impossibility of holding the session .
Our role is not to poison things still further , but to try and calm them , and that is what this House did this morning with the vote that it has just taken .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , this is a really important report .
It concerns the future of a sector of the future , telecommunications .
It concerns the regulation of the World Trade Organization , which is establishing itself as a new World Government in many areas that are particularly important to us .
The report itself makes abundantly clear what problems exist in finding agreement , which we still have to discuss .
For example , the USA is making exceptions for itself , which it will not grant to others .
( Mixed reactions ) The report draws no conclusions from this , and in view of the fact that we have come to the last moment when Parliament will discuss the matter , I do not move that it be dealt with other than as proposed .
Mr President , I only wish to say that I cannot share Mr Wolf 's opinion .
I also wish to state that we have had to agree to vote for this report without debate owing to the enormous delay with which Council decided to pass the issue to Parliament .
And this happens constantly !
I am therefore taking the opportunity to say that we cannot work in this way .
Mrs Castellina , I have taken note of your comment , which in fact has more general substance .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , in principle , on each occasion you quote the opinion of the rapporteur .
I remind the rapporteur that he should defend the text the committee voted for , and not just the Socialist list .
Mr Herman , that is the rule .
The rapporteur can also have personal opinions , but he should also make it clearly understood that this is a personal preference , and that the committee voted differently .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President .
I have asked to make an explanation of vote on the motion concerning the calendar .
I have been informed that it is not possible to make an explanation and I should like to ask you , first , to explain why I cannot make a explanation of vote , and , secondly , to give me an opportunity to do so .
Mrs Müller , I am very sorry , but procedurally I cannot allow you to give an explanation of vote . There is no text on which you can give an explanation of vote .
That has never happened .
Mr President , could you then please inform me on what legal basis you decline to allow me to make an explanation of vote ?
If you say that the procedure does not allow it , then I must ask you to tell me which Rule in the Rules of Procedure forbids this explanation of vote .
Mr President , I do not wish to detain you any longer .
I take note of what you say , but I should like to reserve the right to request a comprehensive statement on this from the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunity .
My interpretation of the paragraph you read out is that , because we have taken a final vote , I have a perfect right to make an explanation of vote .
I shall not , however , debate the matter any further with you now .
I should be grateful if you would perhaps join with me in requesting the Committee on the Rules of Procedure to produce an expert report on the matter .
Mrs Müller , I have no objection to you referring the matter to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure for an authoritative interpretation , and if the Committee on the Rules considers it necessary to amend the Rule , it can make a proposal to amend it .
But as Rule 122 stands , according to my interpretation , it does not permit an explanation of vote because there was no final vote .
But I will note your proposal , with which I personally do not disagree .
Does this now mean that I should make my explanation of vote ?
No .
I agreed to refer the matter to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure to clear it up and , if it so decides , to propose the amendment of this article .
Kaklamanis recommendation ( A4-0296 / 97 )
We must , according to the assent procedure , give an opinion on the agreement linking our Union with the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia in the transportation field .
Our Chamber must give a strong political signal to this country , which has been severely affected by the war situation on the frontiers of Bosnia .
By giving our green light , we will enable the necessary development of road , rail and combined transportation infrastructures .
Infrastructure improvement will improve travel not only within Macedonia , but also to and from our Community .
The European Union must have its place in the reconstruction of this part of Europe . The European Union will have such a place if we give our approval as proposed by our rapporteur .
This will translate into the granting of substantial economic assistance through the European Investment Bank .
I associate myself with the request of our colleague , and hope that our Chamber will back this stance .
We think that agreements between countries should be based on mutual respect and not , as in this case , on one party being forced to change its constitution and its tax system to obtain a trade agreement and subsidies for its transport system .
We also think that greater weight should be given to environmental considerations when the EU gives subsidies to transport investments .
We are therefore abstaining from the vote on the Additional Protocol to the Agreement between the EU and Slovenia in the field of transport , and the Agreement in the field of transport between the EU and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Medina Ortega recommendation ( A4-0319 / 97 )
For the benefit of consumers we support the committee 's Amendment No 10 on exemptions from the protection of designs .
To give spare parts producers the opportunity to make products which are included in or form a part of a complete product contributes , through increased competition , to lower prices in the market .
Price levels are an important factor for consumers .
In our judgment this would not be harmful to the industry 's development .
Legal protection of designs and models raises not only delicate legal problems , but also major economic and political problems .
In its first reading , the debate focused on the question of the repairs clause .
Our interlocutors in the Council and in the Commission agreed in saying that this was the essential part of the draft directive .
However , in the second reading , it is proposed we adopt the draft by setting aside the question of the repairs clause , which has become secondary , as if by magic .
The Parliament should ensure that the Commission and the Council face up to their responsibilities .
Mr Medina Ortega has proposed a compromise solution .
If the Council prefers another one , let it say so , and we shall take our decision .
The conciliation procedure is there for that .
Even so , in order to engage in the conciliation procedure , we have to re-establish the amendments voted on in the first reading .
This is why I voted in favour of Mr Medina Ortega 's proposals .
Car manufacturers make an important contribution to the European economy , not least in terms of the number of people employed in the industry throughout the continent .
It is understandable that their priority is to protect their own position and that they see the production of spare parts as important to this .
However , given the size of the car industry in Europe , surely the car manufacturers should recognize that it is large enough to accommodate those small and medium-sized enterprises who also provide valuable employment in the production of spare parts .
Given the emphasis in current thinking with the EU on developing small and medium-sized enterprises as well as promoting improved competition , it is regrettable that the Council took a position contrary to that thinking .
In Northern Ireland there are a number of small businesses that depend on the right to produce spare parts .
These businesses contribute at least as much to the local economy as the big car manufacturers do to the larger European economy .
I am voting for this report today as I am committed to seeing the repair clause reinstated to the design directive . In this I am not alone .
The British Government is keen to see this clause reinstated .
There is wide consensus between original vehicle manufacturers and the spare parts market in Britain that this clause is an acceptable compromise .
The repair clause is like a classic British compromise .
Vehicle manufacturers have a right to benefit from their investment in design .
Customers also deserve easy access to spare parts and the lower prices from competition between parts suppliers and the original manufacturers , provided that a reasonable payment is made by parts suppliers to the manufacturers .
I feel confident that industry could reach a sensible compromise here .
By voting for the repair clause today , we can urge the Council to allow industry to get on with this task and protect the interests of those who work in or use the spare parts sector .
That way we can safeguard jobs and create a competitive framework for businesses to thrive in .
COM in processed fruit and vegetable products
In its proposed amendment to the regulation , the European Commission proposes to reduce the quota of tinned whole peeled tomatoes by 15 , 000 tonnes and , in counterpart to this , to increase its quota of other products by the same amount in order to take into account the needs of the French food processing industry .
Our group , of course , has unreservedly voted in favour of this modification of the Council regulation .
I must specify that this amendment arises from last spring 's negotiation of the price package , and that it is a response to the request from the French Minister of Agriculture at the time .
It is important that the Parliament adopt this amendment to the regulation with great speed , as our food processing industry needs it in order to adapt in line with the changing market .
I take advantage of this occasion to remind you of the difficulties which French tomato producers have faced for a number of years .
At the appropriate time our group proposed a number of amendments as part of the fruit and vegetable WTO ( Arias Cañete report ) .
For the most part , these were adopted in the part-session , but unfortunately , those relating to Community preference were not taken up by the Commission .
In conclusion I would remind you that French producers have substantial expenses , and that the competition from other Member States , and also from third countries , is in fact unfair competition , as labour costs and taxation are not the same , at a time when markets are increasingly globalized .
The Commission should take into account such comments , if it wishes to preserve market gardening throughout the regions .
Castellina report ( Á4-0305 / 97 )
The European Parliament has been called upon for some time to take a position on the texts relating to the operation of the WTO .
The report by Mrs Castellina is an excellent contribution to raising awareness within the Parliament of the real consequences of the general commitments which were subscribed to without an attentive study of their foreseeable economic and social effects .
Mrs Castellina emphasizes the regularity with which the European negotiators decline to use the principle of symmetrical concessions , without in most cases energetically putting forward the interests of its Member States , particularly if the United States of America are involved .
The report justly denounces the lack of foresight on the part of the Commission , which would have enabled the Commission and this Parliament to measure the impact of this agreement on the telecommunications sectors of the Member States of the Union .
Mrs Castellina is also concerned at the absence of foresight regarding the consequences of this agreement on this sector in the developing countries .
I can but approve the position adopted by the rapporteur .
The absence of data enabling an evaluation of the consequences of our international trade agreements is unfortunately a constant factor in the external trade policy of the European Union .
In its management of the WTO , and of free trade agreements in all directions , as well as of the customs unions to which it has allowed itself to be blindly committed , the European Union appears to be more guided by ideological presuppositions than by the will to serve the real interests of the Member States .
The Commission appears very often to renounce early on the use of the very varied range of protection procedures of which the United States in particular avail themselves .
This agreement is a new illustration of this in the field of telecommunications .
The signature by almost 70 countries of an agreement on the liberalization of the international telecommunications market after three years of negotiation is to be welcomed , especially since it provides a sound legal framework for worldwide investments in the telecom sector .
The ' most favoured nation ' principle and the WTO arbitration ensures clarity for businesses .
However it cannot be inferred that the agreement only produces winners .
The Castellina report is rightly both positive and critical .
We voted for the report and also for the result of the negotiations .
The following critical observations must be made on the result .
1.Complete liberalization still does not exist in every country .
The United States and Japan in particular have stipulated a number of exceptions .
The risk that these create is detrimental to the EU , which is opening up its market completely .
The implementation of the agreement must be properly monitored.2.It is still uncertain whether the agreement will lead to a drastic reduction in international telephone charges .
That can only be expected in non-Western countries with a state monopoly in the telecom market .
Charges in the US are already low and the EU market will be completely free from 1998 .
So the consumer will in fact notice very little effect from the international telecom agreement.3.The advantages for developing countries also have to be seen in relative terms .
With the improved international legal framework those countries are becoming more attractive for investment , which encourages economic growth and technical development .
But because they are also less involved in the telecom infrastructure , there is a strong risk that when their telecom market is completely liberalized they will be caught unawares and will suffer serious damage.Finally the implications of the agreement for employment must not be overestimated .
It will probably only increase the demand for jobs requiring high qualifications .
The liberalization of the telecom market will be of very little benefit to the lower end of the labour market .
It remains to be seen how far the agreement will help reduce unemployment .
Baldarelli report ( A4-0275 / 97 )
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall , the Republic of Slovenia , with its two million inhabitants and with an area of 20 , 250 square kilometres , has become one of the most economically developed eastern republics and the first one to declare its independence with a people 's referendum on 25 July 1991 .
It has a healthy economy with inflation estimated at around 6 % .
Its currency , the talarar , can be considered to be one of the most significant European currencies .
Slovenia submitted an application to join the European Union in June 1996 .
The Commission recommended that negotiations commence for its accession .
For some time now , this country has held economic and commercial relations with the EU , concluding an economic and commercial cooperation agreement and an agreement in the road and rail transport sector , which is valid until 2003 .
I cannot be certain in recalling the works to be constructed and the support services here .
However , I would like to point out that Slovenia will undertake to invest ECU 2 , 200 million of its own budget , corresponding to 2.9 % of the GDP .
I will conclude by expressing the favourable opinion of my group , the Alleanza Nazionale , to the approval of this motion , therefore agreeing with the rapporteur .
Tappin report ( A4-0309 / 97 )
I would like to thank the rapporteur for doing a good job on the report on an issue which is important for Europe .
In connection with the drawing up of the report , I had a number of additional proposals in the opinion of the Committee on Employment on the report which above all emphasize the social and environmental aspects of public procurement .
My additional proposals have not in all respects been taken into consideration by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
I think that more account should be taken of environmental and social considerations in the rules which apply to public procurement and that the current rules contain uncertainty which justifies such considerations .
My position in the voting has been guided by this .
Today , the Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of the report by Michael Tappin dealing with the Commission 's Green Paper , covering the field of public sector procurement .
Danish Social Democrats agree with the report that public sector procurement is an important field , as it accounts for no less than 11 % of the total GDP of the EU .
The report finds ( as does the Green Paper ) that there are still countries which are not following the rules for tenders for public procurement .
The Danish Social Democrats wish to emphasize that free and healthy competition in the public procurement market is essential to ensure a certain , properly working single market to the benefit of all the citizens of the EU .
In his speech during the debate , Niels Sindal expressed scepticism about the possibility of issuing tenders with suspensive effect and suspending tenders .
The Danish Social Democrats see this as a matter for the national courts .
The report challenges the individual Member States to implement the legislation which the EU has already implemented in this field as soon as possible .
The Danish Social Democrats look forward to the continuing debate on the field of public procurement based on the Commission 's Green Paper and the report of the European Parliament now produced .
I welcome the production of this report .
In particular I support the proposal to blacklist companies that are involved in cartels and price-fixing agreements .
While the report relates specifically to public contracts , I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to suspicions that similar practices operate in Ireland 's meat processing factories .
Irish beef farmers have experienced severe financial problems as a consequence of the BSE crisis .
As they have been denied access to both certain European and third markets they have been unable to export their beef as they have done in the past .
This places them at the mercy of those who dominate the Irish meat industry .
I would urge the Commission to investigate this area to see if any malpractice exists and if it does to take immediate action .
The levels for public procurement in the EU should be as low as possible to allow local production for local consumption and to stimulate local enterprise .
Since several amendments to take things into account other than purely economic considerations were approved , e.g. Amendment No 6 on environmental considerations , I have voted yes in the final vote .
Bösch report ( A4-0287 / 97 )
We have great sympathy for the rapporteur 's ambition to overcome the fraud which exists within the EU .
However , unlike the rapporteur we do not think that this requires a supranational level in the fight against crime , and that it is sufficient to have an intensified fight at the national level .
We are therefore opposed to the supranationalism which advocated in paragraph 3 , the independent European judicial authority which is advocated in paragraph 11 and the separate category of crime which is discussed in paragraph 17 .
It is because of this , the rapporteur 's demands for supranationalism in the judicial system , that we are abstaining in the final vote .
We would like to thank the rapporteur for a thorough report on a important matter .
We voted for the report , but we think that the forms of an independent European judiciary should be examined in the future work .
The Danish Social Democrats support the report by Mr Bösch .
Fraud involving EU resources is a very serious problem which affects all the citizens of the European Union to a greater or lesser extent .
There is no doubt that this fraud must be combatted and that this can be done most effectively at Community level .
On the other hand , Denmark 's reservations about participating in legal cooperation in the EU prevent it from being involved in the initiatives to combat fraud which the report demands , which is why we have not voted in favour of all parts of the report .
Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Eriksson , Seppänen and Sjöstedt ( GUE / NGL ) , Gahrton , Holm and Schörling ( V ) , Bonde , Lis Jensen , Krarup and Sandbaek ( I-EDN ) , in writing .
( DA ) Openness is the best and cheapest weapon against fraud involving EU funds .
All the monitoring committees in national parliaments and the European Parliament , the EU 's auditors and national auditing organizations must have access to all documents where EU funds have been used .
The public should be guaranteed access to the files on the use of the resources ( possibly with the actual names involved being deleted before they are handed over ) .
In this way , fear of being discovered will automatically limit the amount of fraud drastically , and we will not need a larger supervisory apparatus and more EU competence to hunt the fraudsters to whom the current lack of openness at the EU is an invitation to fraud .
Fraud is a great evil which endangers the EU , not only because of the financial loss , which probably exceeds ECU 1.3 billion , but also because it seriously damages public confidence in the European institutions .
Like the rapporteur I am pleased with the Commission 's annual report and work programme on combatting fraud .
I agree with many of the Committee on Budgets ' recommendations , including setting up an independent body to investigate the operation of the European institutions .
I do disagree strongly with the view that fraud can only be combatted effectively by a European investigation office , under the control of the European institutions .
Such a body is incompatible with the principle of subsidiarity .
Justice and investigation ( including criminal law ) are the responsibility of the Member States .
It has to be admitted that Member States have neglected their customs departments since the internal market came into force .
Whilst trade between the Member States was growing fast , customs manpower and budgets were cut .
Also there is still insufficient cooperation between customs departments .
If the functioning and cooperation of national investigation departments are optimalized , there is ample scope for reducing fraud at European level .
Although we reject the idea of a European investigation office we consider combatting fraud such an important issue that we are otherwise entirely in favour of the report .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Protection of displaced persons
The next item is the report ( A4-0284 / 97 ) by Mr Wiebenga , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the proposal to the Council for a Joint Action based on Article K.3 ( 2 ) ( b ) of the Treaty on European Union concerning temporary protection of displaced persons ( COM ( 97 ) 0093 - C4-0247 / 97-97 / 0081 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , since the fall of the Berlin wall and the end of the cold war numerous wars and civil wars have broken out in the world .
We read about them every week .
There is talk of instability in a turbulent world and even in Europe , as we know , there are civil wars and so on . Just look at Bosnia .
These disturbances lead to large-scale migration .
The figure mentioned for former Yugoslavia is two million displaced persons , half a million of them flooding into the European Union .
Such a large number of people cannot be dealt with through the usual asylum procedures and yet they need to be allowed in .
The admission of displaced persons into the European Union has so far been uneven .
Germany has taken in a large number of Bosnian refugees .
The Netherlands and Sweden have played their part , but France , England and Spain for instance have done very little .
This is an unsatisfactory situation because at the moment , as we know , the borders in Europe are being dismantled , Europe is becoming one legal area and solidarity and cooperation are needed in its immigration and asylum policy .
That means that a fair distribution of the burden and I would really prefer to say a fair distribution of responsibilities must be the crux of Europe 's asylum and immigration policy .
The present Community action , a form of draft law , is a step in that direction .
The Community action is also of course aimed at the rights of displaced persons in the various Member States - which have up to now all had different rules , nationally orientated - with a view to harmonizing rights throughout Europe .
Then I would like to mention housing for the displaced persons , education , work and so on .
That is an important aspect of this draft law , but some aspects are open to criticism .
For instance the time taken to reach a decision on entry .
How long should it take ?
The proposal is vague on that point .
It indicates that asylum procedures can be suspended after not more than five years and governments will then consider what is to be done .
An amendment I tabled in committee , which the committee adopted , makes it clear that it should not take more than five years to admit displaced persons .
It is inhuman to make people wait more than five years in uncertainty .
After five years people have to go back to their country of origin when the situation there is believed to be safe and reasonable , or they must be granted permanent leave to remain in the country to which they have been admitted , in other words in the European Union , with the possibility of naturalization .
Another matter of concern with regard to this Community action is the decision-making process .
In the Community action it is proposed that decisions on the introduction of rules on entry should be taken by qualified majority and that is very positive .
What is the problem then ?
There are - and I say this quite openly and clearly - two amendments by Mrs Palacio and a number of other colleagues , Amendments Nos 39 and 40 , which call for unanimity on this point and that means that there will again be a right of veto .
I say to my Spanish colleagues , just imagine that in the near future a civil war breaks out in Morocco and tens of thousands of Moroccans , maybe even more , come from Morocco to Spain and Spain wants to introduce rules on the admission of displaced persons to the European Union and there is a possibility of a right of veto .
Do you really think that you can accommodate Spain with fifteen Ministers of Justice ?
It is obviously impossible .
I therefore appeal to Parliament to firmly reject Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 's amendments calling for unanimity in particular and I am obviously appealing on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party .
Mr President , may I conclude by complimenting Commissioner Gradin .
This is the first time that the European Commission has made use of its right of initiative in a Community action .
I hope that we can still sharpen up and improve the European Commission 's draft by means of amendment but this is the way to operate .
And I also want to say to her , keep up the good work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with this proposal for a common measure on the temporary protection of refugees the Commission has for the first time - Mr Wiebenga also mentioned this at the end - taken the initiative for a common measure , where the European Parliament was consulted before the Council of Ministers had made its final decision .
My group and I welcome this procedure and presume that this will be the rule in future .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , for which I was the draftsman , has given no opinion on this report , because when my opinion was presented several of my amendments could not be agreed , with the result that I was no longer able to support the opinion .
The EU common policy on refugees is stagnant , even though the policy on asylum-seekers is seen as one of the most important areas of cooperation .
The proposal for this common measure must be regarded , therefore , as a long-awaited initiative to end the standstill .
The parliamentary report will show that an asylum policy at EU level does not have to mean an extension of fortress Europe , but can also be a constructive development of existing standards .
In this way , this measure must be viewed as a framework for a unified procedure in the case of a massive influx of refugees into the European Union .
A massive influx means that an individual examination of refugee status in accordance with the Geneva Convention is no longer possible .
This measure is in no way concerned with redefining the term refugee , or with creating new standards in the sense of international refugee protection .
On the contrary , it seeks to establish a common procedure , so as to allow Member States to have in an emergency the fastest and most unified procedure possible .
That was also the aim of the rapporteur , and one he always kept in mind .
The following points of criticism do , however , remain : firstly , it seems to me to be very problematical to decide who has really heavy burdens to bear in every case .
Mr Wiebenga pointed this out in his speech .
Of course , Germany has accepted 320 , 000 refugees .
In absolute terms that is the highest number .
If one considers , however , that Sweden has accepted 60 , 000 refugees , that is very much more when compared to total populations .
This country has , therefore , taken on very heavy burdens .
How are offset payments to be made , therefore ?
The suggestion of distributing refugees numerically equally throughout the EU means for them , following the shock of expulsion , a second traumatic experience .
At the same time the value of equal distribution is doubtful , as I have said .
Also to be viewed in this light is the suggestion by the Commission that refugees might be accommodated in their country of origin .
Does one really intend that people who have arrived at Europe 's gates by land and sea should then be sent back to the places from which they have managed to escape with their bare lives ?
Unclarified also is the question of how refugees should enter the EU and how they should be received there .
The common measure should after all lead , as I have said , to the speedy and unbureaucratic treatment of refugees .
Visa limitation and the use of the basic regulation on third countries stand in the way of this , however , and must be de-activated in this case .
For this reason it is also necessary for refugees to be kept informed in their own languages and in the language of the receiving country , so that they can understand their rights , including third party rights .
Finally , I should like to mention an amendment motion concerning unaccompanied minors .
It must be made clear that they are guaranteed the use of all rights open to them .
Mr President , the figures displaced persons have risen dramatically in recent years .
We are therefore very glad that the Commission has taken an initiative aimed at temporary protection for large numbers of people who are fleeing from particular geographic areas .
The proposal to the Council is to decide on common rules on protection based on Article K 3 .
In recent years we have seen a number of crises , such as the migration from Bosnia and the flight from Albania .
Thank you Mrs Zimmermann for mentioning Sweden 's efforts in this area ; they have , of course , been quite considerable .
When large numbers of people close to the Union begin to move because of disasters of various kinds , the Union is affected .
Our underlying common values in the Union , a Union founded on humanity , demand that we also show solidarity in this area for people moving away from a disaster .
However , solidarity requires that measures are in the context of a set of rules which can be accepted by the citizens of the Union .
It is now up to each country to do this itself , otherwise a few countries will have to cope with the consequences alone .
That is unreasonable in a Union with freedom of movement .
We must help each other .
That means common rules , but it also means that in future we will need common ways of making decisions when we adopt these rules , rules which are not about making people into permanent refugees , but about giving them just what they need , i.e. protection for the period that they cannot remain in their home country .
As the Commission has also pointed out , it is very important that the conditions are created in our countries for these people to be able to support themselves and their children .
That is also one of the conditions for them to be able to be received in the proper way in all of our Member States .
This is an area which the Council should in future look at with more modern eyes and adapt to the new growing labour market which demands greater flexibility .
I will conclude by thanking Commissioner Gradin for this initiative and also for wanting to listen to Parliament .
This initiative is central for the Union , since it is a test of whether we are capable of collective responsibility in difficult situations .
Because if we cannot manage it in this area , how are we going to succeed in all of the others ?
Therefore it is important that we listen closely to each other .
These are sensitive issues .
In the Group of the European People 's Party we have some political points which are very important for us .
I have highlighted some of them here .
Mrs Zimmermann and not least Mr Wiebenga , on behalf of the EPP Group , we shall support this report .
We think it is a good report that Mr Wiebenga has produced .
I would particularly like to underline the excellent example from Spain , which I think was very good , and on which I have the same opinion .
However , the condition for us in the EPP Group is that certain of our central points go through .
Otherwise we will be obliged to abstain from the vote .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have greatly appreciated the work carried out by Mr Wiebenga , who has always been very attentive to these topics , and my group will support the general positions assumed by the rapporteur .
We also consider the procedure undertaken by the Commission to be very serious , procedure that involves the European Parliament directly .
This constitutes a very important fact , significant progress .
The subject that concerns us today is certainly a very delicate subject .
On the other hand , wars , hunger , famine , disasters , that make history even today , are part of the history that characterized the migrations in the world , belong to the history of the world .
So obviously , we cannot shut our eyes to the events of recent years , to what happened in the course of history .
Hence the need for more developed , more refined regulations and the need to give a connotation to this new category of so-called " displaced persons ' ; a category that is distinguished from that of refugees , those seeking asylum ; a category to which a great deal of attention needs to be paid , however : in fact , we would not want this category to have been created , let us say , artificially , to avoid a term , which I appreciated a great deal in Mr Wiebenga 's speech , the term " responsibility ' .
In fact , Europe has a great responsibility today on this matter : the responsibility of being a beacon , a reference point for all those in difficult situations , those subjected to particular and temporary dramatic living conditions .
We cannot forget that Europe is a reference point , and therefore has great responsibilities , the burdens of solidarity .
On the other hand , we should ensure that the framework of regulations does not represent a further obligation , a further tie and trap to the work of responsibility , of solidarity that Europe should have .
I therefore agree with Mr Wiebenga when he states that the qualified majority in this case is absolutely essential , that turning back unanimously would be a great mistake .
And so the question of compensation is very important : compensation means that it is not just one member country assuming possible responsibility for the acceptance of these displaced persons , but that responsibility is common to the 15 countries of Europe .
Mr President , the Group of the European Radical Alliance is rarely prodigal with its compliments . Nevertheless , this time I think the author of this report should be most warmly congratulated .
This is not said as a conventional figure of speech , but as real congratulations for the excellence of the text .
This proposal relating to joint action is exemplary in more than one respect , and it is part of the ongoing move towards European construction which is so close to our hearts .
Firstly , it establishes a true solidarity among countries in the Union , in that it requires a distribution of expenses and responsibilities .
It is not uninteresting in this respect to underscore or mention in passing that , on the occasion of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia , Germany took in several hundreds of thousands of displaced persons and that , while no reproach is to be made to anyone , our British friends , for example , have hardly received a single one .
Secondly , this proposal also tries to harmonize the legislation and regulations governing the fate of displaced persons .
In this , it provides an opportunity to create convergence in the behaviour of Member States and governments .
Finally , the European Parliament is now informed - or its opinion is requested - on the conduct to be adopted in the future .
This procedure should be standard , but it is , alas , a little too rare .
The major interest of this document is that it is focused on the human person as directly threatened by war and by the consequences of war .
It emphasizes in particular the minimum rights that refugees or displaced persons may claim , namely decent accommodation , education , social protection , the right to exercise business and mobility within the Union .
In this respect , there is some malpractice , and this should be guarded against .
Here I am thinking in particular about the purport of a number of amendments seeking limitations on the right to return to the country of origin , although this is an absolute and inalienable right .
Secondly , the rapporteur particularly insisted - very rightly - on the preeminent role of the High Commission for Refugees , which a number of amendments had sought to gloss over somewhat , although this is a structure which has until now taken on enormous responsibility , and shown great efficiency .
With regard to exclusions , the text naturally provides for exclusion against war criminals and authors of crimes against humanity .
As it happens , I think it is clearly desirable to exclude them once the legal judgement has been handed down and their guilt proven , but only then .
In this respect , may I remind you of the need rapidly to set up the International Court of Justice , on a permanent basis , with the capacity to hand down sentences in reasonable time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report from Mr Wiebenga relates ostensibly to hospitality for displaced persons , and in reality to the massive influx of refugees within the European Union .
Some claim it would be possible to set up a sort of European law , which would impose on the Member States an obligation to receive political refugees coming in massive numbers from non-European countries .
In reality , the report shows no concern about the fact that fraudulent asylum seeking is one of the leading fraudulent methods of immigration into the Member States .
Secondly , the report does not make it possible to assess the intentions of the persons in question .
To be quite concrete about this , why , for example , do the Tamils from Sri Lanka , fleeing both Sri Lanka and the conflict pitting them against those of Singhalese origin , absolutely have to find asylum in Europe , whereas on the other side of the Detroit of Colombo , there is the powerful federated state in the Indian Union , the Tamil Nadu , which under normal conditions should take them in ?
Why do the Algerians bolt into France , whereas many of them contributed to pushing France out by the same methods of assassination which are currently practised against Algerians today ?
If we are fearful about the situation in the Maghreb , let us rather make approaches to the Arab League .
Today , nobody can understand , Mr President , and here I conclude , how it is that in my own country the regime offered in the last few years to Algerian immigrants is more favourable than the regime granted the Harkis , who took their life into their hands when they fled Algeria , simply because they felt they were French .
I am thinking in particular of those whose sons have lost all , and who have committed themselves to die of hunger today in the very heart of Paris .
, Mr President , as usual the previous speaker on the other side of the House has not even taken the trouble to read the Commission 's proposal and Mr Wiebenga 's amendments .
The silly talk that we have had to listen to has nothing to do with what is in the proposal .
What we are actually talking about is a massive influx of people , as in the case of former Yugoslavia .
The good thing about the proposal is that it offers temporary protection and sets a time limit on it .
If you just listen you might not talk so much rubbish .
Secondly it is again stated that temporary protection is an instrument that does not replace or supplement the refugee convention .
Thirdly it is an appeal to share the burden .
We hope that the national governments also have such a positive attitude to temporary protection .
I hope in particular that Mr Wiebenga 's colleagues in the Netherlands Parliament will share his view .
In so far as we still have any criticisms , they relate , I may say , to minor points .
We do not want any pseudo new refugee convention , in other words a new legal status or bureaucratic rules as in the last part of Amendment No 2 which we , the Socialist Group , are therefore opposed to .
The same really applies to the temporary protection referred to in Amendment No 21 .
We consider that it causes unnecessary trouble and furthermore we , the European Parliament , were not consulted about the temporary protection .
But apart from that Mr Wiebenga has done excellent work and deserves our full support and we would like to join him in complimenting Commissioner Gradin on this fine cooperation .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Wiebenga , on his report .
A number of aspects could be highlighted , but I shall restrict myself to referring to certain paragraphs that I believe are particularly important .
One of the main points concerns article 10 of the joint action .
In its present wording , article 10 is , in my view , legally incorrect .
It provides that the examination of an application for asylum under the Geneva Convention introduced by a beneficiary of a temporary protection regime may be postponed for as long as the Council has not adopted a decision on the phasing out of the temporary protection regime .
The examination of an application for asylum cannot be legally delayed .
The procedure must offer all applicants the possibility of presenting their application for asylum as soon as possible .
In fact , this article should establish the procedure for dealing with displaced persons who , besides receiving temporary humanitarian protection , seek asylum .
I would therefore ask the House to pay particular attention to Amendment No 37 , tabled by our group , which provides that the fact that an applicant is the beneficiary of a temporary protection regime may be taken into account when examining an application for asylum , without this - I stress - determining the refusal of the application or a delay in the granting of the application which could jeopardize the ultimate aim of protection .
Otherwise , in my view , the essential legal protection which must be granted to all asylum seekers will be undermined .
With regard to article 11 , it is essential to underline the importance of Parliament 's mission to help ensure the uniform application of the rule of law in different situations within the Union .
In this sense , I should like to draw the House 's attention to Amendment No 41 , which establishes the grounds for refusing to grant a temporary protection regime .
We must be aware of the fact that we cannot sanctify the content of legal texts , in this case the Geneva Convention , since the case law of international courts and the courts of the Member States , as well as the Member States ' constitutional traditions , interpret the various sources that feed our legal systems - and the law is constantly evolving , as the Members are aware .
I should also like to ask the House to give close thought to approving Amendments Nos 39 and 40 , which provide that the Council shall adopt the measures implementing the joint action by unanimity , in the light of Parliament 's report .
In this House , we have always insisted that Parliament 's role must be strengthened ; and the arrangements for implementing this joint action must therefore also include the consultation of Parliament .
Similarly , we have included , in the second part of these amendments , the provision that the Council shall decide by unanimity , something to which Mr Wiebenga - with whom I regret to say I cannot agree on this occasion - has already referred .
I am aware that this proposal meets with the disagreement of a number of the Members .
Nevertheless , I would argue in its defence that , as we all know , no Community institution can contravene the provisions of Community law or the acquis communautaire . And it should be pointed out that the new Amsterdam Treaty itself maintains the requirement of unanimity in the Council for action in this field .
Consequently , Mr Wiebenga , the Spanish delegation in the EPP Group will not be withdrawing these amendments .
I therefore trust , ladies and gentlemen , that you will support the arguments that I have put forward .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Wiebenga .
I have studied this report and can see no reason to put in any amendments to it .
I completely support his position on it .
The report on temporary protection represents the recognition of the desire at the level of the European Union for a coordinated joint action to deal with the situation where there is a sudden mass influx of displaced persons resulting from an armed conflict in their own countries .
This initiative derives from the experiences of conflict in the former Yugoslavia and , more recently , the situation in Albania .
The question is , can the European Union find a flexible way , through a joint action , of responding in a coordinated manner to any future situations that might arise where persons are temporarily in need of international protection ?
People in need of such temporary action do not necessarily meet the conditions of refugee status under the terms of the Geneva Convention .
The proposal is essentially a humanitarian response to the need to offer protection on a temporary basis to individuals fleeing a country in significant numbers as their lives are in imminent danger .
The temporary protection period is limited to the time during which the conditions in their country of origin do not allow a safe return of those caught up in the conflicts .
It is important to bear in mind that we cannot predict now where the next conflict might arise , the number of people in immediate danger , nor their particular circumstances .
No two situations involving displaced persons are the same .
There are no simple mathematical formulae which can be worked out in advance .
The criteria to be agreed must therefore be adaptable and flexible .
Applications for asylum should be looked at without undue delay .
One of the fundamental characteristics of temporary protection is that it is not a right established by any international instrument .
As the Commission points out , the proposed joint action does not seek to introduce a new right to seek temporary protection in addition to the existing right to seek asylum .
Some of the amendments tabled will not facilitate progress with this proposal which , I want to stress , should prepare the way for a humanitarian response to future situations which might arise where a mass influx of people in need of international protection takes place .
Finally , I want to congratulate the Commissioner .
I have known her for many years .
Any proposal that she would put before this House would have my full support and confidence because I trust entirely her integrity in these matters .
I congratulate her on it .
Mr President , there can be few problems we discuss here , which so affect us on a moral and ethical plane , as the problem of refugees .
For that reason I think it is particularly necessary to find a solution which can be upheld by a large majority in Parliament .
As this concerns a moral responsibility , however , we believe that personal off-set has been too little mentioned in the report .
The problem of refugees does not just concern paying and then deciding who pays , but it also principally demands that the whole of Europe be prepared to solve this problem together .
A further problem - and here we agree that it is a special problem - is that of a qualified majority .
One can look at it like a glass of water : either half empty , or half full .
Naturally the right of veto is a problem that one will have to argue out .
On the other hand it can be seen as positive , if it is declared to be a pan-European problem and we all have to find a common solution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mr Wiebenga is an excellent one .
It can help to remove the helplessness of European Union states which has been revealed by the sudden appearance of refugee streams from various regions surrounding Europe and from Europe itself .
Only in recent years have we seen that problems leading to streams of refugees into the European Union , but originating within Europe , have been inadequately mastered by the European Union .
Incidentally , they were inadequately dealt with politically , because there are forces amongst the Member States of the EU who are represented here in this House , who spoke in this debate , and who are just waiting to exploit refugee influxes as part of their political tactics .
The extreme right in this House , namely , has the effrontery to make a speech here like the one just made by my colleague Mr Gollnisch .
In this he used a phrase which I really must comment on .
Mr Gollnisch , you said you asked yourself why Algerians were coming to France in such large numbers .
I ask myself the same question , when I think that in France an Algerian could meet you .
He would immediately make a run for it to some other country , I am quite sure of that .
You should ponder that the cause of refugee streams such as this one from Algeria can also be found in the fact that your country 's arms industry was delivering weapons up to a short time ago to the parties contributing to this flight .
Mr President , Mr Gollnisch has just made an impolite gesture at me .
I request that you note that in the Minutes , because I consider it an honour to be designated as mad by a fascist .
That can only mean that I must be a serious politician .
I congratulate Mr Wiebenga on one point .
He has made proposals which can be construed as meaning that the governments of the European Union and also the institutions of the European Union , particularly the Commission , should do more than they have already in one direction . That is that we should put into practice our claim , made from time to time in this Parliament , to formulate our strategy for solving political problems based not only on monetary and economic considerations , but mainly on humanitarian ones .
The Wiebenga report can make a useful contribution to that .
Mr President , may I begin by complimenting Mr Wiebenga very sincerely on his excellent report .
We find it very sound .
It is carefully worded .
What I also like very much is that it does not overdramatise .
We just heard from the far right that Europe could be overrun by hungry Parisians .
I do not think that there is any place for that sort of over dramatisation here .
I also welcome the fact that Mr Wiebenga has completely avoided any opportunity to play on xenophobic feelings in discussing this subject ; he has specifically avoided that , which I consider extremely important , because when dealing with displaced persons and others who come here through need we should take care to preserve harmony in our society .
That is why we are opposed to any xenophobic dramatization of the situation .
It is the people themselves who are the drama .
It is a terrible thing to be displaced .
It is not something you do yourself .
Being displaced is also the result of foreign policy , or rather the deficiencies of our foreign policy .
I must say there are Member States that really do want to have a common foreign policy - they have nothing to reproach themselves for - but those that do not wish to , creating misery around us , as in Bosnia-Herzegovina for instance , do have something to reproach themselves for and they should not complain about immigrants arriving out of need , which is the case with these displaced persons .
There are countries that do a great deal and the responsibility is always shifted on to them .
I mean Germany , Luxembourg - given the percentage in relation to Luxembourg 's total population , Sweden , Austria , the Netherlands .
That is about all .
It is particularly important that in future the responsibility should be shared equally .
I would also like to congratulate the Commissioner on the fact that she has done well in finally producing the third pillar policy .
That should not turn into a meaningless gesture whose main characteristic is that it manages to avoid the shortsighted interests of the fifteen Member States , because then there is just about nothing than can be said .
Amsterdam contains a promise in relation to the third pillar .
I would also like to say that for us in the Christian Democrat Party the report contains a couple of important aspects which we consider should definitely be retained in the final version .
Firstly the articles on the distribution of responsibility which Mr Wiebenga introduced himself .
Then the articles about consensus or the majority decision .
We do not therefore feel that the Spanish proposals in this area should be approved , because if so we are really giving up Amsterdam , a second , very important aspect .
A third aspect we argued about was the idea that the concept of safe countries should be retained .
It might not entirely have to do with displaced persons as such , but the idea that the safe countries principle , which is not a purely automatic principle but does allow proper scope for individual assessment if it is absolutely necessary , that that safe countries principle is upheld .
For those reasons I would like to say that our group will be particularly pleased if this report is well received , because a report like this deserves a very large majority .
Mr President , firstly let me congratulate Mr Wiebenga on his critical comments on the proposal for a Community action for the temporary protection of displaced persons .
I would like to raise a couple of points .
It is a good idea for separate rules to be proposed for temporary protection for refugees in the event of a massive influx .
It is essential to harmonize the existing regulations because they differ in a number of ways and the differences have terrible consequences for the refugees .
Mr Wiebenga rightly points out that Member States need to begin , operate and end the temporary protection for displaced persons at the same time , so that excessive influxes of immigrants are prevented and each country bears a proportionate share of the burden .
A Member State should not be able to close its borders when there is a massive influx of immigrants , forcing displaced persons to enter an adjoining country illegally .
The most important point in this proposal , however , is the harmonization of the fundamental rights of displaced persons .
As the rapporteur has said , this proposal is in fact sharing responsibility within the Union .
A remarkably good proposal after the signature of the Treaty of Amsterdam is to use the opportunities it offers in the third pillar .
I am in fact curious to know how the Member States themselves will handle it .
In any event , Mr President , the clock must not be turned back to a veto .
I fully endorse what the rapporteur has said on that subject .
Mr President , first of all may I congratulate Mr Wiebenga on what is a very well-intentioned and wellpresented report .
Of course it presupposes basic approval for the Commission proposals
It is vitally important that we should make proper provision for a mass influx of displaced persons of the kind we have had at least once in the last few years .
We should ensure these people can be properly provided for in terms of housing , medical care , education for their children and so on .
Indeed the provisions for such people already exist in my own country and are implemented .
However , the British Labour members have some difficulties with the Commission 's proposals as they stand .
I understand that the Commission proposals did not receive an altogether positive response from Council .
I suspect that this issue will return because I doubt whether the Council will accept them in the present form .
Rightly or wrongly a number of Member State governments feel that it should be an individual national responsibility to deal with this issue , certainly in terms of the length of time that the displaced persons are provided for , rather than a Community function .
We have particular difficulties over the question of how the burden-sharing is to be organized and flexibility in relation to these matters .
There is a basic feeling that we should be able to deal with cases on an individual basis as promptly as possible rather than lump everybody together and so postpone a decision .
In conclusion , we may find we have to abstain on this report , depending on how the amendments are voted and I wanted to highlight our difficulties .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , misuse of a term has repeatedly occurred during this debate .
The problem is not asylum-seekers according to the Geneva Convention .
Although there are different regulations here amongst the nations , regulations do exist .
The problem is also not the acceptance of guest workers , although they are subject to completely different conditions within individual states .
This leads to problems which are not shared equally , but it is all regulated nationally .
What causes us problems here , and where we have to find a solution , is the problem of refugees .
As a result of the Balkan crisis we are confronted with this massive problem in a way we have not seen heretofore .
We must find solutions to it .
It has emerged that individual countries such as German , Austria and others have been put under extreme pressure simply because they adjoin the crisis zones .
If , with this problem one thinks of the existing one , where these countries have in any case previously employed many guest workers from third countries and accepted their families , then you add to these problems of integration , schooling , housing , etcetera , extra problems to an extent that one cannot imagine this situation continuing .
We need new solutions , because these countries , although they have been commended internationally for their reception of refugees , must no be overloaded in future .
For that reason I agree the proposals before us .
We shall not be able to avoid a sharing of burdens , but that must be a sharing of people .
Offset payments do not help the state concerned , it must be a sharing of people .
I should like to go one step further , however , because reality has shown us that problems arise here , for example , from the use by many criminals of this stream of refugees , the displaced persons , to enter the relevant country and to carry out their nefarious deeds there , whether they be weapon smuggling or drug dealing .
We must introduce mechanisms whereby such criminal elements do not cross the frontiers .
We must also rule this out by making suspicion of responsibility for a crime additional grounds for exclusion and expulsion .
A problem arises when we grant asylum not just to the family of the person concerned , but , as is proposed here , we go beyond the core family and also accept the relatives .
That would lead to extreme situations in our countries .
That is a proposal that cannot be agreed by us in this form .
Otherwise , I am glad that we are considering the introduction of regulations that serve our countries and the whole of Europe .
Madam Commissioner , we have frequently discussed with one another the subject of burden sharing , and you have told various ministers - Bavarian Interior Minister Beckstein , for example - how important you think burden sharing is .
Thus , I regret that your proposal contains no mention of burden sharing .
I am thankful that our colleague Wiebenga takes a step in the right direction in his report , particularly if we are successful in passing the amendments by Mr Nassauer and defeating the others .
Then we can take a step in the right direction .
I still believe , however , that the real problem of personnel burden sharing will not be solved , for it is not primarily a question of finance , but of community solidarity .
This solidarity is challenged in many areas and it must naturally dominate when it is a question of accepting refugees and expellees - and these are not asylum seekers , as Mr Pirker has rightly said .
Certain countries are proportionately under extreme pressure here as well .
We are concerned here with the sharing of people , because too large an influx at one point decreases public acceptance for it , with all the dangerous consequential psychological results .
For this reason we need a set code for the sharing of people between different member countries of the European Union - rather as we have in Germany , with the system for sharing between individual Länder .
As this is not included in the proposal , I think that we have missed the point with this proposal and that we need a new one .
We will attempt to introduce improvements .
We shall rely , however , on new improvements being produced in the Council , and we shall particularly rely on finding a solution in which the required objective is achieved at the second stage .
As for unanimity , I believe we should use the Amsterdam compromise solution , in which we unanimously vote in the fundamentals for a new policy , and then react to routine policy challenges after five years with a qualified majority .
Mr President , the mass movement of displaced people is a constantly recurring phenomenon .
It is seldom possible to predict when and where it is going to happen , only that it certainly will happen again and again .
In recent years we have experienced a refugee crisis which meant hat nearly a million people in need of protection have found a temporary place of refuge in Europe .
I am thinking of the Bosnian refugee crisis .
The main problem was that the number of people was so large that our capacity to examine asylum applications threatened to break down .
Most of the Member States have therefore chosen to postpone asylum tests for a while and instead to offer temporary protection .
In that way a very large number of people have been able to find the protection they need .
The problem is that this has taken place without any kind of coordination or cooperation between the Member States .
The result has been that the policies are very different from one country to the next .
We have seen , for example , how the opportunity to get a temporary residence permit is given at different times .
The same applies to the decision that the protection should cease .
This has led to a situation whereby people with temporary protection which is soon to expire are beginning to move towards countries where the opportunity to get temporary protection still exists .
We have also been able to see that the social rights of the people in need of protection differ from one country to the next .
In one country they are allowed to work , in another they must wait , and in a third they must stay completely outside the labour market .
There are also large differences with regard to access to housing , medical treatment , education and other services .
There is a risk that this too will lead to movements of refugees within the European Union .
It is therefore vital that the European Union reviews its conditions for meeting the refugee crises of the future .
Our citizens see it as obvious that a better cooperation and more similar rules should be built up .
This is reflected in both the Maastricht Treaty and , to an even greater extent , in the new Amsterdam Treaty .
It is our task to ensure that this objective can be realized .
Mr President , in many respects the Commission 's proposal can be seen as a compromise .
We known that historical ties and geographical factors play a large role with regard to which countries accept asylum seekers from a certain region or a certain country .
Our proposal therefore gives the Council of Ministers a large amount of flexibility .
The idea is that decisions can be made from case to case .
As part of the proposal we have included a section dealing with the question of a collective division of responsibility for asylum burdens .
This is an issue which has greatly concerned this Parliament through the years .
I think that is also shown by today 's debate .
Our idea is to create space for the Council of Ministers to also make such decisions when a mass refugee situation arises .
Then people can always debate whether this proposal is sufficient or not .
It is probably also the most controversial issue in the proposal and was intensively debated at the time in the Commission .
That is why I have also decided as far as possible to take into account the results of the many long negotiations which we have already had on this issue in the Council of Ministers .
My aim has been to avoid a situation where this part of the contents of the proposal jeopardise the possibility of reaching any agreement at all on temporary residence permits .
The Luxembourg Presidency has so far taken the negotiations forward in a very constructive way .
The proposal was also raised recently at the informal ministerial meeting in Luxembourg on 9-10 October .
There I had the opportunity to remind the Council of Ministers how important it is for use to achieve a positive result .
We can only speculate on when the next mass refugee situation will arise .
The sooner we can achieve a result on this issue the better .
Mr President , Mr Gollnisch 's last remark in particular prompts my next comment : there are some people whom one must forgive anything , because of their deplorable state .
Mr Gollnisch belongs amongst them .
Mr President , I wish to speak for a different reason , but first just one sentence : I reject the insult to Mr Schulz ' parents and to all our parents , and should like to express opposition to all forms of collective blame .
That is upheld in this House .
I say this as a German and a European .
I wanted to put a question to the Commissioner , however , and that is why I rose to speak .
She did not react to it in her answer .
Madam Commissioner , I just wanted to know why you did not address a proposal on burden sharing to the Council .
Did you fail to receive a majority for it in the Commission ?
Or was it a predisposed obedience towards the Council ?
That is my specific question .
Mr President , I was in fact saying that the Commission is also taking up this question of burden sharing in its proposal and is making it quite possible for the Council of Ministers in connection with this situation to take up the proposal to carry out a sharing of burdens .
You can then always debate whether this proposal is strong enough or not , but , as I have said , it is in the proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 10 a.m.
Cocoa , chocolate , coffee and chicory
The next item is the report ( A4-0310 / 97 ) by Mr Lannoye , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposals for European Parliament and Council Directives on : I. cocoa and chocolate products intended for human consumption ( COM ( 95 ) 0722 - C4-0303 / 96-96 / 0117 ( COD ) ) ; II. coffee extracts and chicory extracts ( COM ( 95 ) 0722 - C4-0304 / 96-96 / 0117 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I must inform you that a majority voted for raising the content of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter entering into the manufacture of chocolate to 5 % .
That being the case , I must say to you , on a personal basis , that I do not at all share this opinion and do so for four fundamental reasons of principle .
While I acknowledge everyone 's right to tastes and traditions different from my own , others must bear the burden of responsibility for their own tastes and traditions .
In my view , chocolate is a food product whose vegetable fat component is cocoa butter .
This seems elementary , yet it must be underlined .
The consumers have a right to this product in all that is best about it .
Any change in its composition would leave the door wide open to ersatz substitutes of all kinds with consequences which are not necessarily without danger to human health .
Finally , Mr President , dear colleagues , you know as I do that for a number of African states with weak economies , cocoa is the only economically profitable export product .
I consider it to be unacceptable for Europeans participating next week at Lomé , in Togo , in the parital ACP-UE meeting to confirm an inconsistency in attitude and discourse on our part .
Indeed , we enter into massive agreements on paper , and in practice we give priority to rich American financiers or others who do not hesitate to destroy economies and trample on our moral commitments , in the pursuit of enormous profits with the markets and commerce as their guide .
Africa is a natural complement to Europe .
For two centuries , in the colonial era , we exploited or destroyed it .
The time has now come to respect it and to develop an economic partnership with Africa on the basis of solidarity for our two continents , resisting the fat lobbies .
Mr President , seldom has a draft directive led to so many problems as the one the Commission has now submitted to us .
When we note that this matter has now been going on for over 20 years and that the Commission has already made three attempts to find a workable compromise , then we really must say that the Commission appears to have been terribly incompetent .
As far as the Committee on Development and Cooperation is concerned , and I am speaking as its rapporteur , the position is that this umpteenth Commission proposal is simply unacceptable .
Commissioner Bangemann should take this to heart .
What are our objections ?
I shall go through them again .
With this proposal the European Union is contravening its own treaties ; the Treaty of Rome , the Treaty of Maastricht , the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Lomé Convention state that the European Union must improve the position of the developing countries .
I will just quote one of the articles , article 130u ( 1 ) of the Maastricht Treaty : ' Community policy in the sphere of development cooperation ... shall foster ... the sustainable economic and social development of the developing countries and more particularly the most disadvantaged among them ' .
Well , this directive will result in a drop in exports of 60 , 000 and up to a maximum of 200 , 000 tonnes of cacao from over ten third world countries and serious losses for millions of small cocoa farmers who are dependent on cocoa .
In this directive the European Commission is also contravening the international cocoa agreement which requires the Union to encourage the free import of cocoa in order to stabilise the revenue of cocoa producing countries .
Here again it is infringing its own treaties .
The Maastricht Treaty states that the Community shall comply with the commitments and take account of the objectives that it has approved in the context of the United Nations and other competent international organizations .
The Commission has in addition submitted a directive to us which states that 5 % alternative fats are permitted in chocolate throughout the Union whilst that 5 % cannot be precisely determined .
The Commission itself recently instituted research into better measurement methods to identify the 40 % margin .
Why did the Commission not do that in the twenty years it has already been struggling with this problem ?
The position of the Committee on Development and Cooperation is clear .
We consider that alternative fats have no place in chocolate and that the Commission must either set the directive at 0 % or withdraw it .
The damage to the developing countries is disproportionate to the profit on the internal market and the profit to the consumer .
The only third party that will be laughing - and here I agree with Mr Happart - is the big chocolate industry , the big multinationals , which will be 40 million dollars a year better off .
If none of our views receives a majority , I shall as a last resort , and I stress that , vote for the amendments that Mrs Thyssen has tabled .
She asks that only tropical fats should be permitted as alternative fats and that the directive should not be allowed to enter into force until it is clear that that 5 % can be determined really accurately .
But it is a final recourse when there is nothing else to be salvaged .
In principle I uphold my view : it must be nil , otherwise the Commission would do better to withdraw the proposal .
It really is a disgraceful proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the chocolate debate is an emotional debate so let us therefore start with the facts .
The European Commission has drawn up a proposal with two principles .
First , the Member States themselves decide on the use of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter .
Secondly , free movement must be guaranteed but with an additional labelling requirement for chocolate with vegetable fats .
I have two comments to make on this .
How far will a Member State be able to resist pressure from its own industry if the industry suffers competitive disadvantages in relation to Member States in which vegetable fats are permitted ?
Here again economic pressure is likely to undermine the proportionality principle .
The labelling requirement is very vague .
The Commission talks about clear , neutral and objective information in addition to the list of ingredients .
But what does this mean exactly ?
Does this additional labelling requirement not conflict with the Béarnaise judgment or the labelling directive ?
I put the question to the Commission at the September part-session .
I received an official written reply from the Commission .
The Commission wrote that the Béarnaise judgment is not applicable and secondly that the labelling requirements are in no way an impediment .
On the contrary , article 6 ( 6 ) of Directive 79 / 112 expressly provides for the possibility of such measures .
The Commission is therefore invoking article 6 ( 6 ) of the labelling directive and I , together with a number of colleagues , have tabled two amendments that do precisely the same , so it seems to me natural that the Commission should accept these amendments since we are saying precisely the same thing .
May I ask for a specific answer on that point from the Commission at the end of the debate ?
Because what is the crucial question when it comes down to it ?
Obviously it is not simply whether we are for or against vegetable fats at a time when the use of vegetable fats is tolerated and permitted in seven Member States - which I find regrettable , but it is a fact .
It is not simply a question of how you inform the consumer and I am surprised that some do want to inform the consumer but preferably not too much .
The advocates of vegetable fats say that their products are excellent .
I believe them .
So why are they afraid to inform the consumer that they are using them if they are so excellent ?
Do they have something to hide ?
A further point : the proposed directive is based on the principle that the same packaging must be used for the same product anywhere in the Union .
An excellent principle !
In fact let us not allow any exceptions for ordinary milk chocolate .
The Committee on the Environment has expressed a similar view .
Let us be consistent . One rule for everyone , no exceptions .
I will end with a twofold appeal to the national delegations and political groups .
Let us stop the embarrassing and shameful business of whose amendment is actually best .
We , like many other people , want better information for the consumer .
We have produced a proposal based on what the Commission wants , article 6 ( 6 ) of the labelling directive .
But other colleagues have also produced good proposals .
It is not a question of who has the best amendment , it is a question of obtaining a sizeable political majority so that we can have an influence on the legislative process .
A second appeal .
A number of national governments , many political parties and Members of Parliament are in principle opposed to the use of animal fats .
We have made our position an abstraction .
We accept the two regulations , but on the basis of clear consumer information .
Might we ask that a significant step is taken by the other side as well ?
Mr President , I have seldom seen a proposal for a directive that prompted so much emotion , debate and lobbying .
I think in fact that I have devoted more energy to it in this last year than I could store up eating chocolate for a whole year .
This chocolate question is a striking example of the fact that if you put off dealing with a problem it does not necessarily mean that it will be dealt with properly .
Mr President , the position of the Group of the European People 's Party has been clear from the start and we stand by it .
That is to say , what we want is the following : we are in favour of maintaining subsidiarity in the sense that Member States that wish to must be able to take a decision to ban the production of chocolate with other fats in their territory .
Secondly we are strongly in favour of restricting the type of fats to specific tropical fats .
As far as most of the directive is concerned the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has backed this requirement but unfortunately this is not true of the operational part , or at least not yet , because amendments have been tabled to alter this , some of them by us , and we expect them to be supported by our colleagues .
Thirdly we as members of the Group of the European People 's Party will never agree to legislation if compliance cannot be closely monitored .
In the Committee on Environment we had already tabled an amendment stating that the first requirement is a method of analysis enabling it to be determined precisely whether the chocolate contains other fats and if so in what quantities and the entry into force of the new directive must be conditional upon that .
This amendment was adopted by a majority and we naturally uphold it .
Fourthly we continue to argue for the democratic discussion of laws .
It is unacceptable that the comitology should leave the European Parliament out of the picture if the directive ever has to be amended again to take account of general food policy rules .
Our amendment aimed at reducing the scope of the comitology was approved in the Committee on the Environment .
We naturally still defend and support this view .
Fifthly we in the Committee on the Environment call for a study to be made at a later date on the impact of this directive on sales of cocoa butter by developing countries .
A good policy needs to be followed up , we must be courageous enough to face the consequences of our voting behaviour and if necessary laws must then be amended in the light of the results .
This again is a good thing as far as the Committee on the Environment is concerned , here again we abide by our position .
My sixth point , last but not least , is concern for the consumer .
The consumer is entitled to information and is entitled to know the quality he is being offered .
We want to safeguard his rights .
But we never agreed with the proposals to amend or add to the sale name .
In the discussion of the labelling directive the Group of the European People 's Party always argued for a different approach , a wide application according to the letter and the spirit of the legal precedents and that is still our position .
But that does not mean that we do not want to give the consumer any information .
We have discussed the matter again because our amendments on labelling were not accepted by the Committee on Environment .
The matter was discussed again in our political group and eventually the group supported a new amendment asking that a legible and visible indication should be given , always on the front , that other vegetable fats had been added to the product .
We believe that this is the best way to serve the interests of the consumer .
When you look at the alternatives : we do it with the sale name , with this product it means that the consumer has to look in the small print on the back because that is where the sale name is and it can also be there if other fats have been added to this product , chocolate , then the consumer has to look at the small gold lettering on the side to find out whether it contains other vegetable fats .
Our proposal ensures that it is on the front and I think that is the best guarantee .
Just one final point .
All these amendments , all the attempts which I hope we are making together are not a complete solution , but we had no alternative .
The matter has to be weighed up , for our group it showed incompetence and irresponsibility for it to be referred back because it is a joint decision procedure and thus we can exercise our full legislative powers .
We want to exercise them , we agree to the five per cent but we also want proper safeguards for Africa and for the consumer and in this way we will have the courage of our convictions and bring our voting behaviour into line consistently , consistently for a year and a half , with the principles .
Mr President , the application of quality standards and controls is an essential ingredient of Europe 's food sector and , from a consumer perspective , we must be vigilant so as to ensure that all food products meet the most stringent production and market requirements .
Over-regulation , however , leads to unnecessary stifling of the sector , resulting in a lack of variety , and ignores the indigenous range of high-quality regional and national food products .
From an Irish perspective , agriculture and the associated food industry are central to our economy , and the chocolate industry , which is the subject of this debate , is a very important component .
Ireland 's quality chocolate sector employs 3 , 000 people and uses 50 million gallons of milk and 40 tonnes of Irish sugar .
Irish milk chocolate - I was tempted to partake in the chocolate bar that was on display - is appreciated as a product of quality and provides high consumer satisfaction .
The agri-dairy sector is as crucial to Ireland 's farmers as cocoa is to other producing countries , and I have no desire to minimize the importance of cocoa to the countries which are dependent on it .
The Commission proposal to allow up to 5 % vegetable fat in the manufacture of chocolate is acceptable , as is the decision of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection to allow the listing of vegetable fats with other ingredients .
This rules out the necessity of putting the designation on the front of the package .
The Commission proposal , which makes it possible to sell chocolate with vegetable fat in all 15 Member States instead of the present 7 , is , in my view , to be commended , thus allowing the internal market to function properly .
For the reasons already stated , and in particular because of Ireland 's dependency on its agri-food sector , I appeal to colleagues to support the existing derogation for Ireland and the United Kingdom to allow the description ' milk chocolate ' within the marketing territory of both countries .
I would ask the Member States and those present to allow the continuation of that derogation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am afraid that we are getting into a debate in which reason and generally accepted principles are having to give way to emotion , national interests and also self-interest .
In my view the harmonization of the chocolate legislation should meet a dual objective : firstly to make chocolate manufacturers , importers and exporters subject to the same rights and obligations to give them the same advantages on the European internal market and secondly to enable consumers to benefit from the advantages of an internal market by offering them a choice .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party is therefore in favour of , firstly , full harmonization and , secondly , clear labelling .
By full harmonization we mean that it must be possible not just to sell but also to manufacture chocolate with vegetable fats anywhere in the Union .
If we are in favour of a real internal market , it is logical that we should allow not only freedom of movement but production anywhere .
A regulation in which the Member States take a sovereign decision as to whether or not they permit vegetable fats in their production is no longer tenable .
Major producers can shift their production to countries where it is permitted and then sell their products under the same name in countries where it is prohibited .
The small local chocolate makers on the other hand are restricted as to where they can operate and are therefore at a disadvantage .
Moving on to labelling , in a free market it is not up to the legislator to decide what ingredients the manufacturer is to use .
It is however responsible for ensuring compliance with the stipulated minimum quantities .
On the other hand the consumer must be able to choose , with the help of clear labelling , the chocolate that suits his taste , his tradition and , why not , his concern for developing countries .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party believes that clear labelling should consist of uniform , clear information in a fixed position , with the name at the top , clearly distinguishable from the list of ingredients , in clearly readable letters .
I would like to make two further comments .
Our group is opposed to the idea of restricting vegetable fats to three tropical fats .
With such a restriction we would soon have problems with the World Trade Organization and then this directive would never get off the ground .
Secondly , we are not in favour of the amendments making the application of this directive conditional upon a Community detection method .
In this connection I would like to draw attention to the 1989 directive on official control of foodstuffs , which lays down uniform rules on the subject .
We are therefore tabling amendment 54 , which ties in with this directive .
Mr President , we supported Mr Lannoye 's proposal in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection because we thought that it was balanced .
And we agree with Mr Lannoye 's proposal because we believe that it respects certain principles that must be observed when it comes to approving the revision of the directive .
Firstly , the need for clear and comprehensive labelling .
As article 2 of Directive 79 / 111 rightly states , consumers must not be confused .
Secondly , the need to reduce the ecological , social and economic repercussions to a minimum .
Mr Lannoye also took into account the Lomé Convention and Articles 130u and 130v of the Treaty , which clearly stipulate the consideration that the European Union must show towards the ACP countries , and especially towards the thirty or thirty one of them directly involved in cocoa production .
Nevertheless , this debate makes clear the complexity of this issue , and makes clear that we must opt to support Mr Lannoye 's proposals .
We must attempt , that is , to reduce the economic , ecological and social repercussions to a minimum .
This morning in the debate on the state of the Union , the leaders of Parliament 's two largest groups referred to the Union 's relations with the ACP countries and stressed the need for those relations to be based on fair trade . According to Parliament 's Directorate-General for Research , if the proposal is adopted as it stands , demand for cocoa butter could fall by up to 200 , 000 tonnes .
This would be a severe economic blow for certain countries , especially considering that more than one and a half million farmers - small-scale farmers , who , as Mr Lannoye rightly points out in his report , are respectful of the environment because they use few chemical products - would be drastically affected .
Furthermore , there is the question of labelling . I believe that the people of Europe 's awareness has been raised .
We all remember the problem of mad cow disease , the monitoring committee 's report on which Mrs Roth-Behrendt will be presenting .
This new public awareness makes it necessary for increasingly clear information to be provided about the products that we consume .
Mrs Thyssen held up a bar of chocolate and described how clearly indicating whether or not it contained vegetable fats would help consumers to decide whether or no to buy it .
In short , it is a question of respect for our agreements with third countries , respect for the consumer , and respect for the European Union 's own legislation .
This is what Mr Lannoye 's report calls for .
Let us hope that the amendments tabled go forward and we can vote in favour of this proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first and foremost I should like to welcome Mr Gauze , the Ivory Coast Minister for Raw Materials , who considered the issue important enough to attend this debate .
Firstly may I say that Paul Lannoye , our representative on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , who was also rapporteur for this directive , soon had to accept that there was absolutely no support for the zero option in this Parliament .
We therefore , reluctantly , had to abandon that idea almost immediately .
Secondly , as soon as we realized that that was impracticable we had to look at the possibility of putting the maximum onus on the consumer , allowing full participation by the consumer . You then have to add something to the name of the product .
That was the position and it was never contradicted in the Committee on the Environment but then later amendments were tabled to make it impossible .
In any event we still consider it important and we have therefore tabled an amendment which again offers that choice , because that is the best choice .
Not because it comes from us but if the name indicates that other vegetable fats are added it is clear to every consumer .
The examples of packaging that Mrs Thyssen showed , all this is of course in the present situation where only real chocolate is available on our market and then Cote d 'Or does not need to put it on the front in big letters .
That is obvious , even a child could understand it .
Thirdly , it is therefore perfectly possible according to the labelling directive to use the name of the product and on this I entirely agree with Mr De Coene .
We therefore have to try and ensure the best possible choice and find a majority for the best possible choice .
The higher the majority , the better for us and we shall fight for that .
Fourthly it is clear that the Commission 's draft proposal , which has not been improved on by the Committee on Environment , is totally at odds with the commitments we have entered into in the Lomé Convention and the international cocoa agreement , in which among other things the EU made a commitment to bigger cocoa butter sales .
It cannot therefore be claimed that exports from the African countries in particular can be safeguarded if the descriptions for the consumer are very poor .
The outcome in the Committee on Environment is now that information should be given in small print on the back , preferably actually in the name itself , and if that is unacceptable , we have to consider where would be most appropriate .
But let us try for the best option .
Finally , may I address myself to Mrs Maij-Weggen . I find your conclusion slightly confusing .
You said quite rightly that this is a bad proposal and then you end by saying : but let us support Mrs Thyssen 's amendments .
I am not saying that it should not be supported under any circumstances but I must point out that there are other possibilities that would offer better protection than Mrs Thyssen 's amendments and they could be tried first .
Therefore , and this is my final comment , if Mrs Thyssen asks for an impact study in 2002 then it is too late to be any use and Mr Moreels ' chef de cabinet told me that too : that 's no use , it is much too late .
You do an impact study beforehand .
Secondly , if we are going to say it still has to be the analysis instrument , it would be useful if it was accepted because that gives us more time .
But there is no point in having more time unless it can be coupled with information for the consumer , so that the consumer can distinguish properly and the best way of doing that is by adding the information to the name .
Mr President , Mrs Aelvoet has addressed remarks to me and she has misunderstood me .
I can correct the misunderstanding in two sentences .
I said that if the zero level is not accepted - and amendments have been tabled on that - and if the referral back is not agreed to - amendments have been tabled on that as well - then in a worst case scenario Mrs Thyssen 's amendments are still better than the 5 % .
But in my opinion the rapporteur should see at the end what the result is and if the result is good he should simply refer it back to the Commission .
Thank you very much , Mrs Maij-Weggen .
In any event , a speaker may speak more than once in a debate only where justified by a point of order , and no such point has been raised .
And I note that fact .
Thank you nevertheless for your brief intervention .
Mrs Aelvoet has mentioned my name three times .
She says that what I am proposing is ultimately not feasible or not good , but I would like to say to Mrs Aelvoet , please just read the labelling directive .
Mrs Thyssen , if you wish to make a protest , I will ask you to speak at the end of the debate .
You may not do so now .
Mr President , I did not know the Commissioner was a specialist in chocolate , but this Wednesday her colleagues certainly had other obligations .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Minister for Raw Materials from the Ivory Coast , let us make no mistake about it . Our discussion on chocolate is much more important than one might think on first sight .
If our Parliament is as divided as it is today , and if passions are running high on this topic , this is not because Christmas and New Year are approaching , but much more because we are dealing with an essential dossier , which reveals the risks of an unwholesome slide from best practice in the internal market .
It is a shame , from this point of view , that the Commissioner responsible should not be present , even if I am happy to see you among our number .
What in the final analysis are we dealing with ?
Since 1973 , the European Union in the chocolate sector adopted legislation which fulfilled a double function perfectly . On the one hand consumer protection and on the other hand , the defence of the interests of the producing countries .
To suit some new Member States and respect their national traditions , derogations were granted .
Indeed , it was difficult to see Brussels or Strasbourg imposing laws covering matters of taste on European citizens .
However , it happens that the Commission considers that the cohabitation of the two regimes is not satisfactory , because it would not respect the sacrosanct rules of the internal market .
So now it proposes that we should generalise these derogations .
In fact , by this complete U-turn , the Commission is once again proposing harmonization at the low end .
Today , I see the Commission is simply returning to the fray on this dossier , although I believe I am right in remembering that the European Parliament had already clearly rejected the Commission 's first attempt .
At this pace , we shall be constructing a European model without any taste at all and beginning with the harmonization of European cuisine .
This would be perfectly stupid and terribly dangerous .
Unlike many of you , I am not a chocolate specialist , but I do see , as it happens , that the Commission is getting ready to generalise a practice which , according to its own admission , entails many risks .
I beg of you , therefore , that we do not follow the Commission 's proposal to the end .
We have laid down amendments - and other colleagues have also done so , enabling the Lannoye report to come out in accordance with the tradition of this House .
I believe that we have as our priorities not only the harmonization of the interests of our countries , but also the protection of the interests of our partners , such as the ACP countries .
I hope that Parliament will be able to defend these priorities without allowing itself to be carried away by soft harmonization , which may well turn out to have a very bitter taste .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal on cocoa which we are discussing today is clearly deficient on a number of points .
Those points must be corrected otherwise my group will be unable to approve it .
The European Commission has tried to resolve the problems with the production and sale of chocolate products on the internal market in the simplest possible manner , namely by allowing maximum freedom for everyone in chocolate production .
That means complete freedom for everyone to use 5 % alternative fats .
That seems an attractive possibility , but it fails to take account of the differences that have existed between Member States for over twenty years as regards the use of fats .
For us the essential point is that pure chocolate should not contain any alternative fats , that is what consumers in most of the Union are accustomed to and you cannot just change it .
There is also the fact that it could have very drastic consequences for the developing countries that produce cocoa .
We have to realize that there are a number of real problems in the internal market .
Makers of pure chocolate which contains no other fats are at a competitive disadvantage and the consumer can be deceived by a product name which fits in with his experience .
So something certainly has to be done .
I think that it is possible to find a compromise by means of information on the label .
Consumers are becoming more aware : they want to know what they are eating .
In my view therefore there is no reason not to be as clear as possible about what is and is not in the product .
Also we must not overlook the effects that altering the composition of chocolate will have on the cocoa producing countries .
Certainly the demand for chocolate has been on the increase for years , but a sudden change to 5 % , without accompanying measures , could prove disastrous for many developing countries .
I must therefore reiterate that as far as I am concerned the label is the right place to resolve this conflict which has been going on for years .
The information must be shown prominently on the label , not in tiny letters in the list of ingredients .
That makes a mockery of it for most of the people who eat chocolate in Europe .
But if that is the way the vote on the amendments goes , then we cannot support the resolution .
Mr President , first congratulations to Mr Lannoye .
The aspect characterizing the motion is given by article 2 of the directive being discussed today , whereby member countries can authorize the addition of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter .
If the directive were adopted , it would force the Member States to market products with vegetable fats in their territory under the name of chocolate .
Consequently , products with vegetable fats were recompensed , thus making the superior product commonplace , no longer being pure cocoa chocolate , but a more expensive product falling under luxury products .
Being aware that , in the current state of technical know-how , determining the proportion of vegetable fats in chocolate is difficult and may have a 40 % error margin , we have submitted an amendment authorizing the replacement of up to 5 % of cocoa butter with vegetable fats in total weight of finished product , so as to quantify the obligations .
The social and economic consequences of the Directive would then have a particularly negative effect on the producing countries .
In West Africa , for example , cocoa is grown by over two million farmers with family involvement raising the number of people involved in the outcome of this crop to over 11 million .
Even the ACP producing countries ( 31 out of 70 ) would feel the negative impact of a Directive which , according to us , should have been based on a certain method of analysis in determining vegetable fats in the product , should have quantified the consequences on the course of the cocoa market by time , and it could certainly only have been effective later .
The African and Caribbean economies , which are based entirely on the cocoa income , would collapse and give rise to hunger and unemployment and no doubt emigration for those populations for whom the cocoa crop is their main source of income .
If we take into consideration the political and economic upsets that too hasty an adoption and a superficial study of the directive would bring , we think that this directive should be rejected , also in the light of the fight against poverty which the Union is involved in the developing countries , with a view to their gradual inclusion in the world economy .
Mr President , nothing I say today will be very popular with the grand alliance of legitimate concerns for the third world , distaste for the single market and economic interests masquerading as high principle which has dominated this debate today .
I would just like to say two or three things to the rapporteurs and then to Members in the Chamber .
I speak as someone passionately concerned for the third world and emotionally affected by some of the attacks there have been on those of us who happen to make chocolate in a different way and have done so throughout my lifetime .
The first thing I would say to the rapporteurs is that the Committee on the Environment 's attempt at a compromise was based on the need to strike a medium here between those legitimate concerns and the pressures of the single market .
If you only want the one and not the other , you would not go with us .
But Mr Lannoye did not accurately represent some of the amendments , including Amendment No 13 in my name and others which sought to set proper labelling in a position where the consumer can see it and can get all the information necessary in order to make a judgment about whether you use cocoa butter or not .
Then Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of her committee , said that what they really want is zero content .
They do not want to have any fat at all throughout the European Union .
If that is not possible - and plainly it is not : even Mr Happart had to accept , however much he deplored it , that the Committee on Agriculture was prepared to accept 5 % of vegetable fats throughout the European Union - the fall-back position is to go to Mrs Thyssen who has had two bites of this cherry-flavoured chocolate already .
She wants us to have a foolproof method in terms of the measurement of chocolates which has never been thought of before .
You never think of this when you bite on your praline and you discuss whether or not the chocolate is adulterated by the ingredients .
Now we have to have a foolproof method of measuring all the ingredients .
In the control directive there is already a way of making sure that the manufacturers are compelled to say in terms of what goes into the chocolate where the 5 % is and what the ingredients are .
Mr Happart is not right when he says that chocolate as we have always manufactured it is ersatz chocolate .
That is what they really want when they talk about change of title here .
They want us to call chocolate as manufactured in seven Member States ersatz chocolate .
It is not , it is chocolate and you had better get used to that fact .
In the single market it has to co-exist with other products and it has to do so in a manner consistent with our international obligations .
Finally , in terms of milk chocolate , the decision to strike out the derogations on milk chocolate has no business in this debate .
The fact is that we are dealing here with added animal fat - a quite different matter .
I cannot think of a more specific description of chocolate with added milk than to call it milk chocolate .
On that basis , we should support the Environment Committee 's suggestions and the bulk of what the Commission is trying to do .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . Chocolate is a sweet seduction ; for some it is a sin , for the European Union it is a red rag to a bull .
Yet chocolate is just a minor addition to the nutrition of Mankind .
No one prescribes how much salami should be on a pizza , or how many strawberries there should be on a strawberry flan .
For this the recipe is enough .
Only with chocolate we would have it otherwise !
There are two markets in Europe who defend their positions to the bitter end , partly even using doubtful means .
The blockade , or chocolate guideline , really belongs on the scrapheap of European development .
Unfortunately we are not there yet , but I say in advance that we shall get there one day .
I think the discussion has made one thing clear , and that is that we shall reach a satisfactory solution only if we respect the differing traditions .
It is imperative here that this mutual respect should be harmonised with the objectives of the internal market , and with the protection and information of the European consumer .
For this we should hold to the principle that is the norm for food on the internal market : mutual acknowledgement of national regulations , such as those about the constituents of foods .
This principle works , and that is partly because unified European labelling laws guarantee and cover both consumer protection and the need of the consumer for information .
Thus it would be wrong to ban in Europe constituents from vegetable fats other than cocoa butter , or to make the use of these fats legally binding throughout Europe .
Then there could be no question of any further mutual respect .
The right approach is to allow Member States alone to decide on permitted alternative vegetable fats , but to authorise trade in them .
It is then right to give the consumer clear , unequivocal and easily understood information about the composition .
We have resolutions before us that would achieve this and would aim at a truly European initiative , namely casting the above mentioned respect for differing traditions into the shape of a guideline .
I should like to call on all colleagues to agree with this initiative .
We should be particularly warned against one-sided labelling regulations permitting the word " Chocolate ' to be used only on one part of the European product , or about falsifying the transport designation .
During the last amendment to the Labelling Guidelines this Parliament fought a hard battle with the Council of Ministers to prevent discriminatory labelling regulations which distorted the competitiveness of the product .
We would do ourselves a great service if we were to demand the same for chocolate , and permit it .
At this point I should also like to emphasize that the above mentioned initiative would really be a compromise which lay almost exactly in the middle of all possible solutions .
We should be quite clear that the decision of the Commission and the Committee is actually on the right path .
Let us use the opportunity , let us prove that we think European and do not follow national interests !
Mr President , I would like sincerely to congratulate Mr Lannoye for the quality of his report .
I have some reason to do so , as some twelve years ago I was myself in the same situation as he is now , having been the rapporteur at the time of the Commission 's first attempt in this direction .
Today , as twelve years ago , the tune remains the same .
The issues challenging us are exactly the same as before , and no progress has been made .
The Commission 's proposal is useless , it is dangerous and it is bad .
It is useless because today the status quo enables everyone to consume the sort of chocolate that they actually want .
It is dangerous , because it very seriously damages the quality of our relationships and of our assistance to certain developing countries .
It is bad , because the reports is badly prepared , and it has not got the appropriate technical support .
I shall not come back again over the problem as a whole .
Instead I simply draw your attention , Mr President , to the question of inspection regarding the 5 % limit on substitute vegetable fats .
There exists today no technique such as will enable us not to detect , but to quantify substitute fats .
Twelve years ago , the Commission said these methods would be developed .
Today the Commission is still saying these methods will be developed .
Everything is imminent , just as before . There has been not a jot of progress .
In response to the questions raised by the committee on environment , of public health and of consumer protection , the Commission representative hammered out that there had been progress .
But he was unable to cite chapter and verse for any progress .
This illustrates , incidentally , the Commission 's dependency , when it came to preparing this draft , on a number of people with influence .
This directive is so mediocre and so badly prepared that the question arises , can we amend it ?
I hope we can , but I doubt it .
If we cannot amend it , we must have the courage to throw it out .
Mr President , there are cultural and emotional aspects to chocolate of course , but without being a specialist , I would like to talk about taste .
Chocolate lovers know it full well . Good chocolate is chocolate made with cocoa butter .
And addition of other fatty matter deteriorates the quality . Hence to defend quality the 1973 directive laid down a prohibition on the use of vegetable fat other than cocoa butter for the manufacture of chocolate .
This rule was respected by the six founding members of the Community .
With the first enlargement of the Community , the new Member States benefited from a derogation which authorised 5 % of the total weight of the chocolate to be vegetable fat .
The breach was now open .
At present , seven Member States use this derogation , and eight support the initial prohibition .
Under pressure from the multinational chocolate companies , the Commission adopted a draft directive on 17 April 1996 whose purpose was to allow Member States the option to authorise the addition of vegetable fat in the name of the free circulation of goods .
This directive was a further step down a slippery slope .
Its application would , and we all know it , have had immense repercussions both on the quality of chocolate and on the revenues of the cocoa-producing ACP countries .
As regards the quality of chocolate , it would have led to levelling down , with the introduction of vegetable and even synthetic fats .
Furthermore , there are no accurate and easily-usable techniques to measure the quantity of fat in chocolate .
The cocoa-producing developing countries would have suffered a substantial loss in revenues , valued at some $ 300 million , due both to loss of market outlet and pressure on prices .
This directive is also a failure by the European Union to meet its commitments within the framework of the International Cocoa Agreement .
I am delighted that the committee on Development and Cooperation has rejected this proposed directive .
Unfortunately , it was not rejected by the committee on Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I have heard the arguments put forward by Mr Lannoye , but if we are to adopt amendments to the directive , we would become involved in a dangerous and complicated process which would in practice be equivalent to accepting it .
Even if there are a number of modifications , they are matters mainly of form .
In the name of defence of the quality of chocolate and in the interests of the cocoa-producing ACP countries , I am in favour of rejecting the directive in order to give a strong signal to the Council .
If the Council really wishes for Europe-wide harmonization , let it prohibit the addition of other fats than cocoa butter throughout the whole of the European Union , and not leave the Member States any possibility of derogation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's proposal is an attack on lovers of chocolate .
They want chocolate to remain chocolate .
They do not want substitute chocolate , but genuine chocolate made from cocoa butter .
Chocolate made with synthetic fats , such as soybean and rapeseed oil , does not just stick in the throats of gourmets , but approval of these ersatz materials would have disastrous consequences in developing countries , because demand there would fall away .
They also mean a blatant breaking of the undertaking in the Cocoa Agreement back in 1993 , in which the Union promised to encourage the use of cocoa .
Producers planted their cocoa trees then in the expectation of the Agreement being met .
About one tenth of global cocoa bean production would fail to find a buyer .
The European Parliament must insist on clear designation .
Members of the Committee on Environment simply wanted to ensure that synthetic vegetable fats in chocolate were recorded in the constituents list , but we know that only 4 % of consumers ever read the small print .
We consider that the mature consumer should be allowed to make his own choice .
Our amendment has as its objective , therefore , that this fact is clearly printed on the product , so that the consumer can make his choice .
Anything else is quite unacceptable to us , such as if the identification were merely to be included in the small print of the contents list .
We also reject the use of substitute materials made from chemicals or gene technology .
We know that chocolate is a substitute drug , but we want no substitute materials in chocolate .
The European Parliament is now challenged not to cow-tow to the substitute foods industry , but to stand up for the purity regulation with regard to chocolate .
That has to be the position of the European Parliament !
Harmonization is right , but it has to be in the right direction .
Instead of using low value substitutes and instead of accepting a consequent increase in indebtedness amongst developing countries , we must maintain high standards of quality and cocoa imports .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall say it quite clearly , personally , I and my group are totally hostile to the draft directive before us , and in particular to article 2 .
My point of view will perhaps appear excessively simple , but I believe that chocolate should be made with cocoa , and that any product obtained from other constituent should have another name , quite simply .
To defend the directive , our colleague , Mr Schnellhardt has said , fairly curiously , that no one really wanted to know how many strawberries there were in a strawberry pie .
This is true , but I would reply , and with as much simplicity , that if you make a plum pie , it is not a strawberry pie , it is a plum pie .
Would we call wine a drink made from apple juice , or call butter a sort of margarine ? Of course not .
And we 'd be absolutely right !
We have accepted as cows , strange animals which are puffed up with hormones and fed on dead sheep ; and we 've seen the result .
Although not so serious , the matter before us is a matter of real concern , as the rapporteur has reminded us , and everything that needs to be said has been said on the technical and commercial aspects of this question .
I would therefore like to raise the question in more general terms .
Is our European Union a supermarket , where the only law is maximizing profit at least production cost ? Or is it a political construction , based on the values of solidarity , quality , and loyalty ?
Solidarity , with regard to the cocoa producing countries , whom we encourage in this speculative business , would involve at the very least not adopting legislation which would contribute to their ruination .
The quality that we need to promote , is the quality of product , whose singularity , inner qualities , and the cultural aspect of its use , makes a contribution to reconciling man with the best of himself , even if here we are dealing only with chocolate .
I , for my part , believe that the combat of quality over quantity is one of the battles that human civilization undertakes against industrial and productivist barbarity .
A sense of loyalty , finally , extends over and above pure free trade and market rules , means we must provide precise information to consumers , who are also citizens , as regards the products proposed to them .
Our drive towards integration must , in the minds of European citizens , be seen as consistent with a constant improvement , and not as downgrading of their quality of life .
If there were to be harmonization , this should happen from the top , by introducing the most elevated requirements and not bottom-up , as our citizens would refuse a Europe which was so conceived .
This is the reason why , Mr President , with the unanimous backing of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , I oppose this draft , and I support the amendments which are in radical opposition to it .
Mr President , when we discuss chocolate today , we find there are national differences of opinion , as we have different traditions and rules on what vegetable foodstuffs can be used in making chocolate .
The rules in seven countries have considered the cocoa-producing countries .
The rules in eight countries have guaranteed women in the poorest countries such as Burkina Faso and Mali exports of shea nuts which account for 20 % of their national product .
Personally , I feel that we could quite well have continued living with this distortion of competition for chocolate making and concentrated on loosening the marking rules in this directive .
But , having said that , I would like to wish Paul Lannoye luck in his work towards reaching a compromise in a simple but very difficult matter , which I believe makes sense on a number of points .
It should be stated that what some Member States have always called chocolate must continue to go by that name , and that marking must be used to show what vegetable foodstuffs are used .
I find it sensible that the marking should follow the list of ingredients , as the Committee on the Environment decided .
But what I find completely decisive is that we pass the proposed amendments which prohibit the use of synthetic methods in making vegetable foodstuffs .
This will give the developing countries the assurance that they can continue to export the products which they produce naturally .
If these proposed amendments are accepted , it would be totally unacceptable to allow any vegetable foodstuffs other than cocoa butter should be used , and I say that as a Dane .
This also applies to the proposed amendments prohibiting GMOs .
The novel foods directive only applies to markings , whereas what the developing countries need is that production should not take place in the first place .
Mr President , Europe is involved in all sorts of different things , and today it is involved in chocolate .
The dictatorship of the single market inevitably results in the dictatorship of a single regulation . This is fine for regulation on chocolate , on condition that it respects essential principles .
So we are full steam ahead for regulations on chocolate , provided it respects fundamental principles . These are honest information to the consumers , the diversity and quality of products , the interests of national companies .
This is not the meaning of what is proposed to us by the European authorities and by certain amendments .
No , it is not to respect honest information to the consumer to describe as chocolate products including vegetable fat other than cocoa , in particular when we know that it will be difficult to actually check the percentages of the different fats included .
It is not to respect the diversity and quality of products , to be able to sell as chocolate fat-based products based on karite or palm oil , or even soya or rapeseed .
To do this would be to go down the road towards not only standardisation but the lowering of standard quality with regard to food , in the direction of a loss of taste and savours , in a sort of Anglo-Saxonization of gastronomy .
And here , I welcome the ambassadors of chocolate and of good taste who are taking the floor today .
No , it is not to respect European interests , and beyond those interests , the interests of friendly countries with whom we cooperate , such as the Ivory Coast , to play the same game as the multinationals and to prepare for the entry of American soya into the make-up of sweets which will be chocolate only in name .
In this whole business , the Brussels Commission has behaved badly .
It is behaving as General de Gaulle feared it would in the past , as a Commission of the Congress of the United States of America .
We reject the American standardization of the world . We reject serving multinational interests .
The Members of Parliament from the National Front will vote against this draft directive .
Mr President , we are talking here - let us remind ourselves - about food legislation in the European Union , which , like legislation in general , is governed by the basic demand for harmonization .
Everyone who wants to sell a product wants free trade in goods .
Even France is amongst these when it wants to sell French products , although it forgets that quite happily in the relevant debate .
If we want free trade and wish to encourage it , which all of us do , then we must have certain prerequisites .
One of these has always been for us that goods produced within the European Union must consist of ingredients free of substances that endanger health .
That has always been the basic understanding of our food legislation .
Unlike many who have spoken today , I have followed every single food resolution for the last 8 years , and always said the same thing : ingredients must be free of substances that endanger health , they must contain no allergen risks , they may not be carcinogenic , they must be such that people can eat them without becoming ill .
We all surely agree on that .
When it is maintained here , however , that there are some substances which are obviously worse than others , then I should like to know why .
I admire the courage - if I were to be malicious I should call it arrogance - of those who believe that there is good and bad chocolate .
Those who like eating Swiss chocolate - and I am an expert on every chocolate in the world - are very surprised when they learn that there is vegetable fat in it .
The same applies to other chocolate .
I have my own favourite chocolate , as do we all .
I do not care one bit if there is vegetable fat in it or not .
It is a matter of flavour , and that goes for the others as well .
To believe that to say that just because vegetable fat - and I repeat , vegetable fat - is used in Great Britain or Sweden , this makes it a chocolate substitute , is an arrogance towards the whole population there , who are accustomed to this chocolate and like eating it .
I believe it has always been our intention here in the European Parliament to encourage the emancipation of citizens , because I hear this said repeatedly .
If we are to do that , then we must regulate just one thing : how much must there be in a product for that product to be capable of designation as such .
We do that with liver sausage , laying down the quantity of liver it has to contain , or whether soya protein may be included ; we do it with wine and everything else .
And I am sure I shall have on my side all of you who have already spoken , when we talk soon about consumer protection and consumer information , for instance , on concerning wine , identification and other matters .
But we shall return to that on another occasion .
Let us not fool ourselves . We are concerned today with competition and money !
This a matter of economic interests , and nothing else .
Anyone who says here today that this concerns the degrading of a product , is not talking about realities .
Recipes and contents cannot be altered arbitrarily .
One thing is quite right : we must inform consumers , and here I am in agreement with Mrs Thyssen and everyone else .
If we believe , however , that the list of ingredients is not sufficient for this purpose , then I would ask you to introduce another consumer information regulation for all colouring agents and all other additives .
I am convinced that the ingredients list for a product must contain details of what is in the product .
That applies equally to cocoa butter , dry cocoa , and vegetable fats other than cocoa butter .
Mr President , a lot of things of have been repeated in this debate .
A large number of us support Mr Lannoye 's report and agree with the need for certain basic requirements .
And it is no bad thing that , one after another , the representatives of the various political groups , with their different sympathies , have been repeating a fundamental idea to the Commission .
We are no longer , Commissioner , simply concerned with the question of arranging and harmonizing the technical norms for chocolate ; rather , we are concerned , and very seriously , about the logic and attitude that has brought the Commission to submit this proposal .
And all the more so considering that Parliament flatly rejected it a few years ago .
The Commission must therefore explain to Parliament what has brought it to submit this proposal , which goes against the interests of consumers , which will seriously affect the economy of third countries that fully cooperate with the Community , and which even breaches the principle of the adequate provision of information .
Madam Commissioner , we shall never understand why the Commission did not adopt the simple formula of distinguishing between the generic designation of a product and the specific designation of particular products derived from the basic product . I doubt that you are interested , Madam Commissioner , but in my view that was the only rational solution .
The Commissioners themselves acknowledge that they made a mistake when failing to make that distinction in the case of honey .
Now , after years of confusing and misleading consumers , they have to rectify that mistake . They accept that it is necessary to distinguish between the generic designation of honey and the specific designation of honey derivatives .
And they themselves acknowledge that they are doing this in order to prevent distortions of competition and avoid confusing consumers .
What , after years of error , they accept is necessary for honey , they do not wish to introduce for chocolate .
Nobody in this House understands why there is not going to be a distinction between the generic designation of chocolate and the specific designation of the various derivatives that can be marketed in the different Member States according to their traditions - such as Spanish drinking chocolate , which , when Spain joined the European Community , had to be distinguished because it did not meet the general requirements which , according to the Brussels Commission , characterized chocolate generically .
That was accepted , the directive was adopted , and now the Commission wants to introduce confusion .
I believe that the principle of quid pro quo in the food field is leading the European Commission down an unacceptable road , and this is why all the political groups are expressing their concern .
Mr President , in February 1995 , at the Joint Assembly of ACP countries and the European Union which was held in Dakar , Commissioner Pinheiro declared that there was no proposal to change the existing rules in the chocolate directive , and he ended by saying that to include fat other than cocoa butter would have serious consequences for many ACP countries .
Today , within a few days of the Joint Assembly in Togo , we cannot but observe that these commitments have not been respected .
Fats will be accepted in the manufacture of chocolate , and worse , there is no guarantee that there will be no recourse to artificial fats .
The ACP countries will lose all along the line .
The fall in world cocoa prices risks being catastrophic for many of them .
It is clear that the primary responsibility for this will attach to ourselves and , of course , in order to salve our consciences , we will possibly provide compensation for others ' financial losses .
And hence we also will be losing all along the line .
We will lose the quality of our chocolate , and we will have to cope with the financial deficits arising from our own shameless attitude with regard to those who put their trust in us .
Personally , Mr President , I will not associate myself with such betrayal .
Mr President , the chocolate directive has led to a stream of calls and letters from farmers in developing countries who grow cocoa and other chocolate fats , from consumer organizations and not least from the chocolate industry .
There is an interesting letter from the Swedish food industry , which like other Swedish industries carries a great responsibility for the fact that EU regulations play any role at all in Swedish legislation .
Now it thinks it sees a threat in the form of an EU regulation which it does not like and calls upon us to vote no to an additional declaration of animal fat in connection with the product name .
It would , of course , be easy for me as a EU opponent to vote no on the grounds that the EU should not regulate the details of product names .
Into the bargain I could gain points for defending Swedish economic interests. but I do not sit here as a representative of Swedish industry , but as a representative of green political ideas .
The Green Party in Sweden has always demanded that trade policy be conducted on the basis of social and environmental considerations .
We have also said that , as long as it lasts , Swedish EU membership should be used above all for the benefit of the environment , the interests of consumers and solidarity with the world 's poor .
On that basis it is obvious that I listen more closely to the interests of consumers and poor farmers that to the Swedish food industry .
The reasonable conclusion then is that goods should be labelled so that the consumers can get effective information quickly and easily .
For example , edible fats from vegetable oils should not be called butter .
Similarly it is reasonable that it should be apparent from the brand name that there is a distinction between chocolate with and without cocoa butter , in accordance with the Green Group 's Amendments Nos 56 and 57 .
It is also reasonable not to allow genetically modified or other new ingredients , but to limit the permitted substitute fats in chocolate products to those which are now in use in Sweden , amongst other places , as demanded by the Green Group 's Amendments Nos 58 and 59 .
Mr President , we knew that the EU would bring extensive detailed regulation before the 1994 referendum in Sweden .
That was one of many reasons my party voted no .
But as long as we are members we cannot simply pick the cherries from the cake . Instead we must try to enable the EU to take overall responsibility for health , the environment and global solidarity .
It is high time that Swedish industry recognized that , and recognized that we who sit here for Sweden are not some lackeys for Swedish industry , but that we stand for certain ideas , in my case for green ideas .
Mr President , few of our debates have been followed by the press and the public like this one on chocolate has been .
Some people are amazed , some smile , some ask if we have not got anything more important to do ? ' The fact is that this chocolate war is first and foremost a commercial war , in which great economic interests are involved , not only those of the chocolate producing countries but also those of the developing countries , some exporting cocoa and others shea butter or other vegetable fats .
The interests of not only the large confectionery multinationals but also the large chemicals multinationals are at stake .
But it is also a question of a great emotional conflict : cultural identity that is very strong in countries such as Belgium and Italy , historic producers of historic and magnificent chocolates ; childhood for many of us ; levels of rationality and levels of irrational nostalgia .
But what is chocolate ?
Since the discovery of cocoa in the sixteenth century and since its introduction into Europe , chocolate has been obtained from cocoa products .
That is the case for the WHO and for the Codex Alimentarius ; that was the case in Community Europe until the entry of the United Kingdom , Ireland and Denmark , countries in which - since the war and not always , and I am sorry for them , because in those countries there are two generations who do not know what real chocolate is - a product has been marketed with a fairly high percentage of vegetable fats .
With the recent entry of three new countries with the same habits , and in the presence of the single market , we are faced with the need for harmonization .
In view of the Commission 's debatable motion - because , in fact , the seven countries would be encouraged to do what the other eight , that is , the majority , are doing - the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has carried out serious , exhaustive work , and the socialist group believes that the wording approved and now submitted to the Chamber 's vote , is a wise compromise to be supported in its entirety .
The Italian national delegation to which I belong will only digress on one point : that of labelling , with the aim , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , of better protecting the consumer , by enabling him to read , alongside the name of the product , whether it is cocoa-based chocolate or whether it is a product with a fairly high percentage of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter .
Mr President , this month is the 25th anniversary of the passing of the European Communities Bill in the British Houses of Parliament , which signalled the arrival of the United Kingdom in the European Community .
We thought we were joining a common market , and the amazing fact is that it has taken 24 years to try to agree a common market in chocolate .
One of my colleagues , Mr Valverde I think , asked why this directive is required .
I will now enlighten him .
The common market is not working .
On 25 March 1996 the Italian Ministry of Health issued a notice stating that chocolate from the United Kingdom , Ireland and Denmark could only be marketed in Italy under the name surrogate chocolate .
I believe that this was withdrawn on the insistence of the European Commission , but difficulties still remain .
What we want in the United Kingdom is a free common market .
We welcome the Commission directive which allows up to 5 % vegetable fat in chocolate with an indication of its presence next to the list of ingredients .
We reject those amendments , put down by a number of colleagues , which we regard as last-ditch attempts to fragment the supposedly common market and protect national industries , especially in Belgium , France , Italy and the Netherlands .
That is why you have been hearing from Belgian , Italian , French and Dutch colleagues on precisely that point .
In particular , we reject the amendments which would tend , first of all , to make the statement on vegetable fat part of the name of the product or place it on the front of the product .
After all , what is cocoa butter if it is not a vegetable fat , and why should we not simply rely on the labelling directive which says that all labelling must be clear , visible and indelible ?
Another amendment says that the directive cannot come into force until a method of verifying the vegetable fat content is agreed .
What are we dealing with here ?
It is not radioactive , for heaven 's sake !
Why did they not put that into the 1973 directive ?
They had 24 years to think this one up , and then at the last moment somebody comes forward with the idea that we should verify the presence of vegetable fat .
Rubbish !
Finally , the idea that the British and Irish should have to rename their milk chocolate is ludicrous .
Let consumers have a choice .
Why should consumers have to alter or find a product with a different name from the name that they have traditionally had ?
I do not know what MEP produced this amendment .
I think it was Mr De Coene and I would like to invite Mr De Coene to come to Cadburys Works in my constituency in Keynsham and tell the people who work there why he wants to rename the chocolate that they make .
The net effect of this directive would , we believe , be to increase the chocolate market to the advantage of consumers , cocoa and vegetable fat producers .
But , above all , the net effect of this directive would be to make the common market work .
And about time !
Mr President , as the debate this afternoon has shown , this directive is about feelings and interests .
We have the developing countries , we have the chocolate makers , we have the consumers , and we have so-called good taste .
As a Dane , I find it interesting to hear that the chocolate I have been eating for nearly 45 years does not taste nice and is not good quality .
What matters to a liberal politician today is to get the internal market to work as Mrs Jackson has just said .
We will be able to make and sell chocolate with up to 5 % fat throughout the Union .
It is also important that we as consumers should have free choice , and so that we can decide whether we want so-called nice tasting chocolate or not .
We must be able to make the choice ourselves as consumers , and so we are in favour of markings which are neutral , objective and clear and are right next to the list of ingredients .
That is my recommendation to my colleagues this afternoon .
My name has been mentioned by Mrs Jackson and she has invited me to come and explain .
I will do so , I will accept the challenge and I will use Mrs Jackson 's argument : that in the internal market products that are the same must bear the same name .
No exceptions , no derogations : harmonization .
Mr De Coene , although your intervention was brief , I must remind you of the Rule that , in the present circumstances , where it is a matter of explaining some personal position which in your view has not been correctly stated , you are entitled to do so at the end of the debate .
Since you did so very briefly , I did not stop you .
Mr President , I was born in the country of Côte d 'Or , of Leonidas and of Ferrero which , as is not apparent from their names , are of Belgian origin , a country of truly great chocolate .
Belgium is also the country of common sense .
This is universally recognized , and I believe that common sense , ladies and gentlemen , means that we should reserve the name ' chocolate ' to those products that deserve that name .
Just as you do not call a carp a rabbit , you do not give the name of chocolate to what is simply an Anglo-Saxon sweet with all the subtle flavouring of aftershave .
At most , we might stretch our generosity to give products which contain very different qualities of vegetable fats , the name ' cocoa-based fantasy . '
To do anything other , would mean that you call ' whisky ' any sort of rot-gut which has been distilled outside Scotland or Ireland .
I beseech you , let us respect the traditions of our respective countries .
If we go against them , we will undoubtedly generate the growing disaffection of our citizens with regard to European institutions .
Mr President , I would like to say that I agree with those who say that logically the minority follows the majority or just imports cocoa butter .
But that is not the logic of politics .
I would like to mention several points which might not have been brought up yet .
Chocolate has already been made for hundreds of years from a fine raw material and it is a semi-finished product .
Mrs Jackson referred to a firm in her constituency . As an Amsterdammer I would say she should come to Amsterdam , the biggest cocoa port in the world , and she will see that cocoa butter is one of the Netherlands 's main export products .
It is obviously not just British interests that are at stake here .
Did you know , for instance , that 75 % of the chocolate consumed in the European Union is eaten in countries that only use cocoa butter ?
So it is more than seven against eight or eight again seven .
Did you know , for instance , that in your country , England , only cocoa butter was used until the beginning of this century and that was the law ?
Did you know that the Commission simply forgot to bring this up in the negotiations with the newest Member States ?
This is an omission for which the Commission deserves to be criticized , as it has admitted in its answer to a question I put on the subject .
Did you know , for instance , that a few weeks before joining the European Union Austria changed the law so that we ended up with nearly seven against eight , because there was Portugal as well ?
Portugal should really be brought before the European Court of Justice because it infringed the existing European legislation and already permits the other fats .
It is unfair and inexplicable that the European Commission has not brought Portugal before the European Court of Justice .
But I can assure you that on that point we can expect an action by the current Member States .
I anticipate that they will go to the European Court of Justice because there are plenty of things that are not as they should be in this directive .
Mr President , I am for the most part in agreement with Mrs Jackson 's argument .
As regards international trade , I am surprised that our Committee on External Economic Relations is actually present at this debate .
I would like to put two questions : to the Commission , can you say whether it is consistent with our international trade commitments to give different treatment to cocoa exporting countries and countries that export oils and fats ?
I would not have thought so but I would like to hear the Commission 's opinion .
As regards Amendment No 7 tabled by Mrs Thyssen - for whom I have the greatest respect , for what she has said here among other things - is it not inconsistent with our World Trade Organization and GATT obligations just to speak about tropical fat imports ?
I would like a clear answer on this point .
It also strikes me that in this debate it seems just as if the next thing is it will be forbidden in the European Union to use 100 % cocoa to manufacture chocolate .
Mr President , we are talking about the ingredients of chocolate and its name .
Of course it is our task to protect European consumers adequately , and to ensure that products can be designated .
In the debate about chocolate , however , much more is at stake .
We are also voting on the way of life in cocoa-producing countries .
A discussion has developed in the forefront of this debate , which we should never forget in future .
In the medium-term we need a fair partnership between European consumers and producing countries .
That means that we must also ensure that the fairest possible production conditions exist in those countries .
The more seriously we take this responsibility , the more people we can free from enslavement to neo-colonialist economic powers and lead them to peace and affluence .
I believe that is a task which benefits both sides .
Mr President , the Directive which we are discussing today dates from 1973 , when it was decided that ordinary milk chocolate must contain a minimum of 25 % cocoa , while dark chocolate must contain a minimum of 35 % cocoa .
I think it is important to bear this in mind in this debate .
Some people insist of course that allowing 5 % vegetable foodstuffs to be used means that the product cannot be called chocolate at all .
That was , and still is , rubbish .
Nothing in this directive changes the basic rule that there must a minimum of 25 % and 35 % cocoa in the product respectively before it can be called chocolate .
Seven EU Member States , including Denmark , allow and use vegetable foodstuffs .
The other eight countries , which stick to cocoa butter , want to prohibit the use of vegetable foodstuffs .
In other words , as we have seen today , this is one area where the single European market is not functioning .
I do not believe that the arguments against a ban are convincing .
It is said that we should use cocoa butter out of consideration for the cocoa-exporting countries of Africa , but the dispute is after all only about the maximum 5 % of the chocolate product which vegetable foodstuffs can comprise , so this matter can hardly be catastrophic for the countries concerned .
In any case - and not many people have mentioned this , it was mentioned by Mrs Sandbaek amongst others , and I think she was right - vegetable foodstuffs are made from shea nuts and palm oil , which are also imported from third world countries .
One of the poorest countries in the world , Burkina Faso , in fact depends on its exports of shea nuts .
So I think this aspect is worth mentioning when we are discussing this thing .
People are also saying that it is the poor countries which will be hit if we impose a ban on using vegetable foodstuffs .
Mr President , at the end of this debate , it now seems quite clear that the proposed amendment to the directive currently in force on cocoa-based products , as well as being inappropriate is , in my opinion , mistaken , was also unnecessary , and , above all , does not allow us to say whether it is just a technical measure to avoid an unfavourable judgment being pronounced by the Court of Justice .
In fact , this sector was governed effectively for over twenty years by the 1973 directive that did not prevent the movement of any product in any country , but merely enabled consumers to know what they were buying and eating , at least in those eight countries where that directive was observed and applied .
What would we lose and what would we gain if the Commission 's motion were adopted ?
The countries whose economies depend on cocoa exports would certainly rely on us , the European consumers no longer able to know exactly what they are eating would rely on us , many small European chocolate producers finding it more tedious to withstand the competition or having to change their traditional production processes would probably rely on us .
However , only a few of the small multinational groups controlling most of the manufacture and European trade in confectionery would benefit us .
And so we ask why ?
Why do we want to bring a sector into line that depends a great deal on the quality of its production at all costs , for the benefit of a handful of multinationals ?
Why these and not other choices ?
For these reasons , we will vote in favour of these amendments which , at least , plan to indicate clearly in the name and labelling of the products the essential characteristics of their composition , particularly with regard to the presence of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter , which are not the subject of specific measures by chance .
We believe it necessary for the Council to examine the possibility of blocking the adoption of a directive which , as it has been presented , is inappropriate , unpleasant and dangerous .
Mr President , first and foremost I would like to thank the rapporteur on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection for the great amount of work which has been done on this issue .
I will begin by also giving some background to the Commission 's proposal .
The European Council in Edinburgh gave the Commission the task of working for a simplification of a whole series of Community rights .
Only the provisions which are really necessary for the single market to work shall be kept .
In the area of food seven directives from the 1970s are affected by these simplification measures .
Two of them are draft directives on cocoa products and chocolate and on coffee extracts and chicory , which is what we are discussing today .
The various social and occupational groups who are affected by the directive and national authorities have been given the opportunity to participate in the preparations and give their opinions .
Initially the Commission considered it advisable to keep the Community 's regulations for these product groups .
The simplification measures are aimed mainly at adapting the existing directives to general food legislation .
The aim is , in other words , to prevent the various texts from overlapping each other or from containing contradictory provisions .
The simplification shall also be followed up by an adaptation to technological developments .
Finally , it was necessary to find solutions to a number of separate problems , which constituted real obstacles to the functioning of the single market , in order to ensure the free movement of goods .
One paragraph in the proposal on chocolate has led to strong reactions , which we have really experienced in the debate here this evening .
It concerns the question of using vegetable fats other than cocoa butter in chocolate .
As you know , out of the fifteen Member States of the Union , three countries give permission for the use of these fats through exceptions , four countries allow it , and eight have bans .
This leads to an unsolvable situation in the single market , since discrimination arises between the various economic players within the sector .
In this case the Commission has tried to find a balance between the various points of view .
This means trying to find compromises between the various demands .
In this particular case the Commission has examined the question on the basis of the legal principles of the working of the single market .
We have also looked at the Union 's international obligations , in this case the obligations we have in the WTO , and finally what rules should apply to provide consumer protection .
It has , of course , been impossible to find a complete solution .
In the Commission 's proposal we have tried to solve the problem in the following way .
First and foremost the Member States will from now on have the right to allow their chocolate producers to use up to 5 % of other vegetable fats in addition to the proportions of cocoa and cocoa butter laid down in the proposal .
In addition , the Member States who in future still want to forbid their chocolate producers from using vegetable fats other than cocoa butter will have the right to do so .
The Commission , of course , attaches great importance to consumer information .
That is the reason why we provide that the label on chocolate which contains other fat must clearly show that such products are included .
In that respect it is not sufficient to say that fats are included in the list of ingredients .
Through these provisions the Commission has tried to unite three fundamental principles . Firstly , the principle of subsidiarity , which means that the Member States themselves may decide what substances may be included in their chocolate .
Through that the States have the opportunity to retain their national legislation .
In that way we avoid adapting quality by reducing it , which is something against which warnings have at times been given .
Secondly , the free movement of goods is ensured .
Thirdly , the labelling provisions give the consumers the opportunity to decide for themselves what chocolate they want to buy and what chocolate they want to eat .
The Commission can only approve amendments which respect these principles .
A lot has been said about the consequences this proposal could have for developing countries .
The Community must of course give priority to sustainable development in these countries , but we do not think that our proposal will have a negative effect on developing countries .
On the contrary , we believe that chocolate consumption will of course be the same in the Community when the proposal has been adopted .
Developing countries can therefore expect their market opportunities to remain .
From what I have said so far you can draw the conclusion that the Commission is able to approve Amendments Nos 8 and 13 which concern the fundamental issue of labelling .
The Commission is in favour of precise information about what vegetable fats , apart from cocoa butter , are used , but we do not think it necessary to prescribe where on the label this information should be placed .
Of the other amendments , we can accept Amendment No 14 on the use of additives and Amendments Nos 19 and 20 on the definition of ' gianduja ' chocolate .
Amendments Nos 28 and 29 concern the date of the coming into force of the new directive .
The Commission is positive towards the idea behind these amendments and is prepared to revise the wording .
As regards the question of analyses which make it possible to check whether the chocolate contains vegetable fat other than cocoa butter , the Commission will of course ensure that an effective method is introduced before the directive enters into force .
We have also received positive information on this point .
Finally , the Commission is unable to accept the three proposed amendments concerning coffee extract and chicory .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Gradin .
Mr President , as rapporteur , I wish to deplore the fact that the commissioners directly affected , Messrs Bangemann and Pinheiro , are not here .
This debate is not a debate , inasmuch as Mrs Gradin has , with great good will , just read us a letter stating the information she was given .
Secondly , I note , on hearing what she has just said , that the Commission systematically rejects all the politically significative amendments which have been supported today .
This raises an enormous problem and I wish to discuss this tomorrow with the Commissioner , who will once again be asked at the time of voting , about the real attitude of the Commission .
Could the Commissioner confirm that she is rejecting all the amendments except the seven which she has said she is accepting ?
Is she positively rejecting all the rest ?
I hope so .
Stick to it , Mrs Gradin !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 10 a.m. on Thursday .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0524 / 97 ) .
I should like to apologize to the President-in-Office of the Council and everyone present for this delay , the reason for which is beyond my control . I therefore wish to express publicly my unhappiness about this delay , and I shall duly inform the Bureau of the reason for it .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I should like to ask for a written reply to my Question No 2 , in view of the fact that I was here at 5.30 p.m. when Question Time was due to begin .
I have to attend a meeting which starts at 6 p.m. , and I would therefore ask for a written reply .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , I also wish to apologize to you in particular , and I am sure that , in view of the circumstances , the President-in-Office will have no objection to giving you a written reply .
Mr von Habsburg has the floor .
Mr President , I should simply like to ask if you would be so kind as to raise the matter , at the next meeting of the Bureau , of what we are going to do about the half hour of Question Time that has been lost .
For the provisions of the Rules of Procedure concerning the time allocated to Question Time are quite clear .
It is out of order that our time was taken up by the programme .
Thank you for your kind words to us all .
Thank you , Mr von Habsburg .
The personal authority which you enjoy and the words that you just spoken will increase my sense of responsibility when it comes to raising this matter with the Bureau .
I therefore thank you for your remarks and propose that we move on to the first question without further delay .
Question No 1 by Ulla Sandbæk ( H-0668 / 97 ) :
Subject : EU funding for the conservation of the African elephant after the Cites Cop 10 .
The 10th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to CITES was held in Harare , Zimbabwe , on June 9-20 , 1997 .
The Parties agreed by an overwhelming majority of two-thirds to downlist only the populations of African elephant of Botswana , Namibia and Zimbabwe back to Appendix II of the Convention .
For the leading conservation organizations , this firm decision rewards the conservation success of the three African nations whose elephant populations should never have been listed in the CITES Appendix I. The mechanisms and procedures agreed in Harare provide every assurance of adequate safeguards and the conditional decision to allow such trade to resume in the future will prove to be positive and will be of benefit in the long term to elephant conservation throughout Africa .
However , in order to be effective and successful , the decision taken by the CITES parties requires that the donor community , of which the EU is an important part , must move quickly to provide at least a substantial proportion of the necessary funds .
Is the Council prepared to take all the necessary steps to ensure that the funds required to implement the decisions taken by the CITES COP 10 can be allocated as soon as possible ?
What financial and political support can be expected from the EU ?
I do not think my question has been answered at all .
First , the EU has already implemented CITES , so it is not true to say it has not been dealt with .
Second , given that the EU played a decisive role in getting the elephant moved from annex I to annex II , one might well ask if this is going to be followed up and money is going to be given to endow such an observation system , for if it doesn 't happen , it is clear that the agreement to moving the elephant to annex II is useless .
So I would like to know if it is the intention to authorize the money so that we can get some results out of moving the elephant from one annex to another at all .
I very much understand the concerns that prompted Mrs Sandbæk to ask a supplementary question .
It is perfectly understood how necessary it is to have mechanisms for converting existing ivory stocks into money intended to supply a fund earmarked for the conservation of elephants .
I think that extra financial assistance will be necessary , as has just been emphasized by the Honourable Member , in order to implement these decisions . This would improve the ability to combat poaching , and make for better management of the elephant population .
I would simply say to the previous speaker , that the Commission is already contributing as part of the actions under management of DG VIII .
As regards supplementary financial support , the Council is not at present in receipt of a proposal from the Commission .
We are therefore , like the European Parliament itself , awaiting such a proposal .
Thank you , Mr Wohlfart .
I would remind that we have undertaken - I did so on your behalf - to give a written reply to Question No 2 by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo .
Question No 3 by Patricia McKenna ( H-0689 / 97 ) :
Subject : British arms supplies to Indonesia
The British Government recently announced that it would proceed with contracts to sell 16 Hawk trainer aircraft , 50 Alvis armoured cars and Tactica water cannon to Indonesia .
British-manufactured weapons have reportedly been used by Indonesian troops in acts of oppression in East Timor .
Journalists John Pilger and Hugh O 'Shaughnessy have both documented the use of Hawk jets there .
In 1991 the European Community set a number of criteria for arms export policy .
Factors to be taken into account include the human rights record of countries buying arms from EU states .
Given these criteria , the evidence of British arms being used in attacks on the Timorese , the numerous reports of human rights abuses within Indonesia and the EU 's common position on East Timor , when will the Council impose an arms embargo on Indonesia ?
The Council is always vigilant with respect to human rights in East Timor .
The adoption in June 1996 of a common position of the European Union relating to East Timor-- which I would ask you to remember - testifies to this .
The promotion of the respect of human rights and of democracy is an integral part of the Union 's foreign policy .
The Council , like the European Parliament , will continue to monitor with concern the situation in East Timor , and expresses its concern regarding this matter each time that it arises .
However , the Council believes that dialogue is the only way forward to a durable solution .
Within this context , it firmly supports the negotiations taking place between Portugal and Indonesia , under the aegis of the General Secretary of the United Nations .
The Council hopes that they will conclude within the foreseeable future in a just , overall , and internationally acceptable solution .
This must , of course , occur while there is respect for the rights of the East Timor people , by agreement with the resolutions of the General Chamber , and in conformance with the principles of the United Nations Charter .
As the honourable Member rightly reminded us , the European Council has agreed at its meetings of June 1991 and 1992 on a list of seven , and subsequently eight , common criteria applicable to arms exports .
These common criteria provide an orientation for the decisions that continue to be the responsibility of the national authorities .
Having said that , the Council has not up to now officially considered the possible imposition of an embargo on arms supply to Indonesia .
The Council will continue , nevertheless , to monitor the situation in Indonesia and in East Timor .
I still feel the question about imposing an arms embargo on Indonesia has not been answered .
There are stories going around at the moment that in Britain they are going to actually block sales to certain countries in the world because of the campaign against the arms trade .
It is very difficult to get any information from the Foreign Office even though the new Labour Government has promised openness and transparency .
A British Labour MP , Ms Clwyd , received a letter from the Department of Trade and Industry acknowledging that there were 59 arms exports licences being considered by the British Government .
Of these , four have been turned down and 11 have been approved .
No details were given on the types of arms that would be exported , their value , or the decisions that would likely be taken regarding the other 44 licences .
Groups campaigning against the arms trade have been very frustrated by this .
Despite the fact that there has been a change of government , there seems to be no change in policy .
The Tories used to announce every year that they were blocking a few arms exports to ruthless regimes while at the very same time proceeding with much greater deals .
I do not think that Mr Robin Cook is pursuing an ethical foreign policy , as he promised .
We have to consider the ethics of promising one thing and doing something different .
The European Union has to impose an arms embargo on Indonesia .
You see what those weapons are doing to the East Timorese people .
It is unacceptable that we sit back here in the European Union and do nothing about it .
I do not think the honourable Member asked a supplementary question .
She simply commented and regretted the fact that to date , the Council had not taken a decision on other measures , notably a possible embargo on arms supply to Indonesia .
I would say simply this .
Mrs McKenna , I understand your commitment as regards the respect of human rights in this part of the world .
Furthermore , unless I 'm wrong , you already received a written reply at the beginning of the month on a question similar to the one that you have just asked .
I believe that you and I might well be able to discuss for hours a subject which is close to your heart , but I will simply repeat that the Council has not to date been able to undertake an official examination of the possible imposition of the arms embargo to Indonesia .
This may be regrettable , but these are the facts .
I can give you no other answer .
Question No 4 by Arthur Newens ( H-0693 / 97 ) :
Subject : EU banana regime - WTO panel ruling
Following the debate in the European Parliament on 16 September , would the Council please make a statement about the options which are open to it and what action it plans to take to counteract the likely effects on small banana producers following rejection of the appeal to the WTO Panel ?
I would like to thank the Parliament for the proposed compromise , given that I must be in Geneva again this evening .
Thank you , Mr President .
To come back to the honourable Member 's question , I would like to say this . The Council wishes to emphasize that it is conscious of the consequences arising from the rejection of the appeal against the decision of the World Trade Organization panel regarding the community regime and the banana sector .
That being said , at this stage , the Council has not yet been able to take a position on the report on the appeal organ for settlement of World Trade Organization disputes , nor on the action to be taken with regard to this business .
The Council will , of course , do this at the appropriate time on the basis of formal proposals of the Commission , bearing in mind that the legitimate interests of the European producers and producers from the ACP , and while respecting the existing international rules .
However , in the light of technical constraints involved in these matters , there should be no expectation of proposals being put forward except after a few months .
I am rather disappointed that the Minister was unable to tell us more .
In theory , at least , the European Union could maintain the present banana regime if it agreed to compensate complaining countries or firmly refused to renege on its commitments to Caribbean and other countries under the Lomé Convention , and call for talks as happened , for example , on the issue of Helms-Burton .
What steps has the Council or Commission made to calculate the cost of compensation or to initiate talks with complaining countries to seek to find an alternative means of maintaining the market for small banana producers ?
Last week the President of Ecuador , Mr Fabián Alarcón , while opposing the present licences system , said in an answer to me personally that his country had no wish to injure others and would be prepared to discuss alternatives .
Surely we should be following up some of those possible alternatives .
First , I would like to come back to the second question that was raised , regarding the idea that it might be possible to do it in theory .
This is an idea which I can subscribe to .
Secondly , I would like to say to the honourable Member that , as regards the regulations he has just mentioned , it is clearly down to the Commission to present proposals .
I can assure you that the presidency will spare no effort if proposals from the Commission are rapidly presented with a view to reconciliation of the recent decision of the WTO with the interests of European producers in particular .
Thank you , Mr Wohlfart , but we are not moving on from Mr Newens ' question yet .
I have received three requests to put supplementary questions .
I can only grant two .
I shall therefore give the floor to Mr von Habsburg and Mr Medina Ortega .
Mr von Habsburg has the floor for one minute .
Mr President of the Council , you said that you would need a few more weeks or months before a decision were taken .
Would you not be of a disposition to request a solution very quickly , because , let us not forget , our banana producers , who are affected by these decisions , are small farmers , whose capital and financial possibilities are relatively limited , whereas on the other side , there are major capitalist companies , such as United Fruit , Chiquita , etc. who can hold out for a fairly long time .
I think it is our duty to try to make a decision as quickly as possible .
That is the reason why I would ask you if you might not be of a mind to ask the Commission to be diligent , as the question is a decisive one for the small fruit farms .
I would like to respond , I hope positively , to Mr von Habsburg 's question .
I propose to place this point on the Council Agenda for its General Affairs meeting of 10 November , because we are going to devote this Council to the revision of the Lomé convention , and I believe that this is a topic of current interest .
I shall try to act in such a way that the message gets through to the Commission , which will be represented , and I also rely on members of Parliament to exercise the necessary pressure on the Commission .
Mr President , my concern is practically the opposite of that expressed by Mr Newens and Mr von Habsburg .
The problem of the banana regime is extremely complex , since it affects not only small islands in the Antilles , but also sizeable areas of the Community , Africa and the rest of the world .
My concern , Mr President , is that at the last meeting of the World Trade Organization , the Community was apparently put under pressure to resolve this issue in a very short period of time .
In fact , a strict deadline of fifteen months was set .
My question to the representative of the Council is : is this in fact a fixed deadline , or will we have more time , since I fear that adjusting the banana regime will take longer than fifteen months ?
The presidency is always caught between two fires .
On the one hand , people want the question to be dealt with rapidly , and with valid arguments , and on the other hand , another aspect of the question has just been raised , that is , the deadline which has been imposed upon us .
I do not think this is a final date .
If my information is exact , this is a reasonable deadline .
The fifteen month deadline could in reality be extended to sixteen or seventeen months .
But I am pleased that the complexity , not only in technical but also in political terms , of the question has been admitted .
At all events , I think that we should get down to this task as quickly as possible , however complex it may be .
Question No 5 by Hans Lindqvist ( H-0696 / 97 ) :
Subject : Used bottle and can return system
Sweden has a long-established and efficient system for the return of used glass bottles and aluminium cans , of which over 95 % are now recycled , and for a number of years has also had an efficient system for the return of used plastic bottles .
Increasingly internationalized trade and the opening-up of the EU 's internal frontiers have to some extent meant that there is a greater variety of products but have unfortunately also caused serious disruption to the Swedish bottle and can return system .
Imported cans are unsuitable , as the original deposit was not paid in Sweden , etc .
The system operated by Systembolaget has virtually collapsed owing to the various types of foreign bottles .
This state of affairs is unacceptable from an environmental point of view .
Are there any plans to standardize bottles and cans ?
Can a Member State , on environmental grounds , require all imported bottles and cans to be adapted for its return system ?
The reply of the President-in-office of the Council to this question will be very brief .
I would like to emphasize that the Council takes note of the explanations of the honourable Member with interest , and also regarding the ancillary question he has raised .
I must however draw the attention of the Honourable Member to the fact that the Council , as such , has no competency in this matter .
It is up to the Commission to examine the problem raised , and , as the case may be , to present appropriate proposals .
I put the same question to the Commission and Commissioner Bjerregaard yesterday , and I got an evasive answer from her .
She certainly did not give the Council as an excuse , but I did not get any answer .
The question concerns developed systems for deposits on bottles , cans , plastic , glass and metal in Sweden which have worked well and are now working well .
When the border controls disappeared , the bottles and cans etc. which existed before were , unfortunately , mixed with a lot of different plastic bottles , cans and glass which do not yet fit into our developed systems .
My question is whether the Council has any proposals for how you could prevent these environmental problems from arising .
Perhaps people could benefit from the good systems which exist in countries like Sweden .
Perhaps a proposal could come from the EU which could solve the problem of the large volume of waste products which , unfortunately , are now the result of opening up border controls .
I believe I can say to Mr Lindqvist that the difference between my reply and that of the Commission , is perhaps not that I have not satisfied the person who raised the question , but at least that my reply was not trying to veer with the prevailing wind , my reply was straightforward .
I have referred the matter back to the competency of the Commission .
I know that the Swedish system that you have just recalled is a model system , and that it operated for many years to general satisfaction .
I think that the Council directive relating to packaging and packaging waste adopted on 20 December 1994 provides for the reutilisation and the recycling of packaging , but not for the standardisation of drinks bottles and cans , for example .
The national systems for recovery and collection of packaging should cover not only national but imported products , without discrimination .
According to the information at my disposal , although I am not a member of the Commission , it would appear that other Member States do not encounter the same difficulties in this respect .
It behoves the Commission to proceed to undertake the necessary checks and to draw the necessary conclusions .
I believe that you made an approach yesterday to the relevant persons .
As I know you , Mr Lindqvist , I do not doubt for one moment that you will make a further attempt to make things move in the weeks and months to come .
Question No 6 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0698 / 97 ) :
Subject : Treaty of Amsterdam
The text of article 100a ( 5 ) of the treaty , as amended by the Treaty of Amsterdam , concerning the possibility of introducing national provisions relating to the environment and the working environment , differs in one respect from the preliminary version of the text since the latter was examined by the jurist linguists .
In the preliminary version , it was stated that such provisions must be based on " scientific facts ' , but in the final version sent to the delegations , those words have been changed to " scientific evidence ' .
The word " evidence ' is usually taken to mean something which is more conclusive and may also be regarded as controversial by scientists and researchers , whose task is to study and question things all of the time .
Why has the term " scientific facts ' been replaced by " scientific evidence ' in the final version of the draft Treaty of Amsterdam ?
Can the Council provide examples of what " scientific evidence ' covers and what distinguishes it from " scientific facts ' ?
I do not think my answer will satisfy the honourable Member .
Similar questions were already raised in the sessions of July and September , that is , questions relating to the motivations underlying this or that provision of the treaty of Amsterdam , and their interpretation .
I must , in the present case , emphasize one again that it is not the responsibility of the Council to comment on the reasons why the intergovernmental conference amended some provisions of the treaty setting up the European Community , such as the one cited by the honourable Member .
I must also emphasize that it is no more the responsibility of the Council , at least not at this stage , to take a position on a question relating to the provision of a treaty which is not yet in force , although it may in the intervening period have been signed .
Under such conditions , I would ask the honourable Member to be kind enough to understand that at this stage , any exegesis of the documents agreed in Amsterdam would be inopportune , especially as the only institution accredited , in our view , to interpret the text of these treaties , is the European Court of Justice .
Thank you for your answer , but just as you suspected , I am not entirely satisfied with it .
The last time we discussed this , one of the reasons you gave was that the Treaty in Amsterdam was not yet signed .
Now it has been signed by the foreign ministers .
I had therefore hoped that you would be prepared to have a discussion about its contents .
I think the situation we find ourselves in is completely absurd .
The citizens of several countries shall now vote in referendums on this , but the Council of Ministers , which wrote the Treaty , is not prepared to say what the Treaty means .
For example , I go to meetings every week in Sweden and I am asked about what various things in the Amsterdam Treaty mean .
The only thing I can answer now is that not even the Council of Minsters can give an answer to what it means .
I think that you are ever so slightly avoiding your political responsibilities if you are not prepared to explain texts which you have actually been involved in writing .
I would therefore like to urge you to be able to answer the next time I ask a question about the actual content of the treaty .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am unsure whether that is a question or a threat .
In any event , you have the floor , since it seems that Mr Sjöstedt 's opinions and yours do not exactly coincide ; but that is the purpose of Parliament .
Mr Sjöstedt is well aware of my opinion on this subject .
He has just alluded to the referendums which will be held in some countries of the European Union .
There have also been discussions at the parliamentary level about the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I think it is the responsibility of the various governments involved in the intergovernmental conference to make the interpretation which they deem to be not only fit but also exactly concordant with the treaty terms .
I would not wish to intervene in the referendum or pre-referendum in Sweden , but once procedures for ratification have been completed , Mr Sjöstedt , we can have a fundamental discussion about the treaty of Amsterdam .
This treaty will , incidentally , be revised - I am well informed in this respect - in the years to come , because the process of integration is a dynamic one .
You also raised a question about the difference between scientific proof and scientific data .
I am neither a great legal expert , nor a great language expert .
Therefore , I had to use my son 's Petit Larousse dictionary , and I think I can tell you that scientific data - but this is a purely personal interpretation , and I am not responding as the President-inoffice here - is a part of a scientific proof .
It therefore does not have the same value as scientific proof .
Thank you , Mr Wohlfart .
I appreciate that your reference to a certain dictionary was not subliminal advertising , because subliminal advertising is not allowed in this House .
In any event , that was , as you said , solely and exclusively a personal opinion .
It is interesting to discuss this matter ; that is why it was taken up .
As I understood the answer , your chap 's description of the concepts ' scientific facts ' and ' scientific proof ' would mean that scientific facts are part of and are less than scientific proof .
That means that the legal-linguistic change which has been made makes greater demands after the Amsterdam summit and since the linguistic adjustments were made .
That is why this these debates arise : How great are the demands ?
As you noted , in my previous question I took Sweden as an example .
Should Sweden , for example , be able provide scientific proof that our recycling system has worked so well that we want to keep it and stop the import of bottles , glass and cans which do not meet our environmental requirements .
That question was never answered .
I am not asking for an answer now .
We are sure to return to this debate .
However , this is extremely important for how the Amsterdam Treaty should be interpreted .
Question No 7 by John Cushnahan ( H-0701 / 97 ) :
Subject : Developing country debt
The problem of developing countries ' debt was on the agenda of the annual conference of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank in Hong Kong in September .
What action did the Council take in order to alleviate the difficulties facing debtor countries ?
The Council is determined to support the poor countries which are heavily indebted .
When I read that sentence , I realized there is now a new abbreviation in French , PPLE , for ' pays pauvres lourdement endettés ' , or heavily indebted poor countries .
The Commission recently presented a paper proposing a community response to the initiative in favour of such countries , launched by the international community in the wake of the Lyons summit , with a view of lightening the debt burden of these countries .
This proposal is currently being examined within the Council .
The Member States , particularly as within the framework of the Paris Club , as well as community institutions , have stated that they would associate with the initiative in question .
They will make an appropriate contribution to this international commitment in favour of the poorest countries of the planet .
The participation of the European Union and of its Member States was also recently confirmed in Hong Kong at the time of the annual general meetings of the IMF and of the World Bank .
I very much welcome the response of the President-in-office and I am sure he is aware of the scale of this problem .
Although Latin American countries would be the most indebted in global amounts , it is the sub-Saharam African countries that are in most difficulty .
This is best shown by the scale of debt that they now owe .
In 1962 they owed $ 3 billion , whereas it is now in the region of $ 235 billion - equivalent to 76 % of GNP .
Arrears for those countries which were at $ 1.2 billion in 1980 have now increased to $ 43 billion .
They have a real problem servicing this debt .
I appreciate that there has been rescheduling of debt but multilateral lenders do not reschedule and that is reflected in the fact that African countries owe the International Development Agency $ 25 billion compared with $ 2.58 billion in 1980 .
I wonder , taking into consideration what the President-in-office has stated in relation to initiatives that have been taken , whether or not pressure can be put on the multilateral lenders to reschedule debts to assist those countries .
I believe that Mr Cushnahan has appropriately identified the scale of the debate and what is at stake .
He has mentioned debt , which amounts to 65 % of these countries ' GDP .
This is a truly heavy burden , and I believe that we shall be able to discuss this question at the General Affairs Council of 10 November .
I hope that we shall be able to agree not only to ask the Commission to present a concrete proposal in the months to come regarding the financial effort which might be supported by the European Union and its Member States , but also the strategy which should be adopted by the European Union to ensure its voice is heard in international fora .
Question No 8 by Hugh McMahon ( H-0702 / 97 ) :
Subject : Agenda 2000
Can the Luxembourg Presidency inform Parliament as to the outcome of discussions on Agenda 2000 at the Foreign Affairs Council on 15 September 1997 ?
What efforts has the Presidency made to reach a compromise between those Member States who wish to curtail disbursement of Community resources and the others who wish to maintain the existing levels of Community expenditure ?
Given that Agenda 2000 is a subject of the greatest interest , not only to the Presidency , to the Council , to the Commission , but also to the members of Parliament , I shall try to give a reply which is appropriate to the question raised by the honourable Member .
I would like to make a brief summary of the voluminous documents , relating not only to the evolution of Union policies , but particularly to structural and agricultural policies , as well as to the oh so important financial framework of the Union beyond the year 2000 , as well as to a certain number of general questions related to the enlargement process , and finally , to the Commission opinion on the countries applying for membership .
The orientation debate on Agenda 2000 , which was held by the Council in its session of 15 September last , enabled the presidency to take note of the initial reflections of the Member States on the general tendencies that we have been able to identify , on the one hand , namely the deepening and development of Union policies and its future financial framework , and on the other hand , the decisions to be taken by the European Council for the process of enlargement as a whole .
This debate has now identified the essential political elements which will naturally require in-depth examination from the perspective of the report that the Council will be called on to present to the European Council at Luxembourg in December .
The Presidency can also assure the honourable Member that it will take every useful step to proceed to an attentive and detailed examination at the political and technical level of the whole of these complex and sensitive questions .
The Presidency , as is its duty , will spare no effort to contribute throughout the whole of this semester to a drawing together of positions so that we can reach the decisions that are required in the interest of the Union and of the candidate countries on all of the questions related to the enlargement process , at the time of the European Council of Luxembourg .
I believe that I am right in saying that the proceedings of yesterday and today were also put to good use by our Prime Minister , Mr Jean-Claude Juncker , in the debate on the state of the Union and also on the Employment summit , which indicates the importance which he personally attaches to these matters .
Mr President , I was interested to hear what the President-in-office had to say about the efforts which the Luxembourg Presidency are going to make to endeavour to find a compromise between the differing views of the individual Member States .
Firstly , what efforts will the Luxembourg Presidency make to ensure that the timetable of adoption in December is adhered to ?
Secondly , in regard to the point being put forward by several Members of the Council that there should be further institutional change prior to enlargement , what impetus or weight will the Luxembourg Presidency give to this ?
This question relating to the date and deadlines calls for some comments on my part .
Firstly , the date itself of the European Council , which was fixed for 12 and 13 December , has imposed upon us an extremely tight schedule .
Furthermore , I believe that we are deploying every effort at all levels to ensure that preparations for the Council go ahead as they should , so as to reach the consensus which is absolutely necessary on questions such as enlargement and other connected questions .
We are making every effort , firstly at the prime ministerial level .
Our prime minister is currently visiting the capitals of the European Union in order personally to meet the heads of state and government to collect their feelings , their comments and their reactions with a view to formulating a compromise at the Luxembourg Summit , because there will necessarily have to be compromises given that there are divergences of points of view on , for example , the financial aspects and also on the allocation of structural funds , to name but a few .
But consensus is necessary and it will , I am convinced , be obtained .
What is at stake is too great for us to be able to not make this meeting a success .
Subsequently , we shall make every effort at the relevant ministerial level .
Be these ministers of foreign affairs or ministers with technical briefs , we are also pursuing regular contacts with our counterparts in the countries of the European Union .
We have also , under the Luxembourg presidency , and furthermore in the General Affairs Council , the Ecofin Council and other specialized Councils , scheduled six informal ministerial meetings with a view to preparing for the Luxembourg summit .
I have furthermore , myself presided over the meeting which dealt with the questions of the internal market .
This was also an opportunity for the Luxembourg presidency , after the decision of the Amsterdam summit , to make contact at ministerial level with central and eastern European countries who wish to become part of the European Union .
I think , Mr President , that I can say , with your permission , that this ministerial level meeting took place in conditions , if I might put it so , of frank friendliness , in a very open spirit , and that we were able to avoid what we might call a breakdown .
People were fully aware of the fact that they were engaged in a historic process , a process which deserved our getting deeply involved in it , because this is the only alternative for the year 2000 and beyond .
We are deploying every effort , finally , at the level of the Committee of Permanent Representatives , which has been mandated by the Council of Ministers .
We took the trouble to go into the details of finalisation of the various horizontal agendas , in order to ensure we had a discussion basis for the Luxembourg summit .
Then our heads of state and government will shoulder the responsibility which is theirs .
I can only tell you that , all together , with the Commission and the other Member States , we are doing our very best to be ready on time .
Thank you , Mr-President-in-Office , for that very full answer .
I think we are all agreed that it is not a zero-sum game and it is in every Member State 's interest to welcome in new members because of the generation of income and the new trading relationships that will bring about .
I have to say that I , and I think my colleagues in this House , sense a threat in some areas .
We have to stress , as you said , the need for a fair and equitable distribution of resources while retaining priority for poorer areas and declining regions .
I wonder if you have also detected that unwillingness , and which Member States would you say are concerned about the future and which Member States fear that they may be asked to pay for enlargement ?
How can we ensure that we get a consensus that it is a fair and equitable distribution ?
I do not think I need to tell Mrs McCarthy the names of the countries because she knows them as well as I do , if not better .
A debate is currently underway over the fair and impartial division of the financial burden .
It is a very heated debate , and I will simply say that as regards my country , Luxembourg , the figures , which are not always correct , make it appear sometimes as a beneficiary of funds and at other times as a net provider of funds .
I can tell you that Luxembourg is a net provider of funds , but I do not want to go into the details of that discussion now .
I believe that consensus is really possible .
It will be decided , Mrs McCarthy , at the highest level , and moreover it may be decided - I am not a prophet - very late at night or late in the evening . I do not know .
As regards enlargement , I have glanced at the statistics relating to our trading relationships with the central and eastern European countries .
I share your opinion , of course it will not be straightforward .
But if you look at the statistics on our external trade with these countries , as the European Union , despite the setting up of free trade areas , in spite of the advantageous conditions granted , it is a fact that the balance of trade is very much in favour of the European Union .
I , personally , am convinced that the non-membership of these central and eastern European countries , on the basis of objective criteria and a well-spaced timetable , will at the end of the day be much more costly than membership .
It is a challenge , Mrs McCarthy , I am convinced of this , just I am convinced that it is a historic opportunity for this continent .
Let us not waste it .
Question No 9 by Sören Wibe ( H-0704 / 97 ) :
Subject : Classification of Schengen manuals
According to reports in Sweden the Swedish Government has classified two out of three Schengen manuals .
These are instructions for the conduct of the checks at the external borders and the exchange of information between the Member States .
The Schengen agreement is now to be incorporated in the EU Treaty , which itself advocates open government .
Does the Council not believe it would be appropriate to recommend that the Member States should ensure that all Schengen manuals are accessible to the public ?
Mr President , it is with pleasure that I reply to this question , as I was one of the signatories to the Schengen agreement in 1990 , already some years back .
To reply to the double question raised , I would say that on its meeting of 16 October 1997 , six days ago , the Committee of Permanent Representatives set up a working group with responsibility for examining questions relating to the Schengen manuals and their assignment to the first and third pillars .
This group , who will begin its work tomorrow , 23 October .
Among the questions which it will need to examine , is the question of the publication of Schengen manuals .
This publication raises various problems , which involve not only their voluminousness , but also the confidential nature of some of the information .
The honourable Member will certainly understand that some instructions , which are addressed to authorities with external frontier controls , for example , are by nature confidential and therefore not accessible to the public .
This in no way calls into question the principle of transparency reaffirmed by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Thank you very much for your answer .
It was a very positive answer .
I was not aware of this working group and am very pleased that it has been set up .
Actually I just have a small follow-up question . Can you say anything about what principles of publicity guide this group 's work ?
You say we cannot make external border controls public .
I am not so sure of that .
A large part of that should also be able to be made public , but I understand that some technical details must be kept secret .
I would be glad if you had some comments on these guiding principles .
In fact , I am going to try and reply .
I believe that the Presidency and the members of the working group do intend to bear in mind the legitimate concerns of the European Parliament and national parliamentarians regarding the transparency of operation of the Schengen system .
I remember , Mr President , that I myself appeared before the competent commission of the European Parliament in 1992 , at a time when Luxembourg was taking on the Schengen presidency .
At the time , one of the great criticisms levelled against Schengen was clearly the absence of parliamentary control and the absence of control by the European Court of Justice .
Even so , I think I can say that with the new provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which re-establishes the Schengen manuals at the Community level , we have now made a great step forward , even though there will still need to be improvements , of that I am convinced .
Now to the subject of transparency . I can conceive that the ministers with responsibility , the President-in-office of the Council with responsibility for justice and internal security might regularly appear before the competent committees of the European Parliament to draw up , let us say , a report on the activities and also on the Schengen manuals .
It is also possible to conceive of a public debate , like so many others , here in the European Parliament on Schengen operations .
I think this would be a good way to prove that we really do wish for transparency within the system , in the way Schengen operates on a day to day basis .
Secondly , another major debate in the Schengen context is that of the protection of privacy , which involves everything relating to personal data .
I think that in this respect you are all in agreement with me and acknowledge that we have to be extremely prudent , and that for evident reasons for the protection of human life , that access to such data must be limited to persons who are really authorized .
I would also like to point out that there is an independent controlling authority which had responsibility for oversight of Schengen , which was in charge of the surveillance and of the non-violation of individual rights in the framework of the Schengen system .
I think we will need to articulate our works around these two lines of action : transparency and protection of privacy .

Thank you , Mr Wohlfart , but I would ask you not to move on from Mr Wibe 's question yet , since , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , I have to give the floor to Mr Sjöstedt for a supplementary question .
Mr Sjöstedt therefore has the floor for one minute on this issue .
I would like to thank you for the Council 's answer , which I thought was very interesting , that developments are still taking place in this area with the large amount of confidential material in Schengen .
You mentioned the instructions to the external border controls .
There are two other confidential documents which are controversial , the Sirene handbook and instructions to embassies and consulates abroad .
Do you have the same view about these documents , that they should remain confidential ?
Could you not conceive of at least partly disclosing these documents ?
I could quite understand that there is certain information in them which cannot be disclosed , but could you not disclose other information in these documents ?
In addition , I wonder whether the process of assessing the announcement will be finished before the ratification of the treaty in the Member States begins ?
That is , you see , also the basis for ratification .
For Sweden and Denmark , for example , the Amsterdam Treaty means the countries will also become a part of Schengen for the first time .
That must therefore be decided before ratification starts in the national parliaments .
I also wonder whether people can have a copy of the President-in-Office of the Council 's son 's dictionary , which appears to be a central document in the interpretation of the Amsterdam Treaty .
Mr President , I have the impression that things are a little vague , a little too vague yet with regard to the Schengen manuals .
I remember a very interesting debate in 1991 , in which European Parliamentarians levelled two fundamental criticisms against the Schengen initiative : that negotiations relating to the Schengen convention of application had taken place as part of an intergovernmental conference , without the involvement of the European Parliament .
Furthermore , at the time I was a little surprised - and I say so without bitterness and without cynicism - that so many people , right down to our national parliaments made every possible sort of claim when they raised Schengen .
Either they said " Big Brother is watching you ' - purely and simply the police state intervening in all fields , or else it was exactly the opposite .
Even so in our negotiations , we tried to compensate for the elimination of internal borders by new measures on the external borders .
I believe that today we are in somewhat the same situation .
I believe everyone agrees with there being a degree of police cooperation , because organized crime raises a challenge which goes beyond the field of action of a given police , of a national police force , however competent it is .
Hence we need to provide ourselves with a means of prevention and repression , while bearing in mind what is , as far as I am concerned , of primordial importance in the Schengen system , i.e. protection of privacy and protection of data .
I know that there are some provisions , notably as regards the delivery of visas , which are no longer the competency of honorary consul , as was the case at the time , but which are reserved to ambassadors and consulates .
At the national parliamentary level , there are oversight committees which at any time may have access to data which they deem necessary .
I think that we will need to be very prudent in the management of some dossiers .
Question No 10 by Anne McIntosh ( H-0707 / 97 ) :
Subject : Abolition of Duty Free sales
As the Council prepares for its extraordinary summit on Employment , does it not understand the contradiction of continuing with the abolition of Duty Free sales in 1999 , and the unemployment that this would cause in the transport and tourism sectors , alongside moves to promote job creation ?
In view of the recent report by the aviation industry indicating that the abolition of duty free sales after June 1999 would result in the loss of 30 , 000 jobs , cause airports to raise charges and airlines to raise prices , does the Council agree that it is therefore imperative that further studies are undertaken into the social and economic impact that abolition would cause ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I already had an opportunity to reply to similar questions during Question Time in July , and I fear that the reply I shall give the honourable Member will disappoint her .
Indeed , I would like to say straight away that there is no really new element in this dossier , which is one particularly close to her heart .
I must , Mr President , underline from the outset that the maintenance of duty free sales , as part of the interCommunity passenger travel is in contradiction with the existence of a border-free internal market .
Indeed , the circulation between Member States of goods privately purchased by individuals for their personal use is now a matter of no consequence from the point of view of tax law .
Hence individuals may purchase goods intended for their personal use in any Member State and take these goods into any other state whatsoever without needing to declare them and pay border taxes .
In such a situation , the existence of areas of reduced taxation for travellers has no justification .
The maintenance of duty-free sales in inter-Community passenger travel , beyond the above mentioned period , could furthermore create competitive distortion with regard to businesses selling goods on a tax-inclusive basis , and between the various means of transportation or travel , depending on whether or not they propose duty free sales .
While the Council , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , temporarily extended duty free sales to inter-Community travellers until 30 June 1999 , it did so out of a concern to offset the social and regional difficulties that might have arisen from sudden abolition of duty free sales .
The statement just made by the President-in-Office of the Council makes a complete mockery of the concept of an employment summit to be held in Luxembourg .
I do not see the point in holding such a summit .
Peripheral countries and islands are more dependent on duty-free sales than central mainland European countries .
The distances travelled in Belgium , Holland and Luxembourg are necessarily less and the prices charged are less .
The contribution to the local economy from duty-free sales , not least in terms of jobs , is therefore not as notable .
The numbers employed in duty-free sales by airports , airlines , sea ports and ferries are substantial , in particular in countries like the United Kingdom , Ireland , Denmark , Norway and Sweden , where nobody enjoys the same low duties as those paid in particular in Luxembourg and Belgium .
Those people employed in airports , airlines , sea ports and ferries will no longer find employment after 1 January .
I ask the President-in-Office to use the Luxembourg summit to study this question .
Believe me , employment and full employment is one of the preoccupations , not only of the European Parliament - and I congratulate the parliamentarians who are concerned about this dossier - but also of my own responsibilities , as I can say that every day I also receive requests for ministerial support for a job , whether in writing or by telephone .
I therefore in no way underestimate the extent of the problem which concerns you .
Nevertheless , with every due respect , I would not like to make a link between one of the provisions of the internal market and the employment summit at Luxembourg .
I think it is a temptation so to do .
I would simply like to say one thing , Mr President , on the internal market , as I have had responsibility for the internal market dossier for some eight years now .
The aim of free movement of goods , services , capital and persons , which should 100 % in force on 1 January 1999 , is an aim which in the medium term certainly will ensure the creation of new jobs .
In a first assessment on the operation of the internal market , which the Commission drew up in November last year , it appears - according to Commission estimates - that there were up to 900 , 000 new jobs created simply by the implementation of the single market on 1 January 1993 .
There are still distortions and obstacles , we know .
This is the reason why the European Council has adopted the proposals of the Commission seeking to launch this internal market action plan , with four strategic objectives for the effective and unhindered implementation of the single market between now and 1 January 1999 .
Why do I say this ?
Because some elements contained in these action plans , in these strategic objectives affect areas which are sensitive , and very important for the single market operation , as taxation - and not just corporate taxation - such as , for example , state aid and other subsidies , as part of the policy for setting up new companies in our various countries , research and development assistance , and many more besides .
It is with the aim of avoiding competitive distortions that all such measures will be taken , and also with the aim of ensuring the setting up of a single currency for the internal market .
Hence , once all these conditions have been met , the full development of this single market will be possible , and also , by the year 2000 , the creation of new jobs arising from the 100 % implementation of the single market .
But I said this also , because I am convinced that some tax provisions , of state or other origin , could in the shorter term have as their consequence - and I stress in the shorter term - the painful loss of jobs .
When we are speaking about the single market in 1999 , we must include all the opportunities that arise as a result .
Of course , we must not underestimate the fact that in the short term , some problems could arise , relating to regulatory tax and other provisions that I have just mentioned .
But in the medium term , the objective which we have fixed is of course the promotion of employment .
Miss McIntosh , I know our Prime Minister well , even if I am not a member of his party .
He is really convinced of the usefulness of the summit for employment and he is going to do his best , with his colleagues , to ensure that the summit on employment deserves that name .
As an aside , if we are dealing with completing the internal market , I wonder what we can do about opening the market here to do something about the appallingly bad Air France service to Strasbourg .
However , on the point in question , I understand that duty-free helps to provide the services for the flying public in this area .
What assurances can we have that the flying public will not be ill-served by this measure ?
I wish to congratulate the President-in-Office on his firmness in the face of what , frankly , has been a very unscrupulous and dishonest lobbying of this Parliament .
The President-in-Office might be interested to know that there is a thing called the ' Duty-Free Intergroup ' , which is simply an organization of the lobby , and that there are some very powerful vested interests involved in this .
Is he aware that many of the statistics claimed for job losses and air traffic increases are highly speculative and that the reality is that it is a taxpayers ' subsidy to the traveller ?
Is he aware that one British airline executive admitted that duty-free is equivalent to an ECU 21 subsidy per passenger on charter flights ?
Mr Wohlfart , do you wish to answer Mr Cassidy 's question or make any comments ?
No , Mr President , because I think that there is still one other question which deserves a reply .
Thank you nevertheless for having given me the floor .
Is it in order for my colleague to accuse those who are in support of duty-free as unscrupulous , when all they are trying to do is preserve jobs , ensure lower airfares , promote tourism and the retention of essential ferry services .
I think that is a gross insult to those who want to see duty-free retained .
Mr Cushnahan , allow me to tell you that that was not a point of order .
Anyway , it could disturb our business .
Mr Papayannakis , you have the floor to raise a point of order .
But not to rebut remarks made about you personally .
I did not hear anyone refer to you personally .
Perhaps they referred to you with some alias or nickname that I do not know .
Mr President , I was one of those who fought to extend duty-free . And I am continuing that fight .
I do not consider myself as dishonest . I am doing this in collaboration with the unions of dutyfree employees in Greece .
And we are talking of 2 , 500 employees .
I have nothing else to say .
Question No 11 by Christine Oddy ( H-0711 / 97 ) :
Subject : Nicaragua , the national forum and the national dialogue
What steps is the Council of Ministers taking to foster the official national dialogue in Nicaragua and the national forum following the street protests earlier this Year ?
What steps will the Council take to assist the Nicaraguan government to implement the property agreement which would resolve the problem of 20 000 urban dwellers and many rural families and prevent eviction ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has always supported the efforts of the Nicaraguan democratic forces to achieve a national dialogue and wishes most strongly that we could strengthen the agreements that we have already come to and develop dialogue with all sectors of civil society .
The Council is very conscious of the challenge faced by the Nicaraguan administration , which confronts a broad program of social and economic reforms which can only be implemented with the consensus of all political groups , and on the basis of parliamentary agreement between the governing party and the opposition .
Furthermore , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council hopes that Nicaragua , in order to enter successfully and harmoniously the world economy , will be able to draw benefit from the process of integration currently underway among countries in the San José group .
The Council has supported the San José group from the moment it was founded , and in this context , welcomes the recent decision taken in Managua by the member countries to provide for common institutions based on the European Union model .
I just like to draw the Council 's attention to the fact that there are increasing social problems and increasing tension in Nicaragua including the problem of street children .
I trust that the Council will continue to show the very greatest concern about that country because it needs our help and assistance .
I can really subscribe to everything that has just been said by the honourable Member , and the Council Presidency will not spare its efforts .
In my personal capacity and as Minister for Cooperation and Development , and not as President of the Council , I must tell you that Nicaragua and its internal situation are particularly close to my heart , as this is one of our target countries .
Question No 12 by Mary Banotti , which has been taken over by Winifred Ewing ( H-0719 / 97 ) :
Subject : National taxation of the European Union Prize for Literature ( Aristeion )
Denmark does not subject to national taxation the prize money awarded in connection with the Nordic prize for literature , nor the Nobel Prize .
However , the prize money received by the Danish winner of the European Union Prize for Literature , the 1996 Aristeion prize , has been subjected to a national tax of almost 50 % .
Can the Council inform us why Denmark is making this difference between a European Union and a Scandinavian award , and whether the Council will not deem this to be an obvious act of discrimination against winners of European awards ?
Mr President , Ladies and Gentlemen , in reply to the question of the honourable Member , I regret to emphasize that the organizational procedures for the Aristeion literary prize do not include provisions for the tax regime which this prize may be subject to .
Furthermore , I must point out , Mr President , that it is not the responsibility of the Council to make assessments on the positions taken by the governments of the Member States , nor to interpret those positions .
I am very honoured to replace Mrs Banotti who is otherwise engaged .
I should like to ask the President-in-Office if he would bear in mind that this is a European Union prize financed by the European Union ; a prize for translation , which is the essence of our exchange of culture , close to the hearts of all of us , paid for by the European citizen .
Half the prize has , in effect , been stolen by the Danish Treasury .
Surely this is contrary , if you look at it , to all the similar prizes .
This is a European Union prize , not an unrelated prize .
Therefore I feel that there are financial interests raised by this matter .
I ask the President-in-Office to look at this again .
I can certainly not enter into any formal commitment , and you as an honourable Member will certainly understand this , but I find your idea interesting , and I shall do my best , Mrs Ewing , to try to give you satisfaction .
But I do not make any commitment in this respect as President , simply as Minister for Cooperation .
Mr Cushnahan , you have the floor for a point of order .
But let it be a genuine point of order this time , since last time it was not .
I am surprised that you abused my good faith .
I was with Mrs Banotti , who was canvassing in my home town yesterday .
She asked me to apologize for her not being able to be here .
I also take this opportunity to wish her all the best in the election to become President of Ireland .
Would it not be wonderful for us if a Member of this House were to become the constitutional Head of State of Ireland , especially since it is someone who is committed to the ideal of European integration , breaking down barriers , sweeping aside old enmities ?
Who better to be President of Ireland than Mrs Banotti , who has worked for that in this House and who is the best placed to build bridges in Ireland itself and sweep away old enmities ?
On your behalf I extend my best wishes to her .
Thank you , Mr Cushnahan .
I listened closely to your remarks , and I am not sure that they belong in Question Time .
Nevertheless , I am generous enough to allow them .
Mr Posselt , do you wish to put a supplementary question ?
Mr President , I should just like to say something on the Rules of Procedure .
You are already aware of the matter .
I am not criticizing you all the time , for you are of the right opinion , but our Bureau and the Conference of Presidents , because Question Time can almost never be utilized in full , now that it has been moved from the evening to the afternoon .
Every part-session is subject to late starts , and each time I criticize that , a representative of the Bureau tells me that it was an exceptional case .
I should like to know how many exceptions we are going to allow ourselves , and whether we should not now accept the consequences and hold Question Time at a set hour .
Mr Posselt , at the start of Question Time , I apologized for the delay , first to the President-in-Office of the Council , and then to all the Members of Parliament , and said that I would refer the matter to the Bureau .
However , this is a matter not only for the Bureau , but also for the political groups .
I would therefore invite the Members also to raise it with the leaders of their respective groups .
Mr Martin has the floor for a point of order .
To reinforce the point you have just made , Mr President , it is the Conference of Presidents who set the part-session agenda and not the Bureau .
Secondly , this House is sovereign on this matter .
If enough Members shared Mr Posselt 's view of Question Time , we could change it to 5 pm. on a Monday .
The problem is that at present Members of this House undervalue Question Time .
As the time allocated to Question Time to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 13 to 29 will be answered in writing .
Before suspending the sitting , however , allow me to thank everyone present , including the interpreters and other parliamentary officials helping us this afternoon , for their patience in the face of today 's delay .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.21 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Insurance undertakings
The next item is the second report ( A4-0295 / 97 ) by Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the supplementary supervision of insurance undertakings in an insurance group ( COM ( 95 ) 0406 - C4-0464 / 95-95 / 0245 ( COD ) ) .
The rapporteur , Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , has the floor .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the whole point of this guideline proposal is better to equip insurance supervisory authorities in assessing the actual solvency of individual insurance companies within a group .
It is an extremely difficult proposition to achieve this aim within limited means , because the legal status of group supervision in Europe is extraordinarily varied , both with regard to soloplus supervision and to the methods of accounting used , the threshold value , holding and re-insurance businesses .
In accordance with the third Accident Insurance Guideline and the 3rd Life Insurance Guideline of 1992 , insurance supervision in the European Union currently covers the licencing and continuous supervision of the insurance sector .
The supervisory regulations within Member States , which are harmonised and coordinated by these guidelines , primarily ensure the protection of the insured , and thus emphasize supervision of the financial position and solvency of individual companies .
This so-called solo supervision of the financial situation arises from the principle of separation of insurance lines of business .
The aim of the proposed resolution is the extension of the supervision guidelines on individual supervision of insurance companies - solo supervision - by additional supervisory regulations - solo-plus supervision - for those insurance companies that are part of an insurance group .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has met a total of twelve times .
That is exceptional .
It heard experts on supervision , science , the profession and also the European Insurance Association advising on the extraordinarily difficult material .
In addition , interested members of the committee have struggled with me to find solutions in so-called informal meetings .
I should like here to thank these members very sincerely for their patience , their stamina and their efforts to reach by constructive suggestion a position capable of commanding a majority in the committee .
The committee feels that it is necessary and right that insurance supervisory bodies be informed about the structure and internal transactions of insurance groups , so that they can step in in good time as part of their consumer protection responsibilities when financial dangers threaten .
Accordingly , the committee welcomes the proposal to increase the transparency of insurance companies by means of improved rights to information - articles 5 and 6 .
Also , in view of the increasing internationalisation of insurance groups , to strengthen cooperation between supervisory authorities - article 7 .
Equally , it welcomes the proposal for supervision of transactions between different insurance companies , based on market behaviour - article 8 .
We should not lose sight of the fact , however , that existing regulations - the 3rd Insurance Guideline , the BCCI guideline , and regulations in Company and Tax Law - already provide extensive supervisory powers to insurance supervisory authorities .
The additional regulations proposed by the Commission are realisable , as far as they can be understood - the text of the proposal is in some places unfortunately very unclear or even ambiguous .
They are capable , however , of being useful in reaching the objective they set .
The only question is whether they accord with the basic law principle of relativity .
In this context I should like to come now to four points .
The Commission proposes the inclusion of minority holdings of at least 20 % , or of non-controlled insurance companies , into the scope of the guideline .
The participation of 20 % does not , however , represent any relevant value for the inclusion of parent companies .
European legislation should be consistent within itself .
The 20 % limit fails to take cognisance of the fact that regulations for corporations in Europe already exist within the framework of the 7th Company Guideline .
The basis used in auditing corporation accounts according to the 7th Company Guideline should also apply to supervision .
Despite this the following is applicable : double gearing opens up opportunities for a business to extend its business activities without additional capital resources , by , instead of using other assets , investing in another company which already uses the invested capital as the basis of its business activity .
Double gearing is , therefore , a view of finance independent of the value of the investment .
It has been recognized that with double gearing a financial danger could exist to the insurance company and the consumer , and to this extent a European guideline is justified .
The Commission and also some of the insurance supervisory bodies in the Member States regard double gearing as undermining the existing regulations on solvency of insurance companies . This is because , although in some circumstances every individual insurance company may meet the solvency requirements of an insurance group just as well as an independent insurance company , taken all together less capital resources have to be used to achieve the same volume of business .
For this reason an end to the double gearing effect is required from the standpoint of equality , but without weighing up the security advantages and disadvantages of group businesses and independent businesses . Also , without looking at evidence of specific cases where , since European solvency regulations have been in place , such businesses have got into financial difficulties because of double gearing to the detriment of consumers , and which could not be solved within the relevant supervision laws .
The existing law on bank supervision is probably an example to use for the proposed exclusion of the double gearing effect .
Representatives of the Commission have told the Committee that they did not overlook the differences between bank and insurance supervisory systems , as well as the different risk situation for banks , that is , credit pyramids , budgetary equality and insurance using the principle of keeping lines of business separate , and the Commission proposes for this reason a higher investment threshold , namely 20 % for the whole guideline .
The majority of the Committee , however , took the view that supervisory legislation to counter the effects of double gearing were only needed insofar as double gearing was a source of danger to insurance companies , and thus consumers .
Such a danger does not come about merely with a minority holding of 20 % , but when there are majority rights , and when the qualitative elements of a guiding influence or a single management board are added to a minority holding .
Precisely this corresponds to the Consolidation Group in article 1 of the Th Company Guideline .
This is also regarded by a majority of the Committee on Law on Law in the same way , and I ask the House , therefore , for agreement to amendments Nos 1 to 7 and 8 .
Secondly , in accordance with the Commission 's proposal , after calculation of net solvency of insurance groups , certain capital resources should not be taken into account , if they were acknowledged as capital resources by Solo supervision .
The Commission intends with this proposal to prevent the multiple booking of capital resources within one insurance group .
The double booking of capital resources in insurance groups must not be regarded , however , as necessarily a particular danger , as it is the natural result of the separation of insurance lines of business in the interests of the consumer .
The proposed strengthening of the capital resources requirement is , therefore , neither necessary nor materially correct .
Anything which is permitted as a capital resource within solo supervision must also be capable of being included in solo-plus supervision .
There can be no differentiation of qualities for capital resources .
Particular qualifying means cannot suddenly lose their quality as capital resources just because , for instance , the life insurance parent organization is subject to a different set of supervisory rules .
Otherwise we should have the grotesque situation whereby the same insurance company which had industrial participation , could continue to use these particular capital resources within the solo supervision system , but these means would cease being capital resources the moment it took on supervised insurance subsidiary companies .
From the economic point of view this would be a contradiction and would particularly hit the mutual insurance societies .
That was also agreed in Committee and so I ask for agreement to Amendment No 14 .
Thirdly , the Commission proposes the inclusion of insurance holding companies within the guideline , particularly for the solvency warning test .
The majority of the Committee felt that the inclusion of holding companies was justified .
As rapporteur I wold personally have preferred holding companies not to be included .
Holding companies have a guidance function and are in a position to finance investment even in insurance companies by drawing on outside funds .
If a holding company at the head of the group goes into receivership , the insurance companies in which it has invested do not lose their capital , but the shareholders in the holding company do .
Quite rightly , though , the latter do not get the protection of the insurance supervisory law .
The Commission justified its inclusion of holding companies in the measures by trying to remove the double gearing effect , fearing that a holding company could obtain credit financed not from outside the corporation , but from within it , that is , by its subsidiary companies , or that it could exert undue pressure on the latter to give it assistance when in financial difficulties .
For these reasons I suggested that credit financing from within a group should be specifically prohibited .
The Committee did not agree the suggestion .
I now ask the House on behalf of my Party to agree to Amendments Nos 23 and 24 which provide that capital holdings should be calculated inclusive of means originating from an insurance holding company outside an insurance group .
And fourthly , the Commission also includes re-insurance companies in its proposal .
It is undisputed that the security of re-insurance companies , that is , their capability , is of decisive importance to the capability of the first insurer .
Reinsurance protection is thus a further quality characteristic for consumer protection in the insurance sector .
Reinsurance companies are not subject to the European solvency regulations and other European insurance regulations , so that that is from the outset invalid as an argument for equality in this respect .
Various Member States , however , make re-insurance companies subject to their national regulations , individual supervision and group supervision .
A majority of the Committee , therefore , voted against excluding re-insurance companies , but also against a Member State 's right of choice .
Amendment No 22 , which has been reintroduced on behalf of the party , is a new compromise attempt aiming to make it possible for Member States to bring in legislation , so that re-insurers are not included in the audited solvency position in accordance with Annex 1 .
On behalf once more of my group I ask for your agreement to this amendment
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to praise two different things .
First , the courageous attack by the Commission in an area that is exceptionally controversial , and secondly the untiring patience of the rapporteur in reconnoitring a passable road through this controversial terrain towards the achievement of compromises .
I admit that it is my impression , that all these attempts at finding alternatives only end up where one must decide by voting .
Either one takes the Commission 's line by including every controlling or controlled company within the definition of parent and subsidiary companies , or one chooses the amendment s that would understand both terms in the stricter sense of the previous guidelines .
Either one calculates solvency with the inclusion of external means , or one excludes these , as was foreseen by the Commission 's original proposal .
I make no secret - and Madam rapporteur knows this - of the fact that I support the Commission 's views on both issues and shall vote accordingly .
But that does not in the least reduce my gratitude to the rapporteur for her work , the more so , because this guideline concerns a pilot project in the supervision of the movement of capital , and I hope Mr Cot will not deny me the spirit of compromise , despite my position .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , Madam rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , the adoption of the directive on the supplementary supervision of insurance undertakings in an insurance group is not only desirable but also necessary .
It is in fact very important that the national supervisory authorities can have a clear view of what happens within insurance groups in order to avoid the double use of separate funds and to prevent cases of company bankruptcy in which the consumers would , in a word , be the principal victims .
Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn 's report , as seen from the work of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is a coherent whole .
She has created an agreement in a highly technical sphere .
Prudence demands that we deviate as little as possible from the Legal Committee 's text .
In agreement with Mr Cot we consider that , in order for this directive to be fully effective it is necessary that its scope includes re-insurance interests and holding companies .
On this condition we will vote for the report by Mme Mosiek-Urbahn .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn for her hard work on this difficult issue and I would broadly like to support the conclusions tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and to thank my colleagues on that committee for the hard work they have put in .
Insurance is an important issue .
It is a bit dry and boring and that is why there are not many people listening to us tonight .
But it has vital implications for people 's feeling of financial security .
Issues like health insurance , legal insurance , insurance for motor accidents , accidents in the home , etc . , all make people feel that bit more safe and secure that , should any tragedy occur , they will be covered financially .
This may well become more important in the future as social security systems become very stretched and strained because of government financial restrictions .
Having said that , I would just like to flag up one or two points on the amendments that have been tabled subsequent to the amendments being passed by the committee .
Amendment No 22 allows Member States to exclude reinsurers from the adjusted solvency calculation .
This is unfortunate .
Reinsurers should be included in the scope of this directive .
Secondly , on Amendments Nos 23 and 24 , this allows the funds of an insurance company arising from outside the group to be taken into account in the holding company test .
This is important and should be supported .
There is some difficulty with Amendment No 25 .
Finally , we should support Amendment No 27 , but not Amendment No 26 .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to thank Mme Mosiek-Urbahn for the excellent and difficult job she has done on this complex matter .
Not being personally a specialist on the question I realize the full value of the efforts your Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
I can imagine just how difficult the debates must have been bearing in mind the importance and technicality of this subject .
The proposed Directive on insurance groups constitutes a major stage in the completion of the single market in insurance .
As you know , insurance companies are required to keep a certain level of funds separate so that their solvency is guaranteed .
This solvency margin , which is a guarantee of security for those who buy insurance , it reinforces the protection of consumers .
The aim of the present proposal is to stop these requirements being evaded by groups of insurance companies who , without these measures , would have the possibility of accounting for the same capital more than once in their calculation of solvency .
Furthermore , this proposal will facilitate the elimination of certain distortions of competition on the European insurance market .
A certain number of states , as you know - some of you have moreover mentioned this fact - have already adopted rules similar to those proposed by the Commission .
Unlike groups of credit companies or investment undertakings , who are already covered by Community legislation , there was no text for insurance groups .
This proposal seeks to remedy this deficiency with an eye to proportionality .
I wish to emphasize that it does not impose new capital requirements on insurance undertakings .
Nor does it penalise companies which form part of a group .
It is intended simply to guarantee the solvency margin currently required by community directives on insurance which will be effectively respected .
Nor is the aim of this proposal to impose capital requirements on re-insurance companies and insurance holding companies .
It nevertheless seeks to guarantee that the financial situation of these companies will be duly taken into account to determine if the insurance companies in the group of which they form part meet the required solvency criteria .
Concerning the amendments proposed by your Assembly , I have the pleasure of informing you that the Commission agrees to accept partially the Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 14 .
For Amendments Nos 1 and 2 the inclusion of a reference to the first article , paragraph 2 of the seventh directive on company law is acceptable , on condition that the rest of these definitions are kept as they are .
For Amendment No 3 , the reference to the first sentence of article 17 of the fourth directive on company law is acceptable , on condition that the rest of the definition remains unchanged .
With regard to Amendment No 14 - I believe that this was the second point of your statement , Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn - only the first paragraph and the first two hyphens , which list the elements which are eligible for the calculation of the solvency margin and already allowed by current insurance directive , can be accepted .
I then refer to another group of amendments which can be accepted in their spirit conditional on certain changes to their wording .
This relates to Amendments Nos 7 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 23 , 24 and 27 .
A word about Amendments Nos 18 and 19 - It was , I believe , the third point in your statement , Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn - concerning holding companies .
Why are they included in the scope ?
The creation of artificial separate funds by an indirect method by holding companies might serve to mask the real solvency situation of an insurance company and the holding company , excessively in debt , thus risks creating financial tensions in the group by seeking to repay this debt .
If the proposal takes holding companies into account it is in order to be able to evaluate accurately the solvency of insurance companies ..
This is why the text provides a method of detection enabling the supervisor to check the level of the holding company 's separate funds . The proposal does not , however , impose any requirements on the holding companies as such .
There is another very important amendment - it was the first point in your speech - which is Amendment No 8 .
Its adoption would deprive the proposal of an important part of its impact .
In fact , this Amendment No 8 would considerably reduce the scope of the directive by limiting the field of applications solely to parent-branch relationships .
Indeed , the criterion of dominant influence which underlies the relationship between the parent company and its branch is not relevant in the matter of double usage .
This amendment would have a negative impact on the protection enjoyed currently by consumers and those who are insured , for it would authorise insurance groups to evade more easily the rules of solvency .
It would thus constitute , Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , a backward step by comparison with the approach followed by the Community in the other sectors of financial services .
As a consequence I must inform you that the Commission will not be able to accept this amendment .
For the same reasons the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 22 , which would leave to the discretion of Member States the application to re-insurance companies the key provisions of the directive .
In fact when an insurance undertaking hold an interest in another insurance company the risks covered by the latter are indirectly supported by the former .
It will be noted , moreover , that the current directives authorise insurance companies to deduct from their solvability charge obligations the operations which they have assigned to a re-insurance company .
This deduction is justified because the risks incurred in these operations are in the end borne by the re-insurance company which is assumed to be an external third party .
A certain number of other amendments also seem to us to have to be rejected in order not to harm coherence with other elements of the proposal .
These are Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , 6 , 9 , 20 , 25 and 26 .
Finally , I shall end , Mr President , by mentioning just one point which was raised just now by several speakers who wanted to know if this proposal would create additional costs .
Well , no , it would not have to create additional costs , either for the insurance sector or for the consumer , since it does not contain any requirement of additional capital for the insurance companies and since its sole aim is to ensure that current requirements are not evaded in the case of groups .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow morning .
Copyright and related rights
The next item is the report ( A4-0297 / 97 ) by Mr Barzanti , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the communication from the Commission : Follow-up to the Green Paper on copyright and related rights in the information society ( COM ( 96 ) 0568 - C4-0090 / 97 ) .
The rapporteur , Mr Barzanti , has the floor .
Mr President , so far much of the work of the Union has been carried out in favour of a harmonized approach , a unanimous , similar undertaking in all Member States on the complex questions of copyright and related rights .
But what has been done , or rather acquired , with the decisive support of our Parliament is now insufficient , incomplete and would also encounter further difficulties of application in a panorama devastated by enormous technological developments , which we usually include in the somewhat hazy but fascinating concept of a global information society .
I think I should repeat here first of all that we need to oppose the technological euphoria that often denies the need for clear and precise rules and regulations opposed to the very possibility of governing and directing the liberalization of telecommunications , the multiplicity of information , access rights to guarantee the protection of works of interest to industries , users and authors for citizens .
These objectives are all essential to the European Union , which is called upon to be ever more present and active with its identifiable voice in international places , starting from the World Intellectual Property Organization .
We therefore need to take action without scepticism and distrust .
I would say , in passing , that I have always considered a good antitrust legislation to be a priority question in this framework , even at European level , avoiding the abnormal formation of dominant positions in a sector in which it is essential to guarantee the citizens ' right to a multiplicity of information .
But that is not the subject of the report I am presenting .
The subject of my report is copyright and related rights .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights believes that copyright and related rights should not be considered obstacles , a tiresome heritage of the past , possibly opposed to consumers ' rights and public rights . No !
Guaranteeing the protection of works , guaranteeing copyright in its new forms , is a fundamental fact to ensure a democratic , useful development consistent with the information society and all the opportunities to which it should give rise .
The digital environment , the growing extension of information networks , the globalization of the market do not annul either the principles or the rights or the requirements to make these rights specific and current .
The convergence of technologies and means should not be taken as a reason for denying specificity and politics which are now more necessary than ever .
We do not object to an idea of information on the basis of which any datum , any contents can be included within this general concept .
There is information and information ; there are works and works ; there are the works of authors asking for the necessary distinction and requiring the necessary protections .
With no good rules , with no regard for the integrity and authenticity of languages with which the authors ' works are nourished , there can be no good , sound European cultural industry , nor can the authors ' creativity be guaranteed and assured for , without any rules , there would be no moral respect or specific remuneration .
That is why we believe it important for the directive currently being prepared by the Commission on systems of technical identification of works to be issued shortly , as well as a directive updating fundamental concepts , such as that of public communication , distribution , reproduction , providing for exceptions that have to be made , that fill the void that still exists on private copy , that establishes the procedures for handling rights praising the task of the collective management companies and also the so-called single counter method , which is necessary for rights to be acquired more simply and more quickly in view of an increased multimedia environment .
I should point out in this connection that I am in favour of many of the amendments presented , that risk a resolution that is already rather long , also on account of the fairly exhaustive work the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has carried out ; in particular , I am in favour of Amendments Nos 9 , 7 , 4 , 10 , 15 and 16 presented by various groups .

As we know , the World Intellectual Property Organization has prepared two treaties of great importance .
It is absolutely essential for the exclusive rights specified in them for artists and actors , or performers producing records to be recognized as well as the artists and actors in the audiovisual world , as always pointed out in the Community directives .
I should like to conclude by pointing out that moral rights as well , which are contested internationally but which are typical of European culture , should be strengthened , should be considered to be one of the aspects by which Europe presents itself in the international context to ensure a protection that is not aimed solely at remuneration but also at the inseparable relationship between works and authors , since works are no more than a projection of the creative activity and a relationship with the public that is renewed each time in terms of continuity and in such terms as to merit deep and absolute respect .
I am confident that our Parliament will continue to fight for an appreciation of industrial strategies , the property of ideas and languages , the creative outburst and cultural identities that make the diversified Europe we all love .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the technical opportunities of the information society and , as we can see , also its pleasingly rapid growth in acceptance by both private and commercial participants , offer artists and craftsmen today not just entirely new opportunities for expressing their creativity , but also huge access to their publics .
Just as in the area of teaching and learning the boundaries between the teacher and the taught are dissolving , so can the information society play its part in blurring the dividing line between the creative on the one hand and the passive public on the other . The oft-mentioned word interactivity becomes a reality here .
That is a blurring that we welcome , but also a blurring that is unwelcome if the legal framework for these new forms is not clear .
The unclear and diverse legal position that we currently have is of no use to anyone , either the culturally creative , the service providers and network operators , or the consumer .
It is , therefore , in the interests of all concerned that now , following extensive discussion of the Green Paper , the Commission should produce with all good haste a draft guideline that contains regulations covering all the burning questions , and does not merely adjourn some issues once again .
The copyright laws , the laws of public reproduction of material , the laws on publicity , the laws on protection of privacy , technical identification and protection systems , and also laws on the limitation of arrest need to be discussed and resolved .
I believe it must be possible to find a fair compromise between the interests of all those involved , in view of the varied dependencies of all participants in this system and the likelihood of a rapidly expanding market .
The report by my colleague Mr Barzanti contains excellent and thoughtful proposals on the form such compromises could take .
I should also like to thank him most sincerely for his ready cooperation in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , as the rapporteur rightly said , the Green Paper on copyright and related rights in the information society is a Commission document which seeks to discuss what sort of legal treatment should be given to copyright in a dynamic environment characterized by technological development which makes possible both new forms of reproduction and new means of expression for intellectual works .
These possibilities must under no circumstances pose a threat to the existing high level of protection of copyright .
Furthermore , there is a need to strike a balance between the rights and interests of the various categories of copyright holders and the rights of consumers and entrepreneurs involved in the exploitation of those rights .
In order to achieve this fair balance , it is necessary to foster initiatives in various fields .
First , the right of reproduction : legislative measures defining the scope of acts protected by the right of reproduction must be enacted . Secondly , the right of communication to the public : new initiatives must be highlighted ; personalized digital transmissions must be protected ; and the limitations to those rights must be defined by means of measures similar to those envisaged for the harmonization of reproduction rights .
The legal protection of the integrity of technical protection and identification schemes must also be harmonized .
The right of distribution will be harmonized , in order to enshrine the principle of exhaustion of the right only at the moment of first sale in the Community by or with the consent of the right holder .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights proposes that a single , coherent legislative proposal be presented covering the main issues referred to : the right of reproduction , the right of communication to the public and the right of distribution .
The Committee on Legal Affairs believes that the exclusive right of authorizing the direct or indirect reproduction of their performances fixed in phonograms - cassettes , records , etc. should be granted to performers .
However - and this is perhaps the most important shift - this exclusive right must not prevent the achievement of a fair balance between the rights , responsibilities and interests of the various right holders .
Likewise , this fair balance must apply to the rights of right holders , of economic operators exploiting works and of users , as established in the case of 6 April 1995 , " RTE / ITP versus the Commission of the European Communities ' .
The Committee on Legal Affairs regrets that the World Intellectual Property Organization failed to reach agreement on the related rights of performing artists in the audiovisual field .
I welcome the fact that the rapporteur has accepted almost all the amendments that I was intending to highlight , especially Amendment No 10 to paragraph 26 and Amendments Nos 7 and 8 to paragraphs 22 and 22b .
I do not wish to conclude , Mr President , without saying , in all justice , that Mr Barzanti 's report is excellent .
And , although the Committee on Legal Affairs is accustomed to the fact that his reports are always excellent , I still wish to congratulate him most warmly .
Mr President , my objective is for us in the EU to speak in plain language as much as possible so that as many people as possible understand what we are saying .
Unfortunately , I am a little afraid that this report is very difficult to read , in spite of the fact that it does not concern a legislative text , but an answer to a communication .
We are talking about encryption , but our own language is cryptic and we often refer to various articles .
I am afraid that many who vote on the report in the morning do not really know what we are talking about .
I am not sure that we have succeeded .
I believe that it is important that we , on a question which is so fundamentally to do with democracy , are more successful in publicising what we are talking about , the society which we are trying to build .
I am , you see , convinced that this area is one of the most urgent ones for the EU .
We need legislation together with rules for electronic trading and electronic signatures .
Today it is 80-90 per cent a question of politics and legislation for this part of the information society to be able to become reality .
The absence of rules is equally as serious for the development of the information society and within this sector as us trying to make too many or too detailed rules .
The developments are rapid .
I am convinced that new ways will arise for owners of copyright to be able to benefit legitimately from their copyright and get payment for what they have produced .
Often the information society which is now in the process of being created does not depend on what politicians do , i.e. what we do .
It is a society in which we will be certain that messages are confidential , that Big Brother is not watching what we read .
We must also think about this when we impose a responsibility on the various players in the information chain .
We should not impose on them things that are impossible to carry out , things that hinder development .
I am pleased that we stress balance in paragraph 15 , that is , that there should be a balance between the various interests which are at work in this area .
What surprised me in the negotiations was the resistance which there was against putting more emphasis on this balance .
At the same time as I would like to aim for balance and fairness between the various players , I would also like to aim for balance between the various copyright holders , as the previous speaker pointed out , and as we point out in the report .
We also want rights for those who have created audiovisual works .
I presume that the debate will continue .
I hope that the Commission will soon bring forward a proposal , since we need a situation in which we also have a borderless market in this area in our EU .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I should like particularly to thank the rapporteur for continuing to press for the new opportunities of the information society to be treated by EU legislation not just as matters for the internal market and commerce , but as cultural concerns .
It then becomes unavoidable for copyright law to become the focus of this work .
But what sort of law is copyright law ?
According to the TRIPS Agreement it is property law .
Something does not fit with this classification , however , because a collector with a databank gets the same right - or better - as a composer , a poet or a visual artist .
Copyright is a personality right , a right to recognition and identification .
My groups amendments all have the aim of addressing this problem in future legislation , and thus taking a currently rather fluid terminology to normative clarification .
I believe that is why the Organization of Composers , Creative and Performing Artists specifically supports them .
The Barzanti report seems to us , however , to be an important advance in this direction , with which we completely agree .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow morning .
Food additives
The next item is the report ( A4-0281 / 97 ) by Mrs Breyer , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending European Parliament and Council Directive 95 / 2 / EC on food additives other than colours and sweeteners ( COM ( 96 ) 0303 - C4-0468 / 96-96 / 0166 ( COD ) ) .
The rapporteur , Mrs Breyer , has the floor .
Mr President , this evening we are discussing additives .
Previously , additives were called foreign ingredients .
That word clarifies what this is about , namely foreign ingredients in food .
The Commission 's proposal is aimed at changing the 1995 guideline concerning other food additives such as colourings and sweeteners , whereby the 35 proposed amendments almost exclusively cover the corresponding Annexes .
We in the Committee on the Environment Questions , Public Health and Consumer Protection assume that a unification of licensing for the use of food additives in the European Union is to be welcomed . Without a unified regulation of additives the principle of mutual acceptance would lead to insecurity amongst consumers and large problems in food inspection and food labelling .
A unified authorization and use of additives should be accompanied at the same time as far as possible by a search for reductions in the number of different additives and their areas of use .
The Committee on the Environment has again made clear that our concern must be to meet the demands of European consumers and their associations . Their concern is mainly that the food industry should as far as possible voluntarily avoid the use of additives .
Consumers and also the food industry have shown over recent years that the use of additives can be greatly reduced .
We now have the situation where there are products on the market both with and without additives .
The outline guideline of 1989 provided criteria for the authorization of additives .
First , there must be a technological necessity for them ; they must not damage health ; they must not mislead the consumer ; and they must of course show advantages .
There has been criticism of the Commission 's proposal , however , as it has not taken the trouble to make the technical necessity clear , nor to explain where the advantages to the consumer lie .
It is urged , therefore , that in future there should be an examination of technical necessity before the authorisation of additives , and that there should be a further check some years later to see that the technical necessity actually still exists .
It is desirable that the Commission should at last to lay down objective criteria to develop these central licensing factors to achieve a better assessment of additives .
The Committee on the Environment has proposed several amendments .
The Commission wanted cream , low-fat cream , non-fat cream and sterilized cream , which have 38 additives , to be allowed to have more .
The Committee expressed its opposition to this , as it can be assumed that the consumer wants relatively unprocessed food , and this applies particularly to cream .
The consumer should also be informed where there is a potential hazard to certain groups of the population .
It has been shown that particularly the food additives possess an increasing allergenic capability , and that it is precisely these allergies which have increased in frequency of occurrence .
The Committee recommends , therefore , that the use of sulphur dioxide and / or sulphates and sulfides on dried fruit is of no great technical importance , and that here there should be a printed warning to asthmatics , so that this particularly endangered group should in future have the possibility of informing itself on the dangers . Figures are available from the USA to show that in these areas there have already been instances of death and poor tolerance .
The Commission also wants it to be possible to make the foam head on cider longer lasting by licensing the use of E405 combined with E999 .
The Committee opposed this general permission for cider , because a lasting head of foam would suggest freshness , which was not the case . Thus the Commission 's proposal would be misleading to the consumer .
The Committee also rejected the proposal for a coating on rice , a microcrystalline wax , as that also would mislead about rice , a staple foodstuff : rice possesses a natural appearance and does not shine .
Here again the Committee was of the opinion that a technical necessity did not exist .
Particularly where baby foods were concerned we came to the conclusion that , as this is a very sensitive area , it is particularly necessary to apply caution .
We reduced the suggested proportion of starch in baby foods from 50g per kg to 5g per kg .
Industry interests play a part here as well , and we hope that Parliament will agree the amendment wishes of the Committee , as this is a matter of consumer protection .
Consumers together with the industry have , over the past few years , shown that it is important to reduce additives as much as possible and to make certain that products are left in their natural states .
Mr President , Directive 95 / 2 states that an evaluation of the level of use and consumption of foods is to be made within five years .
The additives we approve in the EU will be assessed in the light of how many additives people may be exposed to .
It is simply amazing that the Commission is putting a proposal before us now before the studies of the population 's potential intake of additives have been produced .
So now we are dealing with the proposal on the basis of responsibility for health and the concept of technical necessity .
There are some people in this Parliament who are going around wanting a real European health policy .
My advice to them is to examine the EU policies which may affect people 's health , including the food policy .
Prevention is more important than cure .
This directive should not be extended , but limited .
Substances such as nisin should not be used in food , as this is an antibiotic and so belongs to the world of medicine .
We do not want to stroll lightly into a resistance problem further with our eyes open .
Sausages and cheese will no doubt continue to occupy a central position in Europe , even without adding nisin .
Marking of food is the alpha and omega .
Some foods , as most people have reason to know , can trigger asthma and allergic attacks in others .
So we must know what food contains .
With the proposal to allow sulphite in the production process for breakfast foods , we are running the risk of sulphite residues reaching consumers without their being able to read on the product that it may contain sulphite , as sulphite is not included in the list of ingredients .
This is irresponsible , and so are the proposals for change by the Environmental Committee .
An extensive lobbying business has developed against the proposal to give two different carageens their own E number each , namely E407 and E408 .
As the substances are refined differently , and 408 is not as pure as 407 , I think they should each be given their own E number .
We should remember that carageen can be used in baby food and create problems in babies ' digestive systems .
It is important to insist that we should only use additives if there is a technical necessity and a health test can be passed .
The Commission is bound to give reasons why things are technically necessary , but it has not done this in all cases .
Rather , it and some of the EPP Group 's proposals are based on what is possible for industry and technology , which is quite a different thing .
It is only in recent years that food has been plugged with additives .
Before , we managed to make food without artificial additives .
In other words , European civilization existed before there were additives , so I am not worried about what will happen to society if we put on the handbrake slightly , rather the opposite !
The number of allergies is constantly increasing , and it will of course end up with the Commission one day having to put forward totally different proposals if it wants to live up to the health aims of the Amsterdam Treaty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we must rather regret that the debate on food additives is sinking under cocoa and chocolate .
This subject is usually good for the emotions and it is used from time to time to upset food consumers .
It spans the range from falsified food ingredient lists , which regularly raises its head and is declared as scientific , to horror stories about damaging health effects .
The amendment to the guidelines before us today is the first major revision to the 1995 guidelines on additives , which comprehensively regulates this sector .
Even during consultation on the 1995 guidelines it became apparent that modifying guidelines would be necessary because a few additives were still undergoing scientific testing .
In my view four objectives are set by the present amendment to the guideline .
Firstly , the correction of some errors in the basic guideline of 1995 ; then the consideration of traditions in the new member countries of Austria , Finland and Sweden .
Also , some new additives had to be authorised and , arising from subsequent testing by the Scientific Food Committee of previously authorised additives , new uses or amended quantities had to be agreed .
Fourthly , a completely new annex of authorized additives for baby and infant foods had to be created .
Whereas the correction of errors , the incorporation of traditions in new member countries and the creation of an annex on baby and infant foods have proved largely uncontroversial , the other point has met with differing views within the groups .
Our group does not support Mrs Breyer 's amendment on labelling , to the extent that labelling within this guideline is to be achieved with additives .
There is little to criticize in Mrs Breyer 's demands on marking , as far as the content is concerned , but unfortunately , by their inclusion within the identification guidelines for additives , these amendment are located in the wrong place .
We have a comprehensive identification guideline , and it is here that amendments to the identification guidelines must be undertaken , if we are to stay within the law classification system .
We can support Amendment No 42 made by Mr Lannoye , which draws attention to the identification guideline .
I would ask the Commission to make a specific statement on Amendment No 42 .
Then there is Amendment No 32 .
Here I am torn both ways .
My name has also been incorrectly connected with it .
I should like to ask the Commission about No 32 , on nisin .
I have meanwhile learnt that this is very useful for problems with egg products , and I should like to know how the Commission stands on that .
There is heated discussion about Amendment No 6 , which was accepted in Committee by a small majority .
This concerns the designation E407 or E408 for treated eucheuma algae .
In a previous amendment to the guidelines we passed the designation E407a after two readings in the European Parliament .
This legislation came into force in March this year , and there is absolutely no sense in altering this European Union designation , when it has only just come into force and is , in any case , internationally recorded as a WHO designation .
Contrary to what it says in the comments to Amendment No 6 , publication has already taken place in the Official Journal , so it is existing law .
I should also like to explain my Amendment No 30 , which at the beginning is the same as Amendment No 31 by Mrs Jackson and Amendment No 38 by Mr Whitehead .
This concerns the use of SO2 , sulphur dioxide , for preservation of dried fruit .
According to Mrs Breyer this point should be completely deleted , as in her view the use of sorbic acid is quite sufficient .
All the information I have received fails to support this view , as sorbic acid merely affects the discolouration , the darkening , and not the conservation .
Also the Commission 's text , as it has been given to us , is not quite correct from a technological standpoint .
Apples and pears , in particular , with a moisture content of more than 12 % are sold to end consumers , and must be treated with a higher dose than products that are merely intended for further processing .
Because of these different uses there is a need for the application of different quantities .
In my Amendment No 30 I propose , therefore , just as does the Economic and Social Committee , a better differentiation , and I am obviously opposed to Amendment No 11 by the rapporteur .
The use of additives is , after careful scientific testing , a technological necessity in many cases .
Precisely this technological necessity has been repeatedly emphasized by the European Parliament .
According to the checks available to me the Commission is in this respect worthy of support .
Mr President , as Mrs Breyer has recalled , the proposal before us has the aim of amending a directive on food additives in order to adapt it to recent developments and to the requirements of consumers .
In this context I would like first of all to speak from a personal point of view on Amendment No 6 , which has already been mentioned , designed to give the seaweed known as processed euchema , produced in the Philippines , the E number 408 rather than 407a in order better to distinguish it from related products which bear the E number 407 .

We know that these related products are processed in Europe and that our producers wish to establish a very clear distinction in order to protect their interests .
But we must also consider that the European Union spends significant amounts of money - ECU 250 million per year - on a programme of aid to the Philippines , a programme for the most part designed to ensure stability through economic development in certain sensitive areas .
I am thinking of the island of Mindanao , where 240 , 000 families live off the production of this seaweed .
It is not jumping out of the frying pan into the fire , scarcely coherent , to give aid with one hand and penalise with the other .
Finally , and I speak on behalf of my group , Mrs Breyer has put down a series of amendments designed to prevent the authorisation of new substances which have , however , received favourable notices from the Commission and from the Scientific Committee on Food .
Apart from the fact that her position does not seem to be based on very serious scientific data it could have very negative consequences for certain products already authorised for sale in most Member States .
I am thinking , for example , of the production of mozzarella , of certain margarines and of cider , treated by methods widely used in Ireland , in particular .
It is for this reason that our group will not be able to support Mrs Breyer 's proposal .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Breyer for all the work she has put into this report .
I am also doing so because I believe that the directives on additives and so on , are in a class of their own when it comes to complexity .
I will come back to this later .
Of course , it is partly because of the history of the directives , including all the compromises and changes which have been made over the years .
But , when you read this version of the directive we are dealing with today , you cannot help but think that the Commission does not particularly feel inclined to explain what is happening either .
So they have simply offered us a technical summary .
But , apart from this , when the Commission tries to explain on the background for the proposals , there is also a conflict between the grounds for the proposals and the specific remarks .
The reasons state that technical scientific developments make this proposal necessary .
No other reasons are given , even if that is a so-called reason .
The specific remarks state that in fact this is a collection of forgotten additives , that new Member States have joined with specific traditions , and that some substances have been updated which the Scientific Committee has completed since last time .
Finally , another possible factor is that some countries are again trying to get something through which they tried to do before without success .
The truth can be read in the specific remarks .
And if this had been said straight off , we could quite easily have had a discussion on that basis .
But that is not it , the overall reasons say .
And if we add that it is largely inaccessible , so we will have to spend oceans of time on the directive , that may well be slightly irritating .
Which brings me back to the start , namely that in fact only experts could read this directive .
This might perhaps be partly justifiable at a time when it was only experts who were involved in the directive 's proposals , but now that the directive is part of the democratic process at both national and international level , it is totally unacceptable .
It cannot be the intention that European legislation can only be read , understood and amended by experts .
And , as we know , it only leads to totally irrelevant discussions .
One of the main demands for the next version which we will be dealing with must therefore be that , apart from the fact that some results from a consumer survey will be available , these directives must also be rewritten so they are reasonably readable .
To continue with amendments on the present basis is totally unacceptable .
I would also like to say that , apart from two proposed amendments , my group is able to vote in favour of the amendments the committee puts forward , and I would like to emphasize in particular that , even if the marking proposals are a bit involved , we believe it is incredibly important to get them through .
Mr President , it is very clear that there has to be clear labelling .
People who have allergies need to see what is in the packet .
This does not apply just to packaged products but also to loose products .
People who have allergies look at the list .
To go back to a point that the Union for Europe Group made about the additive to cider , I am from Ireland and I am not in favour of this additive .
It is already prohibited in catfoods so there are serious question marks hanging over it .
As regards additives in general , there is very little advantage to the consumer in the vast majority of them .
They are for the benefit of business and profit and the consumer is hoodwinked which is completely unjust .
As regards the antibiotic issue where nisin is going to be allowed into egg products , this is completely unacceptable .
There is already a situation where people are dying because they are immune to antibiotics .
Medicine should be kept out of food .
It is a completely separate issue and it is unacceptable .
This matter of the eggs is one of hygiene and is not a consumer issue .
Antibiotics should not be added to foods .
As regards sulphates and sulphides , it is clear that they cause asthma and , in the worst cases , death ensues .
So we have to look at what we are doing and the interests of consumers have to come before the interests of big business and profit .
Amendments Nos 32 and 36 concerning antibiotics have to be rejected .
It is wrong to include antibiotics in food .
The long term consequences will be that we go back a hundred years to where people will be dying from diseases which presently can be cured by antibiotics .
It is irresponsible for anyone to suggest that this is in the interests of consumers .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , this proposed directive on additives comes in a context with which we are all familiar , a context of anxiety and therefore caution about the quality of foodstuffs .
This very afternoon , on the subject of chocolate adulterated with vegetable fats , we have seen how great is the emotion of all the members .
This is clearly understandable .
After the mad cow business , after the risks of milk with somatotrophine , with hormones , or after , obviously , American meat pumped up with oestrogens which we must eat thanks to the GATT agreement , which the Commissioner told us was one of mankind 's steps forward , this defiance with regard to additives is clearly understandable .
\ these additives are authorized by annexes and a directive of 1995 and we must amend it at thirty five points , always without having at our disposal any objective general criteria for assessing , for example , the technological necessity for these additives , their harmlessness to health or any information for the consumer .
Obviously it is regrettable , all our colleagues have said so , when we know that the increase in allergic attacks , not only in connection with young babies , not simply with adults but also with defects , temporary or otherwise , of the immunity system is due to these additives or to foods modified industrially .
There has been reference to sulphides , or sulphur dioxides with all the risks of allergic or asthmatic accidents .
But obviously we need to retain our commonsense , we must not cause worse damage with a nordic neurosis on health problems , above all when we know that northerners sterilize deviant adolescents .
I am thinking particularly of the Philippines , of the 240 , 000 Philippinos of Mindanao , a region where muslim guerilla warfare is raging , who need to export their processed euchema seaweed and who had hitherto benefitted from a favourable regime , at lease since 1996 .
Now we modify the classification and call into question the whole economic balance of this already very troubled region .
We have to find a balance between - as d 'Aboville was just saying - ECU 250 million worth of aid , ECU 150 million given , the necessity to protect the interests of our own producers , especially the French , and then the necessity of having a coherent strategy and not disturbing the development of a zone which is actually being disturbed on a military level .
That is why we are opposed to Amendment No 6 .
The same applies to metatartric acid used in grape juice - I personally come from Languedoc Roussillon - to ensure its acidity .
There is tartric acid in grape juice .
With potassium it produces a salt , potassium bitartrate , which precipitates under the effect of cold .
This causes the grape juice to lose acidity and that prevents the assessment of flavour .
Hence the necessity to add metatartric acid which restores acidity and permits rediscovery of the flavour .
With these two exceptions , the excessive harshness of Amendment No 6 towards the Philippines and their seaweed and Amendment No 41 with regard to metatartric acid , we can support Mrs Breyer 's caution .
Mr President , this is the second time today that we are going round a course dictated to us by two simple facts : one , the extension and expansion of the Community , which means that custom and practice in different Member States have to be accommodated , and secondly the pace of technological change .
Mrs Breyer , who has put in an enormous amount of work on this and deserves to be commended for it , is absolutely right to draw our attention to the warnings of the latter - the pressure of the market to bring in new products which cannot be scientifically tested .
However , when I look at the amendments , there are some that I cannot support which went through the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I cannot see that products which are not new , not the result of some technological freak but as old as sorbates , for example , should be excluded in the way now suggested from dehydrated apples and pears .
We will be supporting Amendments Nos 31 and 38 to allow that back .
Secondly , in terms of the objections which have been raised in that quite passionate and impressive philippic from Ms McKenna just now - and she almost converted me - the fact of the matter is that when we come to the point of nisin , it does not have medical applications .
So the idea that you build up a resistance to it as an antibiotic is quite wrong .
What I would like to hear from the Commission is whether it accepts that the alternatives , sorbates and benzoates , needed to kill listeria , are equally effective .
We never received a clear answer to that in the Committee on Environment and I should like to get one now .
And the reason why , Ms McKenna , is that more people are dying - particularly in my country - from listeria and from infections that come from the mass production of foods , than are likely to die as a result of a building up of antibiotic resistance .
This is a real danger and it must be acknowledged .
My last point is on the issue of Amendment No 6 and Carrageenan and Processed Eucheuma seaweed .
It is not the position of my group but I am persuaded that we should look again at the case for the Philippines , and it is ironic that those who have wanted to change the designation here to a quite new E number , E 408 , are the very same people who have been arguing earlier today that we must defend the third world and its right to import products into the European Union .
We should look again at this and consider carefully what we are doing to those who produce this material in the Philippines .
Mr President , Mrs Breyer and Mrs McKenna are the worst possible advertisement for life without additives .
I think they probably need a few additives in order to calm down a bit .
I agree with Mr Whitehead that what we should do is to be very careful about any new additives which we allow onto the European market .
There are three points I want to make .
One echoes his own point with regard to Amendments Nos 31 and 38 .
I wonder whether Mr de Silguy , who is taking time off from the euro , could possibly tell us whether the European Commission is going to be in favour of Amendments Nos 31 and 38 .
They would rectify a situation whereby the Italian fruit processors have essentially set up a protected area and are trying to exclude the possibility of using sulphur dioxide as a preservative in dried fruit .
So I hope the Commission is going to be in favour of Amendments Nos 31 and 38 .
If not , we want some very good reasons why they are not .
I support what Mr Whitehead has said on nisin .
I challenge the Commission to produce any evidence that it acts as an antibiotic .
We were given misleading information in the Commission .
If I were Mr de Silguy I would not listen to Mr Gaerner .
They are playing Chinese whispers there together .
What we want from the Commission is some backup as to why they have not accepted these amendments in the past .
We would like to have this explained to us here , out in the open , because the use of nisin as a guard against listeria is a very important aspect of the additives list for the future of human health .
Finally , what is the Commission 's view on Amendment No 16 on E405 ?
The rapporteur wishes to delete the use of E405 .
Ms McKenna has referred to this .
It would be used , under the proposed amendment to the list , to retain the head or foam on cider .
I would point out to Ms McKenna that it is already permitted in beer .
If her cat is drinking beer , then that is probably what is making the cat ill .
It is not the presence of the additive , it is the fact that the cat should not be drinking beer .
Could the Commissioner please tell us whether or not he is in favour of Amendment No 16 .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , food additives have a particularly important role , not only because they are significant to quality and price , but because they are important to the consumer .
Austria , Finland and Sweden have a tradition here and I think that this question is of particular importance to those countries .
I believe the identification guideline is sufficient and that it is unnecessary , where E407 and E 407a with the eucheuma alga are concerned , to amend existing law . These products are not going to be sold to consumers , but only to the processing industry , which has learnt how to handle them and where it is clearly seen as sensible for them to be used in the future .
Even the Philippines , which are to a large extent involved with the supply , can draw attention to the fact that these products are permitted in Australia , New Zealand , Japan and the USA , and recognized as very useful .
After all , 240 , 000 jobs depend on this product in the Philippines .
I believe we should give serious consideration to the fact that this is also a matter of the future in these countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think a Member just said that this text is unreadable unless one is a technician . Well , all the more so when one is dealing with money , this is not at all simple to follow .
I am nevertheless going to try to reply to your questions .
I would like to say first of all that , in November 1994 when the European Parliament adopted Directive 95 / 2 relating to food additives other than colorants and sweeteners the Commission stated that it was aware of the necessity to propose quickly an amending directive suitable for the new industrial product .
Since then , as Mrs Schleicher has moreover rightly commented , the joining of three new Member States , Austria , Finland and Sweden , has necessitated the broadening of the use of additives already authorised to traditional foodstuffs in these countries .
The Commission is grateful to Parliament for its collaboration on this difficult case and I am particularly keen to thank Mrs Breyer and to congratulate her on her excellent work .
The proposal is based on a toxicological evaluation and a technological analysis .
I recall that additives are featured on labels and , I do so to assure certain Members who just now gave me the feeling that there might be some misunderstanding on this subject .
The Commission 's original proposal is based on three essential principles , of which I take the liberty of reminding you , for they are utterly fundamental .
First principle : the Commission has scrupulously taken into account the opinion of the Scientific Committee on Food which guarantees that the additives used within the limits fixed by the directive present no risk for public health .
You can be reassured , Mrs Jensen , that the evaluation is done before the proposal and the protection of consumers is the Commission 's top priority .
Second principle - and here I reply to Mrs Breyer : food additives are only authorised if their use is properly justified by technological requirements .
Finally , third principle : as the opinion of the Scientific Committee is respected and where technological need can be demonstrated then Community legislation must respect the practice of Member States concerning the use of certain additives in specialities and traditional food preparations .
Bearing in mind these three principles , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 16 , 18 , 19 , 26 and 43 .
In effect these do not take sufficient account of the technological needs which exist in certain Member States .
Their adoption would bring about the disappearance of foodstuffs which are perfectly safe from the food trades of certain Member States .
On the other hand the Commission is also unable to accept Amendments Nos 30 , 31 and 38 , for it insists , in the interest of the consumer , that these products cannot be authorised for final consumption .
Finally , the Commission does not favour the adoption of Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 and 42 because they introduce labelling requirements which add to the framework directive relating to the labelling of foodstuffs .
The consumers , I repeat , are informed by the label about the presence of ingredients and additives .
The Commission prefers neutral information rather than warnings .
The role of the Commission is to control carefully the existence of technological needs which justify the use of additives in ingredients .
It therefore accepts Amendment No 12 incorporated in Amendment No 10 and Amendments Nos 13 , 14 , 32 and 36 concerning the use of additives in cases where technological needs has been demonstrated .
However , the Commission was not able to verify the necessity for additives in the uses mentioned in Amendments Nos 15 , 17 , 39 , 40 and 41 .
For the moment I cannot therefore accept these amendments .
I am happy however to propose Amendments Nos 20 , 21 , 23 , 25 and 35 because , in addition to the fact that they conform to the opinion recently issued by the Scientific Committee on Food they meet the technological need to produce food for young babies and children in good health and foods for use in particular medical situations .
Between Amendments Nos 22 and 33 the Commission prefers Amendment No 33 because it best reflects the opinion of the Scientific Committee on Food .
For the same reason it prefers Amendment No 34 to Amendment No 24 .
Nevertheless the Commission wishes to reserve the right to make additional corrections where necessary .
All additives intended for use in preparations for young babies and children are very specifically evaluated in this regard by the Scientific Committee on Food .
The Commission cannot therefore accept Amendment No 27 or the first three substances mentioned in Amendment No 28 which stipulates a maximum level of use of an additive lower than the level regarded as safe by the Committee and not meeting existing technological requirements .
Nevertheless the Commission accepts the five substances mentioned in Amendment No 28 .
It cannot accept Amendment No 29 because it would prevent production of food for young babies and children intended for use in particular medical situations .
Nor can it accept Amendment No 6 which provides for the assignment of code E408 to processed euchema seaweeds to replace code 407a , if I have understood Mr d 'Aboville correctly , for this amendment refers to the provisions of the 1996 directive , adopted by the European Parliament , on food additives .
This proposal does not form part of the Commission 's proposal and it is difficult in our opinion for the House to go back on its own decision .
I shall add , to reply to certain other questions , notably relating to allergies , that it is scientifically proven that a maximum of 1 % of consumers suffer from food allergies and that these allergies are , in the majority of cases , due to the actual foodstuffs and not to the additives .
This is true in respect of eggs , shellfish , molluscs , fish , nuts and other things .
In any case the additives , I remind you , are referred to on the labels .
I would like on the other hand to reply to Mrs Jackson to tell her that with regard to Amendment No 32 on lysin we are in agreement with her : this additive is effective against listeria , which are dangerous bacteria , and that is why the Commission accepts the amendment .
On the other hand it does not accept Amendment No 16 and in this it agrees with what Mrs Jackson wanted .
Nevertheless , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 31 and 38 but it accepts Amendments Nos 32 and 36 .
In conclusion I shall say to you that we have given in writing to the Committee on Environment all the necessary technological justifications .
Nevertheless if Mrs Dybkjaer wants more information in order to decipher these texts , our services are of course fully at her disposal .

Mr President , both Mrs Schleicher and Mr Rübig have pointed out that they support the identification regulation , but are of the opinion that it does to belong here , but rather in the framework directive .
You too have told me that , Mr Commissioner .
Hence my question : if we agree that this identification regulation should receive political support , but we disagree where it belongs in law , can we then agree for the Commission to make a declaration to the effect that , should Parliament pass these regulations , they will be accepted into the framework directive ?
That is my question to the Commission .
I see that Mrs Schleicher is nodding .
I hope she would also be in agreement with such a regulation , because identification is , after all , what the consumer wants .
Then I should like to put another question , Mr Commissioner : Mr Gerner , sitting next to you , said a few days ago at the last vote in the Committee on the Environment , that the Commission would not support it because of these very doubts expressed here . He pointed out that there were other possibilities : that technically one could avoid the use of messin .
I should be interested to know what has brought about this change of mind within the Commission , and if new information has become available .
Another matter , because the Commission has just declared that we were sent the report with the definition of technological necessity : I believe , and several of the speakers here - Mrs Dybkjær and also Mrs Schleicher - have mentioned it in committee , that that was unfortunately most unsatisfactory , Mr Commissioner , and I hope that it improves in future !
Mr Commissioner .
I should just like to ask again about Amendment No 42 and to hear the views of the Commission on it .
Mr President , I still was rather unclear whether the name which the Commissioner announced was actually mine , but it could hardly be otherwise at this point .
I would like to say that I have been involved in this for quite a long time , and that means I know how complex it is .
Unlike the Commissioner , perhaps , I have also talked with ordinary people , if I may put it that way , so-called ordinary people who have tried to read this as they were interested in it , and no matter how superior the Commissioner acts on this , he is simply mistaken if he cannot see that these directives are simply written in such a complex way that only the experts can read them .
It was in all modesty I was trying to say , and so I said that if the directive is to be amended , and it will be , it must be structured in a logical , readable way .
That has nothing to do with whether you use E and all possible other descriptions .
That 's not the problem at all .
It is the fact that the text is so convoluted , the way the annexes are constructed etc. which makes it totally inaccessible .
Yes , we already know that , but that is not the issue .
Does Mr Whitehead wish to ask a question ?
Mr President , I want to support Mrs Breyer 's request for exactly the opposite reason .
I am delighted to hear that Amendments Nos 32 and 36 have been accepted but we now have to give this information to people by the vote tomorrow .
All we have is the statement that the position has changed , not the reason for it .
I would like to hear the explanations just as Mrs Breyer would but for the opposite reason .

I shall reply to the best of my ability , Mr President , first of all , as far as labelling is concerned , I believe that just now I was sufficiently clear in telling you that the Commission is not in favour of adopting Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 and 42 because they introduce requirements with regard to labelling which refer to Directive 4 on the labelling of foodstuffs .

I do not wish to make here , in the absence of M. Bangemann , a commitment on his behalf on the modification of the directive relating to labelling , I can only commit myself to studying your suggestion and reporting it to him .
We shall examine next what we can give him .
As for Amendment No 32 , I have told you that we were in favour of authorisation where it is scientifically proven that this additive is effective against listeria , which are dangerous bacteria .
The other question on Amendment No 42 .
We reject this amendment for the reason I have just given you , namely , this point refers to the labelling directive .
I believe I have already replied to Mr Whitehead on the subject of Amendments Nos 32 and 36 by telling him that we can accept them .
I do not want there to be any misunderstanding on what I have said to Mrs Dybkjaer .
I do not dispute the complexity of certain texts but that is , I said , a reflection of the subject being dealt with .
It is a matter for the Community institutions , for our communication services : it is up to us to be able to present them and to explain them so that they are more consumer friendly .
I therefore share your point of view , which does not , moreover apply only to the texts on food additives .
I could show you some texts on monetary matters which are no more direct or easy to understand , and the euro affects all citizens .
In a more general sense , I think that all European institutions have to make great efforts in terms of information and that , if we wish to convince and win the support of our fellow citizens we must first achieve a more legible , more comprehensible way of presenting what we decide .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow morning .
Socrates action programme
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0320 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the common position established by the Council ( C4-0481 / 97-97 / 0103 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision amending Decision No 819 / 95 / EC establishing the Community action programme Socrates ( Rapporteur : Mrs Pack ) .
The rapporteur , Mrs Pack , has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at this late hour I will just make a few comments .
There are indisputable facts about Socrates - not the late lamented , but the programme .
First , this Socrates programme , with its elements Erasmus and Komenius , is the success story of the European Union , as far as adult and language training are concerned .
What needs to be done , what has to be strengthened or improved ?
Nothing , actually , except that expenditure of money is associated with it .
Secondly , education and training are the important pillars of all efforts for the future that we can undertake today .
In Europe our capital lies in the best trained young people of all classes , in other words irrespective of their family origins .
Thirdly , xenophobia can only be reduced and hatred of foreigners prevented by mobility and living with one another in Europe .
The Socrates programme in all its parts is the instrument for many young people to achieve a European capability .
I am sure - one can read that also in the Council 's joint declaration - that this is common ground .
The conclusions in the joint declaration are , however , curiously illogical .
Knowing that the programme is a good one ; that it has gained acceptance ; that young people want to use this programme to invest in European added value for the rest of their lives ; the Council takes no cognisance of it .
Today I received by coincidence a letter from a young student who said he wants to take part in Erasmus , is taking part and receives DM 100 per month - ECU 50 for his mobility .
He is sorry , but he cannot do it . We first need more money , therefore , in order to meet the desires we have awakened .
Secondly , the Council must give solid financing to its own promises .
I want the central and eastern European states and all associated countries also to be able to participate in the Socrates programme .
Today I have to ask myself , however , if the Council really wants that too .
We want it .
The Council owes us proof .
A miserable sum of ECU 23 million for 1998 and 1999 .
That means the Council allows us ECU 12.5 million for next year .
How generous !
Particularly when we needed over ECU 80 million just for 1997 in order to complete but one part of Erasmus .
Parliament is very moderate . Really .
In view of the stretched budgetary situation in all Member States we really do not want to be immoderate .
We are not quite so moderate , Commissioner Cresson , as you will probably have to be today , unfortunately , for reasons of collegial responsibility .
We are not quite so moderate .
We ask for ECU 50 million for the next budgetary year - and it is in tomorrow 's budget and we shall vote for it .
That is still much less than we planned for in 1994 , at a time when neither Sweden , Finland nor Austria was a member , and when there were no associated nations .
We still remain today below what we previously planned for the whole programme , what we estimated for the whole duration for 12 countries , namely ECU 1 , 000 million .
We remain under this today .
One cannot be more moderate .
We do understand the budgetary situation .
I believe we have no option but to appeal to the Council .
I hope that the Luxembourg Presidency of the Council really helps us to get over this in the next few weeks .
We appeal to the Council to do everything in its power not miss this investment in the future of our children .
What we miss today cannot be recovered tomorrow .
It is the best possible investment in a good future for the whole of Europe !
Mr President , thank you for coming to listen to us debate Socrates again .
I hope this will be the final time we are congregated to discuss this issue because we hope we will have a result following conciliation .
But it is important that we appreciate the importance of the Socrates programme in its attempts to cement the links between the young people of Europe .
It is a programme that has served to combat racism and xenophobia .
But if it is to continue its good work , it needs to be properly funded .
If we take the example of the Erasmus student grants , the maximum that people are allowed to get is around ECU 5 , 000 .
If every eligible student were to receive funding , there would only be enough for about ECU 750 per person .
This is totally inadequate for those not of independent means .
But it is a vital way of ensuring that links between the people of Europe continue .
Parliament has consistently shown its commitment to this programme by supporting a ECU 100 million increase in its funding over the next two years of the programme .
The Commission has come up with ECU 50 million .
We understand that you have collegiate responsibilities .
Of course we then have the big battle with the Council , which has come up with the paltry sum of ECU 25 million .
It is important that the Council puts its money where its mouth is with this vital programme .
It is important that our children are our future .
We understand this , but it is important that our rhetoric is backed up by our commitment and resources .
The programme is also being extended to the ten associated countries of central and eastern Europe .
The budgetary effects of this expansion have to be considered .
We originally ordered a set meal for our family of 12 people .
We then invited 12 more people to the table but I am afraid we did not order any extra food .
What we need is more resources for the caterer to ensure that none of our family or our guests leaves our educational table unfed or hungry .
Our citizens have an educational and a cultural appetite .
We must try to make sure those appetites are satisfied .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , training is one of the most important instruments available to us for ensuring future employment .
There are three main divisions in economic policy : research and development , infrastructure and training .
I think that we in Europe have done a lot for training .
We have had the Year of Learning for Life , we have Socrates , we have Leonardo , we have Youth for Europe , we have the Green Paper on Training and Continuation Training .
I believe it is necessary to do a lot more in this direction in future .
Quite simply , it is important for us to obtain people for the professions , for the exercise of the professions , who have the ability to make quantitative and qualitative decisions , who are good at time management , and who involve themselves and try to produce results accordingly .
Socrates in particular is in a position , because of its cross-border activities , to motivate our young people to become active in this area and to make themselves available to act as models for other young people .
Our purpose in training is to see that young people gain experience .
In the past it has always been taken for granted that one gained knowledge and then was able to pass it on .
But it is also our purpose for them to gain social knowledge , that is , to talk to citizens of other countries , to learn about conditions there , and to bring positive aspects of other countries back home with them .
Finally , there is self confidence , that is , how one appears to others , how one presents oneself .
I think that here we can learn a great deal from other countries .
I am very pleased that the programme is now open to all 15 states in Europe , including those countries who want to join .
I believe that particularly with training we can point the way Europe is going , and I think it is necessary for that reason to invest in this programme , and to make efforts in future to integrate the new Member States into the training programme , passing on our knowledge to them .
If Parliament makes ECU 150 million available for the Luxembourg Summit , I think it is up to the Council and the Commission to give some thought to how this money should best be spent .
And I believe that in the training programmes we have the best starting point for tackling employment : for making an employment programme available in future to young people who are currently out of work .
Our foremost objective should be integration into work .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , we in the Union 's decision making body are concerned for that reason about people 's indifference or active dislike of the Union .
It is hard for ordinary people to see the positive work of the EU in everyday life .
However , it is hoped the Union can promote useful projects to achieve that extra credibility for Europe , and increase crucial understanding and confidence .
In fact , this should obviously be the clear aim of international harmonization .
How is the Commission and Council of Ministers going to respond , then , to the challenge when it debates the Socrates programme ?
The common attitude of the Council , the result of which the extra funding required by Parliament is rejected , is totally incomprehensible in the light of the issue .
How can we bring the Union to the people if we are watering down a programme that people in each member country see as important , useful and effective ?
This Parliament , which represents those people , cannot go along with this .
The Socrates programme has already achieved much to improve quality in training in Europe , and it is very important that we carry on with the work to do with the development of further training for teachers and language learning .
Aside from current Member States , the Socrates programme has much to offer applicant countries in Central and eastern Europe .
The reciprocal movement must be ensured , and the ECU 100 million claimed by Parliament is the absolute minimum for the programme to be viable and credible .
We can 't afford to allow such an excellent and vital programme to wither away into just a kind of elitist programme with dwindling aid and diminishing aided project numbers .
The level of aid must be maintained to enable all students to participate in the exchange programme .
The situation is particularly awkward in colleges , which do not have the funds to support it .
I sincerely hope that in future arbitration we will be successful in salvaging the EU training policy flag-ship , Socrates , and that in the future more young people will have the chance of an internationalised and interactive education , regardless of background or origin .
I wish Mrs Pack every success in her splendid and purposeful work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to support most energetically the criticism expressed here .
The financing of Socrates is indeed scandalous .
There are few activities of the European Community in which the personal sense of an increase in European value , the experience of increased value , can be so appreciated , as in training and exchange programmes , and they have been really successful .
No one can deny that .
These training programmes also make an increasing contribution to employment policy for young people in Europe , who by learning foreign languages , new legal systems , new mentalities in other countries , gain invaluable knowledge and skills . From these they produce for themselves new opportunities on the European employment market .
Yet I am forced to say that precisely here , where Europe can make some of its credibility visible , the Council is proving to be a Scrooge .
They are being utterly insensitive to what the rump of Europe actually perceives : communication and understanding as the basis for integration .
The commitment of the German Government and others to the open-mindedness , work and life of Europe loses its credibility against this background .
I should also like to say a quick word about the sociopolitical aspect .
It is not just that the payments are so low - and that is itself scandalous - but that this has led to real selection of participants .
Anyone today who can afford it goes abroad to study in any case , and if the finances of Erasmus , for example , are not increased , socially underprivileged young people will be unable to go in future years .
Without additional finance we shall not be able to improve on the current participation by barely 1 % of young people on professional training courses .
One always finds oneself in a dilemma in one 's constituency .
Should one advertise the programmes in schools and workplaces to which one is invited , or should one show a sense of responsibility and keep silent about them , because the ratio of applicants to means is growing ever shorter ?
I should also like to comment on making the schemes available to central and eastern Europe . The same heads of government who promise their states EU membership put financial hurdles in the way of a meeting of peoples through the youth exchange scheme .
What is an increase of 25 million on a total budget of 860 million , when the countries who are to profit from Socrates in the future amount to about a third of the population of the present EU ?
Just continue in this way , one would just say if one were cynical , and the credibility of this EU will sink still further in the eyes of the population .
All the glossy brochures in the world will not help here .
Reality speaks a different language , and with this financial arrangement we shall not inspire young people for Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank Parliament , in particular the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media for the commitment and determination it has shown in reaching a substantial increase in the budgetary funding of the Socrates programme .
I would like to thank in particular your rapporteur , Mrs Pack , for her work on behalf of this programme which , we all agree , is of prime importance for the future of Europe .
It is of proven interest .
More than ever the development of our citizens , the fight against social exclusion , the creation of jobs , depend in fact on our investment in education and development throughout life .
It is thanks to Socrates and other programmes like Leonardo da Vinci , Youth for Europe and , in the future , European Voluntary Service , that we shall move progressively to a Europe of knowledge and that our fellow citizens ' expectations in this field will be realized .
But there are many other reasons why Socrates should receive the necessary funding .
First of all because by enabling each year about a hundred million persons to participate actively in European cooperation it contributes to bringing the Union closer to its citizens .
This is a role of absolutely prime importance in particular in this phase of ratifying the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Then , and you were right to draw attention to this aspect during your first reading of the dossier , it constitutes an important point of support for the enlargement of the Union to include countries of central and eastern Europe .
However , the Council has not supported us in our proposal for a significant increase in the initial financial framework of the programme .
The ECU 25 million proposed in the common position of the Council represents only half of what the Commission proposed .
That is what pushes the principle of budgetary austerity to the limits which correspond neither to the views of the Commission nor to those of Parliament in this matter .
That is why , at the Council in June I fought to the end in favour of our proposal .
Without even talking about a real increase in the funds available the sums proposed by the Council would not even cover the rate of year-on-year inflation .
The Commission , in the opinion which it has just sent to the Parliament and to the Council , has firmly rejected this amount .
Parliament , by proposing an increase of ECU 100 million at the first reading , has shown how much it acknowledges the impact of Socrates both for the citizens and in the perspective of the long term development of the Union .
The Commission , at the presentation of its amended proposal , took into account almost all of the amendments proposed by Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is true that the Commission 's proposal relating to the amount of increase is modest .
We recognized this by declaring clearly in the explanation of our motives , and I quote : in a more favourable global budgetary context the Commission would not have hesitated to propose a much larger increase , which would have been fully justified by the ratio between costs and advantages of this activity and the necessity of establishing extra funding .
Nevertheless for 1998 the Commission has adopted a preliminary draft budget which proposes an increase limited to 2.4 % of committed credits by comparison with 1997 .
Bearing in mind the sums which will go to the structural activities to meet the commitments of the inter-institutional agreement of October 1993 , this severity imposes an extremely low increase under the other expenditure headings .
For all the internal policies it is limited to 0.5 % by comparison with 1997 .
Such a limitation in the increase in the funding of internal policies did not enable us to propose as significant a revision of the Socrates programme as desired and in relation to the importance and success of this programme .
The Commission sees itself as constrained to continue to support a position of austerity .
But you can be sure that your commitment is shared by the Commission .
We shall fight to the last for a significant increase which will enable the programme to meet its goals in the coming years .
First we shall redouble our efforts to convince the Council to soften its position between now and the Education Council on 20 November .
Nevertheless it is most probable , as we all know , that we shall have to put in hand a procedure of conciliation .
I can assure you that the Commission is ready to play fully the role accorded to it by the treaty in the context of this procedure .
We are going to use every means , in close collaboration with the Parliament , to obtain a result which is as favourable as possible .
Allow me therefore , in conclusion , to cast a glance at the future .
It is in fact at this moment when we approach the planning work for the next generation of Community programmes put into operation from the year 2000 .
The Commission will at the beginning of November adopt a communication comprising the guidelines which we intend to follow in our work .
This will give us another opportunity to exchange ideas on the future of this most important sector .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow morning .
( The sitting was closed at 11.17 p.m. )
Madam President , I have a question .
Before the summer I wrote to the College of Quaestors and also to the President of Parliament asking what the position was with the move and computer equipment for Members in their offices .
I now understand that we shall be moving in November , in other words in the November political group week and the November part-session week .
I should like to know whether , if Members want to have their own computers installed in their own offices , it is possible for the computer provided by Parliament to be put in the assistants ' room and what arrangements do I need to make ?
That is the first question .
I put it in writing and have still not received an answer and I should very much like one .
My second comment is that there have been quite a few moves in the last few weeks and is there any guarantee that when Members move electricity and water and also all telephone connections will be working ?
I have my doubts , because there have been a great many problems with the moves in the last few weeks .
Can you guarantee that and also perhaps let Parliament have a plan so that it can all be done in those fourteen days without any hitches ?
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , your point of order has the great merit of allowing our colleagues to join us as quickly as possible , since we are going to vote on the budget soon .
That being so , it is an important question .
The College of Quaestors examined your questions on Tuesday , and the reply , from what I have been told , is on its way to you .
On this point , Mr Tomlinson has some details to give you .
I am letting him speak , because , as you can see , we still do not have the necessary majority to vote on the budget , but I do ask you please to avoid spending much time on this question .
I can assure you , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , that all the points you have raised will naturally be examined with the attention they deserve .
Madam President , this follows on in a slightly different direction from the interesting point made by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
There are rumours circulating concerning new furniture that has been purchased for the D3 Building .
There are those who I would call ' first class ' Members of Parliament who have better quality furniture than the ' second class ' Members of Parliament who have decided that they are unhappy with their first class allocations .
There is also a rumour circulating that a number of Members has asked for unused furniture to be removed from their rooms .
This , I am sure , is incorrect .
I am also quite sure that the Bureau and the chairs of committee and everybody else will want to be as financially responsible as possible when we are trying to meet Maastricht convergence criteria .
However , if there is any truth in this rumour , can you discuss it in the Bureau and ensure that it is quashed .
Mr Tomlinson , we heard you .
Anyway , as far as I am concerned , I heard your message well .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
The matter of my visitors from Twente who were attacked and robbed was ruled out of order , but the President has taken it up himself , for which I am grateful .
I am happy to hand the matter over to Mr GilRobles .
Madam President , there is an error on page 8 of the Minutes where the President is described as referring a letter from a colleague to the Bureau .
In fact , the President decided to refer it to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
Speaking for myself , I think that both bodies should be involved : the Committee on the Rules of Procedure to establish an authentic interpretation and the Bureau to comment on the discourtesy shown by the Labour Party in suspending four of its members after the President had made it clear he wished to have the code of conduct further discussed and considered .
Mr Donnelly , I want to make it clear that we are not going to reopen that debate .
What was said was the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , we all heard it in our headphones .
There is an error in the English version , which says ' Bureau ' .
All the versions will therefore be revised so that the Committee on the Rules of Procedure appears .
For the moment , we are approving the Minutes , and it is important that the Minutes reflect properly what was said yesterday .
It was the Committee on the Rules of Procedure which was mentioned .
Madam President , I would like to refute the comments from across the floor and say that there are totally inappropriate .
I would also like to support the President 's comments which he has made in writing .
Madam President , I request your help .
I have on two occasions raised an issue in this Chamber during the course of discussions such as this and it has been incorrectly minuted .
I will now dictate the minutes which I wanted for Tuesday and that I asked again to be reinstated .
It should read ' Mr Hallam complained that the proposed Council Regulation 96 / 0247 banning the use of nickel in the new euro coin on health grounds was based on a myth .
There was no health risk from nickel .
The proposal to insist on Nordic gold in the new euro coins was an expensive nonsense . '
The aforementioned relates to Tuesday and I request that it be included in the minutes for that day .
Mr Hallam , I can say to you now that your remarks will indeed be faithfully recorded in the minutes of today 's session , but they are worth correcting for the other sessions .
Madam President , pages 18 and 19 of the Spanish version record the incidents that took place yesterday at Question Time to the Council . The Minutes faithfully record that , at the beginning of Question Time , the President apologized to the President-in-Office of the Council for the fact that Question Time had started almost half an hour late .
They also faithfully record that a number of Members expressed their discontent .
However , Madam President , they do not record that the President , after consulting the Council Presidency and Parliament 's services , proposed extending Question Time by twenty minutes .
That was a clear proposal and it is not recorded in the Minutes .
We will make the correction .
Madam President , I notice from the Minutes of this morning , as well as yesterday morning and the previous day that there is obviously a serious problem of underemployment among the Conservatives in this House .
They seem to spend most of their time looking at the internal procedures of other parties .
Perhaps you could give them some reports to do , some real work .
Madam President , this is about tomorrow 's Minutes .
I welcome you to the chair , and above all I draw the attention of Mrs van Dijk and her press officer to that fact .
Are there any other comments on the Minutes ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President , on a point of order .
I wonder whether the Bureau could clarify the rules governing demonstrations in this institution ?
As we came into the hemicycle Members were greeted by a demonstration of members of staff with a very laudable aim : ' Tomlinson go home ! '
We have had discussions about this in the past , and I remember during the miners ' demonstrations those of us who supported the miners in their struggle against the Thatcher Government were not allowed to display our support and publish posters .
However , here we have a situation where members of staff appear willy-nilly to be able to demonstrate and Members appear to be denied the same privilege !
I would like some clarification here .
I do not object to people being allowed to demonstrate but what is sauce for the MEP goose should be sauce for the parliament official ganders .
Madam President , on a point of order .
The Rules of Parliament are quite clear that Parliament must issue its amendments and its reports in the languages of the Members present .
I went to Distribution and asked for the amendments to the Tomlinson report and I have received them in German .
Now as most people in this room will know , because of the English language that us Scots get taught in Scotland our English isn 't very good . I can assure you my German is absolutely hopeless .
Is it possible for you to instruct the office to ensure that these amendments are available in English and the languages of the other Members so that we can understand what we are voting on ?
Mr Falconer , I think there was a mistake , because the amendments exist in all the languages .
But someone must have thought that you also spoke German , you see .
Madam President , I gave notice to the Secretary-General of Parliament that I would raise a point of order at the beginning of budget votes today .
Outside this Chamber a demonstration is going on which is in fundamental breach of the Rules of Parliament .
We as a Parliament have banned all demonstrations outside the hemicycle .
There is a demonstration taking place by our staff .
If any lobbyist had lobbied against Parliament in the way that our staff are lobbying against Parliament , we would have expelled the lobbyist under our Rules .
It is unacceptable when Parliament is exercising its responsibility in relation to the budget , and when the Committee on Budgets is following the decision of the Bureau of Parliament , that there should be a demonstration which is being personalized against both the Secretary-General and this Parliament 's rapporteur as in the case with the performance which is going on at the moment .
Will you instruct , therefore , the ushers to tell Parliament 's staff to go back to work !
That is what they are paid to be doing here ; we are paid to legislate !
Thank you , Mr Tomlinson .
Mr McMahon had raised the same problem , but in the meantime I have actually been able to check on the material existence of this demonstration .
It is quite unacceptable .
An end must indeed be put to it , and I ask the ushers to take the action Mr Tomlinson has called for .
I believe the dignity of our Parliament requires us to put a stop to activities which damage the credibility of our institution .
I believe that we must be very , very careful , and that everyone must do his or her part .
I think you understand me .
I hope that will happen .
Madam President , the posters are still there attacking a Member of this House .
I asked the ushers to remove them ; they said that they were authorized .
I asked who had authorized them and received no answer .
This is a very unsatisfactory situation .
I would like these posters to be removed right now !
Mrs Ewing , no-one authorized those posters , and really this is all becoming very unhealthy .
We must be very careful .
It seems that those posters are outside the hemicycle .
If they are still there , they must be removed .
No national parliament would tolerate that .
Madam President , I must report a mistake in the Dutch version of the attendance list .
The members present are shown from A to K and the next page is the same .
To reassure Mrs Van Dijk and her press officers it is important that names from K to Z are also shown on the attendance list .
Thank you , Mr Tillich .
Ladies and gentlemen , if you agree , I suggest that when we come to the amendments which Mr Tillich has indicated , you take account of the technical points which he has just given us , and on which there seems to be a broad consensus in the House .
On Amendment No 127
Madam President , the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have tabled this again .
It concerns an increase of ECU 1 million .
That was rejected in the Committees on Budgets .
We have now reached agreement with the rapporteur that we shall try to arrange it again for the second reading . So as not to give the impression now that this is a programme which has to be defended by Parliament against the Commission , as though it had been rejected here , we have resolved to withdraw the amendment .
on Amendment No 707
Madam President , I just asked to speak to put it on record that I am amazed by the fact that , with a budget of ECU 90 , 000 million and with 500 amendments presented , separate votes have only been requested on one point .
I just wish to express my amazement to the House so that at least it is recorded in the Minutes .
On the remarks of Amendment No 199
Madam President , there is a great deal of importance in having the remarks of 199 voted because they will make this money more easily available to the Administration to facilitate spending .
At the moment they are operating under some difficulty and the remarks are designed to remove that .
That is why there has been a request to vote the remarks separately .
I congratulate Mr Tillich very warmly on his excellent work , and all the members of the Committee on Budgets .
Madam President , we want a split vote on this amendment to paragraph 13 , so that we vote first on the first sentence up to the words ' suggest improvements ' , and then on the second part .
Madam President , this resolution which has been put down , apparently as a result of a television programme in Holland , would effectively undermine , if not end , Parliament 's pension scheme .
It is a voluntary scheme .
Anyone who wishes to leave , can leave .
I would hope that the House will vote solidly against all of this amendment .
Then let us have some discussions if we want some changes , but we do not change the pension scheme by a resolution put down at the last minute .
I invite the House to vote against .
( Mixed reactions )
Madam President , I did sign the amendment and I would like to say to Mr Balfe that as regards the attacks on this voluntary pension scheme , to which I too belong , we need the authority of an institution from the European Union which confirms what we think , in particular that the scheme is legitimate , the pension fund is legitimate , but there is nothing to be gained by failing to respond to the continual attacks .
We believe that an authoritative institution from the European Union can and should confirm this and we therefore support this amendment .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am quite embarrassed because I really would not want you to restart a debate on this subject .
Mrs Green and Mr Samland have asked me for permission to speak .
I shall give it to them very briefly , but you will understand that it is not possible to start a debate on such a question now .
Madam President , I have no intention of opening a debate on the amendment .
That is what I am standing to criticize - that Mr Balfe should have been given the floor on this issue in the way that he was .
It is not appropriate to discuss the content of the amendment at this point .
Some of us - just so that everyone here is aware - have been arguing and asking for clarification about this pension fund for years .
It is not the result of one television programme !
Madam President , I should like to avoid giving the wrong impression here .
If you support this resolution you will not be calling the system into question , but you will be supporting an additional examination .
Those colleagues who may not yet have the text in front of them must not get the impression that a decision in favour of the application will put the system at risk .
I just wanted to correct that on behalf of the Committee on Budgets .
Personally , I think that Mr Samland 's explanation was quite important , and I thank him for it .
Mr President , I would like to point out that there are a number of serious errors in the Danish translation . For instance , Amendment No 20 refers to a law on mother 's milk product itself containing polyunsaturated fatty acids .
The Danish translation translates this as " packaging ' .
Of course , packaging immediately leads one to think of physical packaging , and that is definitely not what this is about .
In Amendment No 19 , the words " polished rice ' have been removed from the Danish translation : in other words , polished rice can still be surface treated , even though Amendment No 19 states the opposite .
Amendment 15 refers to liquid coffee and tea in tins , while the French refers to liquid coffee and drinks based on tea in tins .
If we are voting on subjects which are reasonably technical , and of course we are not experts , I think it is very important that the translations we are given are correct .
I do not mean of course that we should not vote on these proposed amendments , but I would like to ask that people check that the Danish translations are more accurate in future than is the case with this report .
Thank you very much , Mrs Sandbaek .
All the necessary linguistic checks will certainly be made so that no doubts or ambiguities remain at the end of our work .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
I shall be as brief as possible , since I do not want to hold up the voting .
Yesterday , in the debate on the Wiebenga report , we in the Group of the European People 's Party requested an answer from the Commission , but we did not get it .
I shall not delay everything now by touching on all the points involved , but I can mention one , which is the sharing of responsibility for temporary protection of displaced persons .
I do not know whether Commissioner Wulf-Mathies is able to answer on Commissioner Gradin 's area .
In any case I would now like to give the Commissioner the opportunity to answer , since for reasons of democracy it would perhaps have been reasonable for the Group of the European People 's Party to hear the Commission 's views on our significant amendments in this area , even if very briefly .
I now invite the Commissioner , Mrs Wulf-Mathies , to speak so that we are then in a better position to vote .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope the information I have been given is correct , and that you have accepted the Commission 's remarks on Amendments Nos 39 and 40 , 25 and 30 , and 20 .
If that is so I am perfectly ready to give you the answers on behalf of my colleague , Mrs Gradin .
First , the Commission must insist on its proposal concerning Amendments Nos 39 and 40 , that the resolution be passed with a qualified majority .
We consider it important that the qualified majority pertains here , so that specific results can be achieved .
The Commission cannot , therefore , support the request for a unanimous resolution .
( Applause from certain quarters ) Concerning Amendments Nos 25 and 30 , I should point out that it is hardly realistic to lift the requirement for a visa and the ability to turn crossers back at the border .
It is a fact that at the moment every Member State decides for itself on the need for a visa .
As for sending people back , that falls under the Geneva Convention .
Now to Amendment No 20 .
The reason why the Commission has not provided for consultation of Parliament as an absolute condition in article 12 , is that the Council of Ministers must be able to react quickly in cases of mass flight .
In practice Parliament will then of course be told directly .
My last general comment : during our discussion in the Council of Ministers , which will now take place , we shall be happy to include the positive comments of Parliament and hope in this way to achieve a sensible compromise .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Excuse me , Mr President , I wish to refer to another matter .
In the vote on the Breyer report , I intended to vote against Amendment No 6 , but - either through tiredness or illness , or both at once - I am not sure that I did .
I should therefore like it to be recorded that I voted against Amendment No 6 .
Mr President , I am very keen to cast this vote .
We have experienced an important day and so it is also important for a record to be made in the Minutes for future reference of the profound disappointment that both I , on behalf of my group , and many other colleagues , feel at this time .
Let me explain : at the end of a budget procedure , marked by an atmosphere of dialogue , of tolerance , in which all the political groups , with a spirit of understanding , agreed that a procedure be adopted which has caused a whole series of points to be passed with oral amendments , against all the rules , which , in practice , means several million ECU which we have orally decided to allocate or not to allocate in the budget . I am sorry that a series of amendments , accepted by the Committee on Budgets and by the relevant committees , did not have the support of the Chamber .
It seems important to me that our disappointment at the poor way in which several amendments have been made should be recorded .
Mr President , on behalf of the Austrian ÖVP Members I should like to emphasize that we support the budget decision , particularly on safety , safeguarding of health and right to information , which in the area of nuclear energy production must be guaranteed by appropriate means .
I voted against the draft general budget for 1998 to show my disapproval , first of the increased amount of expenditure on the structural funds , which has been forecast since the preliminary draft , but also of the other increased expenditure which the European Parliament requests .
In fact , the Commission had presented a preliminary draft in which payment appropriations rose to ECU 91 , 350 billion .
The Council reduced this figure to 90 , 884 , to make the Union participate in the budgetary discipline efforts which are demanded of the Member States in view of the single currency .
The European Parliament has just proposed increasing the total to ECU 91 , 750 billion .
The difference is admittedly not enormous , but it covers requests which I do not support , particularly for propaganda in favour of the euro and for subsidies for the projects of associations claiming to be of European interest , or associations of immigrants from third countries .
On this subject , I would remind you once again that it is intolerable to see associations of immigrants , like the Immigrants Forum , which are 100 % subsidized by the Commission - that is , the taxpayers of the countries of Europe - being invited to meetings of the European Parliament to give us lessons on citizenship rights that we ought to grant to nationals of third countries .
There should be sanctions against this permanent brainwashing used by the Commission uses to get policies I consider anti-European accepted .
Once and for all , the Commission must be deprived of appropriations it uses to manipulate opinion .
Finally , the draft budget includes a serious legal error .
By an agreement signed on 16 July between the Commission , Parliament and the Council , it was accepted that the common foreign policy budget should be placed in the category of ' non-obligatory ' expenditure , on which the European Parliament has the last word .
Now , common foreign policy being , until further notice , by nature inter-governmental , it is contrary to the treaty to give such a power to the European Parliament .
This situation , which shows in passing how much the European institutions disregard the letter of texts when they want to , would by itself justify rejecting the budget on principle .
The draft general budget for 1998 is a shameful attempt at pulling the wool over the eyes of working people and public opinion .
It is characterized by the most shameless adherence to the logic of austerity programmes and policies and by blatant contempt shown for economic , social and other problems , and for the protests and demands of working people .
It maintains the utterly inadequate figure of 1.27 % of the budget for financing common foreign policy , with a forecast take-up of up to 1.15 % at the most .
It totally butchers budget expenditure in the agricultural sector , whose viability is in the most dangerous crisis , and in the structural sector , with the structural funds and the cohesion fund .
For reasons of demagogy and disorientation it makes a gesture towards the scourge of unemployment with forecasts of the availability of the derisory sum of ECU 150 million .
It is a hypocritical attempt to present budget appropriations as available for unemployment and for employment , at a time when not a single ECU has been added to the European Union budget and when the titles of certain lines are simply being changed .
The European Parliament 's proposals on employment , which are not sure of being accepted by the Council , amount to approximately ECU 8 per registered unemployed person , and naturally that is incapable of contributing in the least to addressing this most critical issue for the people of Europe .
They are simply an alibi for those who adopt yet another grim austerity budget for working people , farmers and small and medium-sized businesses , in the name of the competitiveness of large concerns and in support of the exorbitant profits of big finance .
It is all too clear that the budget appropriations to cover economic and social problems - unemployment , social security , health and education - are certain to be at unacceptably low levels .
However , it is also certain that the profitability of big finance and its conglomerates will reach new record highs .
This is evidence of the fact that we have an even worse example of European Union budgetary absurdity .
The same logic will be displayed by Parliament if it adopts this budget .
When all is said and done it is only in budgetary matters that the European Parliament has any real power .
It is time that this power was exercised on behalf of working people , on behalf of the people who , with their votes , elected it as an institutional body of the European Union .
The undersigned ÖVP Members have voted for the budget , because it is a good and important instrument for the further development of our common Union .
We protest most emphatically , however , against the " Herod Premium ' contained in the budget , which is a payment for the killing of new-born calves .
We shall do everything within our power to see that this premium is no longer included in the next budget .
The Danish Social Democrats support the proposal that the EU should provide assistance for setting up an information office for organic farming in the EU .
We also believe strict control should be exercised over the money set aside in the budget for Turkey .
We think it is important that all 11 official languages of the EU continue to enjoy the same official status .
We are therefore in favour of the full amount continuing to be set aside for translations of the proceedings of the European Parliament .
We are also in favour of more control of MEPs ' travel accounts .
Travelling expenses should be refunded on the basis of expenses actually incurred or on submission of evidence that the journey was made at the cheapest published rate .
My observations refer to the agricultural rationing budget for 1998 .
In fact , what appropriations do we see for agriculture ?
They are limited to ECU 40.8 billion , and only increase by 0.45 % .
In other words , beggarly !
As for the general budget , with ECU 90.8 billion of commitment appropriations , it increases by 1.97 % , and the structural funds , that is the regional appropriations for dismantling the nation states , increase by 6.3 % as demanded by the Edinburgh summit , but for agricultural appropriations , on the other hand , it is the Malthusian spirit of the Club of Rome , the spirit of zero growth .
The agricultural population is spared nothing .
Only ECU 3 million are found for bee-keepers . ECU 3 million for bees , which provide pollination , and increase fruit farm yields by 30 % .
By contrast , for European propaganda , for the promotion of the euro within the Prince programme , ECU 38 million are found .
ECU 38 million thrown away on wind , against just ECU 3 million for a paramount activity like bee-keeping !
Admittedly ECU 15 million were found for promoting the quality of agricultural products .
But because of BSE , which could have been avoided but for the mistakes of top European civil servant - as the committee of inquiry reminded us - no less than ECU 1.5 billion were spent in 1996 , and ECU 2.2 billion in 1997 .
The farmers must repair the mistakes of senior civil servants and industry , but the agricultural budget must not support those same farmers !
The symbol of this anti-farmer budgetary destitution is something we caused here when we voted on the 1998 budget , by rejecting the amendment on developing the use of wool .
The European Court of Justice had already removed wool from agricultural products .
At present , using that same wool is made impossible .
Our shepherds and sheep-breeders have no other solution than to pay both for shearing and for destroying the product of shearing .
This rationing will get worse until the farmers are suffocated .
With the enlargement of the European Union , the overhaul of the CAP , the world renegotiation of the agricultural trade agreement , agricultural prices will collapse , agricultural incomes will fall , agricultural demography will go into reverse , and finally , between budgetary restrictions and financial rationing , the dream of Sicco Mansholt will become reality , and the last farmer will disappear from European territory in the 21st Century .
As far as the agricultural expenditure procedure is concerned it may be noted that cooperation between the Council , Parliament and the Commission has been much more open and regular than in previous years .
That is also true of the two parliamentary committees , the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
By having an opinion on the preliminary draft budget ready on time it was possible to have a sensible dialogue before the Council established the draft budget .
Consequently it was more realistic than in previous years .
Furthermore it was later agreed not to conclude the ad hoc procedure at first reading by Parliament , but to lay down Parliament 's terms of reference in an annex to Parliament 's resolution .
Thus the agriculture budget and the development of the actual expenditure follow on to the second reading in Parliament .
In the present instance that may lead to a timely review of the across-the-board reduction in all budget items under heading 1 , which Parliament considered undesirable but which was accepted in the dialogue between the three institutions .
In a subsequent budget year it must be considered whether this fairly simplistic and automatic across-the-board reduction approach can be repeated .
Parliament still prefers reduction on the basis of recent experience .
But as has been said , keeping the ad hoc procedure open after the first reading by Parliament largely deals with that objection .
When the budget was examined this year the main focus was on the financing of additional revenue .
Where there was an imminent deficit in the agriculture budget ( initially because of the BSE crisis ) the Commission immediately resorted to this budget item and proposed an across-the-board reduction of 7 % in expenditure .
The Commission even used the argument of current overcompensation .
The Council and Parliament were strongly opposed to the Commission 's approach and were of course successful .
Even so , the way in which the matter was handled was still unsatisfactory .
In future we must look seriously into ways of differentiating between premiums per hectare and per head of livestock .
But I also think that to put the financing of the agricultural income premiums on a more durable footing we should look for our own new system of financing such expenditure .
Certainly income premiums are becoming so much more important that they now account for roughly half the expenditure of the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF .
A few years ago it was only a few per cent .
However the burden of this very specific expenditure , which in my opinion cannot be compared with the rest of the EU 's expenditure , is still shared in the same way and it is extremely doubtful whether this situation is tenable in the long term .
In refusing to vote for the draft 1998 budget of the European Union as it was presented to the House by the Committee on Budgets of the European Parliament , I was eager to mark my disagreement on several essential points .
As vice-chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , I wanted , by my vote , to mark a very clear disagreement with the attitude of the Committee on Budgets , which did not consider it necessary to put forward in the part-session a unanimous request from the Committee on Fisheries intended to give Member States the necessary means to implement controls in reliable and fair conditions for all the fishermen of our various countries .
Surely this is a major inconsistency by our Parliament , which on the one hand approves of rapid , general implementation of control by satellite , and massively adopted the report which I presented to it on this question , and on the other hand refuses to write into the budget the necessary means to put into concrete effect the decision which it has just taken ?
Yet this House , in approving the implementation of control by satellite , which the fishermen 's organizations consider to be the only suitable form of control , had explicitly retained , as I proposed , the principle of financial compensation , so that this new arrangement does not upset the financial balance of our small fishing companies , which is often precarious .
In refusing to take up the proposal from the Committee on Fisheries , the Committee on Budgets , which has chosen the path of budget laxity in many other fields , is going to delay the implementation of an objective , incontestable control mechanism , which is essential if the rules of the common fisheries policy are to be observed by everyone .
As a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I also want to stand very firm against the legal error - but we know that the majority in this Parliament rarely acts legally - of applying in advance , in the 1998 budget , the interinstitutional agreement about the CFSP which is contained in the Treaty of Amsterdam , when the treaty has not yet been ratified by the legitimate representatives of our peoples , the national parliaments .
As a member of the Committee on Agriculture , I must also very firmly oppose point 16 of the Tillich resolution , which actually proposes a change to the distribution of obligatory expenditure .
To be able to finance so-called quality promotion campaigns for the benefit of , notably , British beef , and to develop production of honey , flax and hemp , it is proposed that the amount of refunds on wheat , flour , barley , malt , sugar and isoglucose should be lowered .
Now , I must remind you that agricultural expenditure is obligatory expenditure , and that neither the Committee on Budgets nor the European Parliament is authorized to change it in any way .
This House has no power over obligatory expenditure .
Surely it works against the interests of our producers to propose furtively , in an appendix to the resolution , amendments which penalize European exports in the field of large-scale agriculture and cereals , for the benefit of promotional budgets which are intended to highlight generic products ?
For instance , European flower producers , who only represent , as is known , 40 % of our consumption , are hardly going to benefit from a campaign to promote flowers when the Union imports 60 % of its consumption of horticultural products .
Tillich report ( A4-0290 / 97 )
More than half of the Community 's budget goes to support agriculture in the Member States .
We think it is high time that the Council of Ministers intensified the discussions on the future agricultural policy since it is the Council which has the decisive influence over agricultural questions .
In our view it is quite unacceptable to earmark a large proportion of the Community budget to an agriculture which in its current form is not adapted to environmental considerations , animal protection , the promotion of consumer interests and the consideration of needs in relation to the global food supply .
We also consider it wholly unacceptable that Community funds are used to support tobacco growing .
We think it would be a good thing if , in the budget , Parliament now pointed to measures for creating employment .
We support the proposal to set up a separate budget item for special measures for the Baltic area .
In connection with the discussion of the budget , attention has again been drawn to the issue of travel allowances for Members of Parliament .
We support the proposal that travel allowances should be based on the actual costs and be on the same terms for all Members .
As far as Parliament 's voluntary pension system is concerned , we support Mr Dankert 's proposal to make essential reforms to the voluntary pension scheme and increase supervision and controls .
We have abstained from voting .
We welcome the restrictiveness which characterizes the annual budget , even if the ambitions are not as far-reaching as the Council 's draft budget .
We are also positive towards the ambition to emphasize employment issues , but we cannot support the methods of financing which entail cut-backs even in areas which are not connected to employment .
We are also opposed to combining investments in transeuropean networks with increased employment .
We think that Parliament should also have reduced the appropriation for various kinds of propaganda campaign .
We are abstaining on controlled thermonuclear fusion , controlled nuclear fusion .
We are voting for safety , protection of health , rights to and duties of information , to be ensured in the area of nuclear energy production .
In the annual budget debate our aim was to reduce the EU 's budget and at the same time to try to make it greener .
That means we supported proposals to cut back on tobacco subsidies and to give more to the promotion of organic farming , proposals to give smaller grants to organizations which promote the European Ideal and proposals which are opposed to the EU 's information campaigns , including those for the euro .
We support the Committee on Budget 's line as far as employment policy is concerned .
We do so because it does not entail any increase in the budget , but only a redistribution of funds within the budget .
We think it would be better to put the proposed ECU 150 million into investments in small and medium-sized businesses than into various campaigns and doubtful programmes .
This does not mean , however , that we think the EU should begin to conduct an active labour market policy .
We are entirely opposed to that .
There are also positive sides , including the fact that the allowance for the clearing of anti-personnel mines is increased by ECU 1 million under the paragraph on arms reductions .
That is something at least .
The expenditure in the area of agriculture and the regional structural funds are among the compulsory items of expenditure and are decided by the Council of Ministers , even though the President of the Parliament ultimately signs the budget .
We think there are a lot of things within the EU 's expenditure in these two areas which can be strongly called into question .
Unfortunately we do not have the ability to influence through our votes the items of expenditure in the areas of agriculture and regional policy with which we do not agree .
We think that regional policy should be returned to the Member States .
Similarly there has to be an extensive reform of the current Common Agricultural Policy as soon as possible , both for reasons of efficiency and to facilitate an enlargement of the Union .
Furthermore , subsidies to wine and tobacco growing must be phased out as soon as possible .
There are also a number of doubtful budget items whose purpose , according to the justification , is to strengthen the European Ideal .
Above all we are opposed to budget lines A-3020 - grants to organizations which promote the European ideal , A-3030 - grants to projects set up by clubs and associations of European interest , and A-3501 - preparations and assistance for the achievement of economic and monetary union .
We oppose these budget lines in the strongest terms .
There are several budget lines which appear to us superfluous , but which we cannot influence at this stage .
Tomlinson report ( A4-0280 / 97 )
Mr President , this vote has also been marked by the same attitude .
When examining the budget of the other institutions , we sought to adopt a uniform line which , once again , came up against a brick wall on several highly significant amendments , such as the one to increase the Sakharov Prize appropriation .
We all know that the Nobel Prize is worth close to a million dollars for the winner .
This seems to me to be encouraging for research , science , culture and work for peace .
The stubborn refusal of the rapporteur Mr Tomlinson and the Group of the Party of European Socialists to increase this funding , which currently amounts to only ECU 15 , 000 , seemed to me to be obstinacy I can only take to be personal , aimed at me and the other MEPs who supported me in seeking this amendment , which was also approved by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , and frankly I think it is totally narrow-minded .
That is the point I want to make , using the only opportunity for complaint now left to me , as we have decided that the votes should be cast before an empty Chamber , causing you , Mr President , and those who want to listen to me to waste time .
I am greatly concerned as to how to record that , even now , in a budget in which we have managed to allocate the Van Maerlant building to three different Institutions in one year , and perhaps at second reading we will also have a fourth idea , there was an obstinate determination to reject an amendment which would have dignified one of the most important manifestation of the European Parliament on the international scene : the Sakharov Prize , which will be decided at the Conference of Presidents this afternoon and to which we will then make a donation of just ECU 15 , 000 .
I would like that to be recorded as well .
In the vote on the budget we have consistently supported proposals concerning a reform of Members ' various travel allowances , so that people only receive an allowance for actual costs ( Amendments Nos 2 and 3 which are largely the same ) .
As far as the voluntary pension fund is concerned , we have decided to support Amendment No 4 .
The amendment does not end the pension fund , but asks the Court of Auditors to carry out an investigation and asks the Bureau for suggestions on how it could be changed .
On the other hand , we do not support the proposal for a common charter for the Members which is mentioned in the amendment .
Naturally , we also supported the ending of subsidies for the restaurants in the European Parliament ( paragraph 24 of the report ) .
We regret the decision by the European Court of Justice that the European Parliament must have 12 partsessions per year in Strasbourg , which has an affect on the budget because the costs of the weekly move are increasing .
We have also consistently supported other proposals aimed at reducing administrative costs .
Mr President , there was a lot of comment in the press to the effect that the votes on the cocoa directive were totally predictable and that they took the line of individual Members ' Member States .
In particular , they were alleged to support the producer lobbies within each Member State .
I would like to state quite categorically on behalf of the Scottish National Party members here , Mrs Ewing and myself , that is not the case .
Many Members in this House - and certainly the SNP members share this - care very much for the Third World and especially for the cocoa producers in countries such as Ghana and Côte d 'Ivoire .
That is why we voted with our group , the European Radical Alliance , and took that line .
There is , however , one specific opt-out where we differed , and that concerned the fact that in Ireland and Great Britain there is a tradition of producing a particular kind of chocolate and labelling it milk chocolate .
To me there is no harm in that , and the acceptability of Europe requires that we do not try to do away with that tradition .
So we voted differently on that particular amendment .
But the main thing is to support the interests of the Third World , and that is what we did .
Mr President , I did not vote for the proposed directive , and I do not totally share the satisfaction of the rapporteur , since even if there have been improvements , we are faced by a draft which is eminently contestable .
In the European Union , it will be possible to call viscous brown substances , which are at best odourless , ' chocolate ' without them being real chocolate .
The absence of any precision on the specific names means that the wellfoundedness of this directive is heavily mortgaged .
I add that the inapplicable nature of some arrangements makes them null and void before they have even been adopted .
And if the Commission had two pennyworth of good sense , it would do as it did twelve years ago , and withdraw its draft .
I hope that it will have that good sense .
The Commission proposes to make the use of vegetable fats in the composition of chocolate , up to 5 % , general in the fifteen countries of the European Union .
In our opinion , three conditions absolutely must be fulfilled before such a measure can be considered .
First condition : a clear , obvious indication for the consumer , that is not a simple mention in the list of ingredients , but a visible description such as " chocolate with vegetable fats ' .
Second condition : it must be possible to measure the quality of these vegetable fats exactly , which is not the case in the current state of scientific knowledge .
If vegetable fats must be accepted with a ceiling of 5 % , this possibility should only be offered when it is possible to measure the quantity of them precisely .
Third condition : a restrictive list of authorized vegetable fats must be established .
If any of these three conditions - which are converted into amendments - is not fulfilled , we will be unable to vote for the Lannoye report .
The revision of the former 1973 directive turned out to be very useful , and EU harmonization was absolutely necessary .
But harmonization does not mean levelling down with respect to the protection and information of the consumer .
And in this way the situation today is serious , even grave !
When a directive is revised , it must , for chocolate in this case , maintain the demand for quality of the product , and harmonize it in the European countries .
This is perfectly obvious .
This is why the proposal to authorize the addition of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter to chocolate is unacceptable , because it undermines the integrity of the product .
Besides , the composition of vegetable fats is very close to that of cocoa butter , so that checking the 5 % limit is difficult , or even impossible , which is unsatisfactory for the consumer .
I support , and have supported , amendments which observe these principles .
I have also signed several of them .
That is why , I do not understand the attitude of the Commission at this stage , and I consider it unacceptable .
Mr President , I wish to place on the record the fact that I voted against the Lannoye report .
Amendments Nos 9 and 21 were particularly hostile to the interests of the Irish milk chocolate industry as indeed were many other amendments .
Although I was in favour of the directive I am convinced that the legislative proposals as modified will be damaging to the Irish chocolate sector .
In the first place , I would like to stress the fact that the Commission has introduced a proposal which drastically changes a situation which is certainly somewhat untidy - eight Member States on one side , seven on the other - but where , in fact , everyone was relatively satisfied , particularly consumers , who could consume the type of chocolate they wanted .
From the moment when , in the name of the single market , making a uniform regulation on the content of chocolate is proposed , it is normal that everyone wants to protect " his system ' , and thus " his chocolate ' .
In my eyes , and those of many of my fellow citizens , the name " chocolate ' must be reserved for products which are 100 % cocoa .
It follows that if permitting the marketing of chocolate-flavoured products containing up to 5 % of substituted vegetable fats in all Member States is desired , it is difficult for me to accept that these products have exactly the same name as 100 % cocoa products .
A clear label such as " chocolate-flavoured ' ought to be used for this type of product .
If it is not possible to reach agreement on this point , at the very least the rule must be that the note " contains substituted vegetable fats ' must be printed in large characters beside the word " chocolate ' , so that the consumer is informed about the objective qualities of the product which he is about to buy and consume .
If no consensus emerges on one of these principles , I prefer to vote against the proposed directive , and to maintain the status quo .
Seven Member States permit the use of 5 % vegetable fats other than cocoa butter in the manufacture of chocolate products , and , in the face of the Commission 's attempt to simplify the regulations on foodstuffs by means of this draft directive , a " chocolate war ' has broken out , amongst other reasons - and let us not deceive ourselves - because the industry itself is divided .
It is the understanding of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , of which I am a member , that what is important is to provide consumers with adequate information .
This requires labelling which clearly indicates whether or not the chocolate in question contains vegetable fats other than cocoa butter , in order to guarantee freedom of choice .
I recall that a few years ago I unfortunately had to convince Mr Nordmann that Spanish drinking chocolate , which is thickened with flour , was not harmful , but a culinary speciality of my country , which should be respected .
This exception was taken into account in the final vote .
Today , other considerations are undoubtedly important , but this is what the debate is about .
My final vote will therefore be in favour .
I am eager to congratulate Mr Lannoye , who has carried out excellent work which I support .
Despite the complexity of this dossier , he has succeeded in amending the proposal of the European Commission in terms which satisfy me completely .
The 1973 directive defines chocolate , and forbids the use of vegetable fats in its composition as a substitute for cocoa butter .
However , a derogation was provided when three new states - the United Kingdom , Denmark and Ireland - entered the EEC , authorizing them to use vegetable fats other than cocoa butter up to 5 % of the total weight .
Austria , Finland , Sweden and Portugal also apply this derogation , even if legally they do not all have the formal authorization of the Commission .
This derogation thus authorizes these states to manufacture and sell this type of chocolate on their territory only .
These products are currently freely on sale in most of the other Member States , but without being called " chocolate ' .
Only Italy and Spain have closed their borders to these products , and thus violated the rules of free movement of goods .
By virtue of the principle of subsidiarity , the Commission 's proposal allows Member States the option of authorizing the addition of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter , up to 5 % of the total weight of the product , while guaranteeing its free movement throughout the EU by the name " chocolate ' .
However , the labelling which the Commission proposes must mention this addition clearly and objectively .
This simple condition is quite insufficient , and thus unacceptable .
In fact , the Commission wishes to allow a product which contains vegetable fats other than cocoa butter , and is manufactured in a state which permits this addition , to be called chocolate , whereas this is not possible today .
Currently , the countries which forbid these vegetable fats in the production of chocolate represent two-thirds of EU production .
The Commission thus chooses to make the exception into the rule , to the detriment of traditional chocolates and the information of consumers .
I think that is unacceptable .
It is essential that the labelling carries the name of the product , and that this is made prominent , so that the consumer makes a clear distinction between two products with different characteristics at first glance , without having to read the whole of the ingredients list with a magnifying glass .
As a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection - and although I appreciate traditional black chocolate - I consider that , in accepting the different traditions of our British , Austrian , Swedish or Danish neighbours , we have taken a step forward .
But we cannot accept that traditional products which contain only cocoa may be confused with products containing other vegetable fats .
The British , Swedes and Danes will tell us that it is only a matter of taste .
Certainly , it is entirely a matter of taste , which cannot represent a decisive argument , but I wish to defend " true ' chocolate , not only for myself but above all for generations to come .
The proposal of the Commission also raises a series of questions concerning , in particular , the relations of the EU with the less developed countries , particularly the cocoa-producing countries .
For these reasons , the development and cooperation commission , when asked for its opinion , unanimously rejected the proposal of the Commission .
So it is indispensable to limit the use of vegetable fats to tropical fats - illipé , shea and palm oil - of which some ACP countries such as Mali or Burkina Faso are producers , in such a way that these countries are not disadvantaged too much and the use of vegetable fats by producers is limited .
Six multinational companies share 80 % of the world market for chocolate , so their weight cannot be ignored .
The principal motivation of these chocolate giants is economic . Vegetable fats cost much less than cocoa , and the consumer has little chance of seeing this gain reflected in the retail price of chocolate .
Also , no method today makes it possible to detect exactly the presence , quality and type of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter in chocolate .
The margin of error is at least 30 % .
I think it is irresponsible to set standards when we have no way of checking that they are applied .
It is therefore right to make bringing this directive into force depend on perfecting a technique for detecting vegetable fats other than cocoa butter in chocolate .
Mr President , I set three conditions which must all be fulfilled before the proposal is adopted , namely : enforcing a different name for chocolate containing vegetable fats other than cocoa butter ; making the implementation of this directive dependent on perfecting a technique for detecting and quantifying vegetable fats ; limiting the use of vegetable fats in chocolate to certain tropical fats .
Unfortunately these amendments did not receive the majority of votes , and therefore I have rejected the whole text .
This has been an extremely difficult question for me , partly because I do not sit on the committee which discussed the details of Mr Lannoye 's report .
However , I am guided mainly by listening to the consumer interest , the trade aspects and the countries ' cultural background where chocolate is concerned .
I have therefore voted for the proposals which mean that there should be labelling on the packaging so that the consumer is able to know what he or she is buying and eating .
I have taken into consideration the fact that trade policy should be conducted with regard to both the social and environmental aspects .
Last but not least , the cultural aspects must be taken into consideration .
The EU countries do not have anything like a shared history when it comes to the amount of cocoa in chocolate .
In Sweden , amongst other countries , the level of cocoa in chocolate is traditionally low .
In the light of that it is inappropriate to introduce a directive which conflicts with this cultural difference .
The section on chocolate in this proposed directive has aroused much lively reaction which is perfectly understandable because of the economic and social consequences which it is likely to have in Europe , but also outside Europe , and particularly in Africa .
The debate , like the flood of amendments tabled , has brought out very contradictory positions .
Some people want priority given to consumers , cocoa producers and small and medium chocolate companies , whereas others want to grant privileges to the six multinational companies which by themselves represent 74 % of the European market for chocolate-flavoured products .
Obviously , our group belongs to the first category , and has tabled numerous amendments along those lines .
A first group of amendments relates to the supply of cocoa .
It is essential to preserve the economy of the 31 ACP states which are heavily dependent on cocoa exports .
I remind you that the West African cocoa producers market 90 % of their production within the European Union , and that 11 million people depend directly on the cocoa harvest .
The European Parliament 's research department estimates that if the proposal is adopted in its present version , the drop in demand would be between a minimum of 30 , 000 tonnes and 200 , 000 tonnes .
Apart from the loss of outlets , we can expect significant consequences for the world price of the raw material , cocoa .
The European Union absolutely must comply with the agreements which it has made with its partners , the ACP states . This is the sense of the first series of amendments which we have put down .
A second series of amendments relates to consumer protection .
A product which incorporates vegetable fats other than cocoa must not be called chocolate , but a chocolate-flavoured product .
It is also necessary to spread exact information among consumers .
This information must be clear , precise , legible and printed both beside the list of ingredients and on the display side of the product beside the brand name .
A third series of amendments relates to control .
Indeed , how is it possible to authorize incorporation of vegetable fats in a chocolate-flavoured product , at 5 % maximum , unless reliable quantitative methods of checking are available ?
The final series of amendments relates to the curious request which was expressed by the Committee on the Environment , to have research carried out to evaluate the impact of this directive on exports of cocoa from developing countries .
But research after the fact is not what is needed .
In contrast , I propose having research carried out before the fact , before any authorization to incorporate these vegetable fats , on the economic and social consequences , within and outside Europe , that this would have .
I know very well that the Commission often has a habit of proceeding like this , and adopting decisions regarding external commercial relations without any research in advance on the consequences .
It does not seem to me necessary to encourage and adopt these bad tendencies for ourselves .
Regarding employment within the European Union , I would remind you that 6 companies by themselves represent 74 % of the European market for chocolate , and that a large number of small and medium-sized food processing companies exist and share the remaining percentage .
These companies have neither sufficient financial capacity nor the production structure to be able to incorporate vegetable fats other than cocoa .
If this directive is adopted as it stands , many of these companies will be doomed to disappear , and obviously , many jobs will also disappear in this sector , which represents a famous traditional European activity .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Lannoye , who has carried out difficult but remarkable work .
His report has succeeded in taking stock of all the problems raised by this proposal from the European Commission .
As a member of the joint EU / ACP assembly , I cannot accept that the European Commission is proposing such a text .
The fact is , our partners would not be able to understand it if we agreed to vote for a proposal which violates the Treaty of Maastricht and the agreements which bind the EU .
Indeed , without returning to these points in detail , I am eager to stress that a general authorization to add vegetable fats other than cocoa butter throughout the EU would result in a reduction of cocoa consumption , estimated at between 88 , 000 and 125 , 000 tonnes , compared to total world production of 2.6 million tonnes .
This would be a body blow to many farmers .
The most affected countries would be the Ivory Coast , Ghana and the Cameroons .
The EU is party to agreements within its relations with the ACP countries .
The Lomé Convention , one of the principal purposes of which is to promote the exports of these countries , would be quite simply violated .
Also , this decision would be contrary to the international agreement on cocoa , and would have a very negative impact on the price of cocoa , and thus on the Stabex , the system for stabilizing cocoa prices within the Lomé Convention .
This could cost the EU billions of ECUs , and would be very bad for the producer countries in the long term .
For all these reasons , when the Committee on Development and Cooperation was asked for its advice , it unanimously rejected the Commission 's proposal , and today I insist on the fact that , in spite of these elements , I was ready to vote for this proposal on certain conditions .
The amendments on which my vote in favour of this text depended have not all been adopted , and I regret this .
That is why I voted against the report as amended by this House .
I have voted in accordance with the Swedish Social Democrat line that it should be permissible to add 5 % of vegetable fat other than cocoa butter to chocolate .
However , I cannot help being struck by the thought of the enormous volume of documentation which is being produced on the matter when we could instead have let it remain a matter of national legislation .
That has worked well for at least a hundred years .
It is things like this which damage the Union 's reputation among its citizens .
Mosiek-Urbahn report ( A4-0295 / 97 )
There is absolutely no reason for the EU to concern itself with this question .
It is a national question , or a question for an international organization .
Breyer report ( A4-0281 / 97 )
Mr President , I want to speak on the Breyer report , as a Member for Lubéron and LanguedocRoussillon , the premier wine-producing region of the world , but also of your country , President Imbeni .
Foolishly , we have rejected Amendment No 41 on grape juice , or to be technical , metatartaric acid , which makes it possible to return acidity to grape juice and to improve the flavours of grape juices .
By doing this , we are doing considerable damage to the production of grape juices , which makes it possible to use thousands and thousands of hectolitres of must .
We cannot be told that there is overproduction of wine , which is anyway untrue , and at the same time prevented from using , or at least reducing , this alleged overproduction .
By a majority of two votes , partly from the left , begging your pardon , Mr President , we have done enormous economic damage .
Knowing the environment , and the behaviour of the European Commission , as you know , on the common organization of the wine market , knowing all the efforts the European Commission is making to destroy the European vineyard for the benefit of the Chilean , Eastern European , Argentinean or Australian vineyard , one cannot be surprised at the damage which has just been done , once again , by the action of a pseudo-green lobby .
I regret and condemn this attitude .
I hope that you and your group do not carry this responsibility , Mr President .
In order to complete the common market it was unavoidable that the use of additives in foods should be coordinated .
In the event , because of further developments in the area of food additives it became necessary to alter existing regulations and complete them with expanded annexes of limits .
Of the 28 amendments accepted by the Committee on the Environment , the most important are the ones that complete the annexes with new additives .
Without a basic and unified regulation on additives the principle of mutual tolerance leads to great confusion amongst consumers .
In the table to Annex III , which contains permitted maxima of SO2 , a new food was added : the distilled alcoholic drink with whole pears , particularly Williams brandy .
This is of considerable importance to fruit distilleries in Northern Italy , who traditionally make this product .
Williams brandy , made for example in the Alto Adige province , contains a whole pear .
This has been treated with sulphur since time immemorial , that is , the pear is soaked in an aqueous solution of 50g / ml of sulphur dioxide .
This has to be added so that the fruit does not immediately discolour and start to rot .
The prescribed dosage is so small , that it is of no consequence from the health point of view , and can be used for its anti-bacterial effects .
This product has been manufactured by our distilleries for decades .
If the annex to guideline 95 / 2 is not excepted , this traditional regional product is threatened with extinction .
Williams brandy with genuine preserved pears is a traditional product , and is highly regarded by many customers far beyond the borders of the country , in other EU states .
It would be a loss if this product could no longer be sold .
Once again I would like to thank the members of the Committee on the Environment who supported this matter in committee and voted for my proposed amendment .
We have voted for the report because it entails a restrictive approach to food additives .
That does not mean that we approve of the increase in additives in baby food which could , unfortunately , also be a result of the directive , something which the National Food Board in Sweden has warned against and Sweden 's representatives on the Council have tried to stop .
We think these issues need to be analysed much more thoroughly .
What consumers want is clear .
European consumers are increasingly thinking in environmental terms .
They want cleaner raw materials and they do not want additives .
But the Commission is ignoring the wishes of European consumers , and instead is extending the so-called positive list by allowing a number of additives .
The Commission is also allowing them without any evidence that the additives are technically necessary and without any evidence that they benefit consumers , and without any evidence that the doses proposed present no risks to health .
These are also matters which the Commission is bound to consider if the positive list is to be extended .
Once again , we find that the wishes of consumers are being ignored .
I am voting in favour of the Breyer report as a whole , as it involves tightening up labelling requirements in a number of important areas and criticizes the Commission 's lead in extending the approved list .
This is the case , for example , in connection with the use of sulphite or the more grotesque example of the Commission 's authorization of E405 , which makes cider will look better , even if the substance is prohibited in cat food .
But there are a number of proposed amendments to the report which give cause for concern .
I am voting against the proposed amendments which seek to increase the number of permitted additives .
In many cases , there is no reason for the extension - and especially not when it comes to additives in baby food .
But one exception here must be additives for baby food designed for sick children , where there may be special requirements .
When it comes to sulphates and sulphites , I must vehemently oppose the use of these agents .
Denmark amongst others has tried to limit the use of sulphites , and that is the way it should be at European level too .
To a large group of people , sulphites may cause health problems , particularly in the form of allergic reactions , especially in asthmatics .
The reaction depends on the dose ingested , of course , and how predisposed one is , but may vary from discomfort and breathing problems to , in extreme cases , death .
Sulphites should be limited , also because in many cases they are unnecessary , as we have seen in the debate on dried fruit , for example .
Nor are sulphates necessary when it comes to making canned potatoes , as non-toxic agents such as citric acid and anti-oxidants can be used just as easily , as is the case in Denmark , for example .
To prevent further use of sulphite I am therefore voting against Amendments Nos 7 , 30 , 31 and 38 .
I am voting for Amendment No 10 , precisely because this attempts to limit the use of sulphites ; but I am voting against the part seeking to add to the list the possibility of using sulphite in connection with alcoholic drinks with whole pears , as this would mean increasing the use of sulphite .
I must also object strongly to nicine being included on the approved list ( Amendments Nos 32 and 36 ) .
Nicine is an antibiotic , and who wants that added to their food ?
Medicine and food should always be kept strictly separate , and particularly when , as in this amendment , it involves using egg products as ingredients in a wide range of products .
Finally , the additive PES should have its own E-number , as otherwise consumers might confuse it with E407 , which differs considerably from PES , both in the way it is made and in health terms .
The Breyer report is important , and we can only hope that sensible , restrictive Danish rules are not undermined by less consumer-friendly European legislation .
For the Danish consumer ( and especially those at risk ) , this would be nothing short of a catastrophe .
The effect of Mrs Breyer 's report is not to favour the development of a certain number of important food products .
For instance , certain amendments which the Committee on the Environment has adopted will cause very serious problems in the sector of low-fat dairy product manufacture or of dehydrated potatoes .
Our group has put down two very specific amendments concerning two different sectors of activity .
These two amendments illustrate the philosophy which , in our opinion , the directive concerning ingredients ought to have accepted .
The first amendment concerns the use of metatartaric acid at 50 mg / l , which makes manufacture of grape juice possible .
On 8 October last , the food technology commission published , an unambiguous opinion authorizing the use of metatartaric acid to preserve the natural acidity potential of fruits .
Since this metatartaric acid is not completely degraded , it must be considered as a food additive .
We all know that grape juice is an important outlet for European viticulture .
Metatartaric acid is used for many kinds of food production .
So why forbid it for grape juice ?
It is necessary to know that France represents 75 % of European production of grape juice .
I dare not think that the development of this production , which seems to meet the needs of consumers well , can be considered as undesirable competition , for instance , by the producers of orange juice , who mostly belong to other Member States and might wish to limit its growth in this way .
The second amendment concerns the use of potassium sulphate , which is necessary for manufacture of pre-packed bacon cubes .
The purpose of this amendment is to ensure the microbiological safety of the products .
It is necessary to know that there can often be contamination outward from the raw material itself .
The development of this germ must therefore be controlled , particularly if there is a break in the cold chain between manufacturer and consumer .
In conclusion , I wish to draw the attention of the House to the fact that standards must not be used with the intention of diverting parts of the market to the profit of competing companies in other Member States .
Also , in the name of badly understood consumer protection , the use of certain additives which are recognized as perfectly neutral by the scientific authorities should not be refused , to the detriment of food safety itself .
On this last point , I must remind you that the USA , which is often held up as an example for the sophistication of its food safety legislation , is one of the countries where the number of food poisonings is highest .
Wiebenga report ( A4-0284 / 97 )
Mr President , Europe has often been the scene of tragic events , which have forced people to flee their country to escape Communist repression : the crushing of the liberation movement in Hungary in 1956 , the suppression of the Prague Spring in 1966 .
Closer to us , the war in former Yugoslavia , which is also a sequel to a Marxist regime , has demonstrated the need to prepare for any eventuality .
All the more so because the situation in Algeria could be heavy with consequences for the European countries surrounding the Mediterranean .
In this context , whereas it may be desirable to organize cooperation among the nations which make up the European Union , it seems unimaginable to us that the possibility of recourse to a system of temporary protection can be imposed on a Member State by the device of a Council decision taken by qualified majority .
Can anyone fail to see that a massive flow of displaced people may undermine civil peace and the social and economic equilibrium of a nation which undergoes such an event ?
In this field , perhaps even more than others , the sovereignty of the States must be absolutely respected .
Besides , surely the system being proposed to us , when there is not even an international obligation , risks having a disastrously attractive effect , all the more so because no action to encourage return is provided ?
Hell is paved with good intentions , Mr President , and generosity which is not framed by reason can turn out to be more disastrous than anything .
For these reasons we have been unable to vote for the Wiebenga report .
The proposal for common action on temporary protection of displaced persons , addressed by the Commission to the Council , ought to alarm all responsible people who are concerned about the interests of our fellow citizens .
It is all the more disturbing because it reveals a constant state of mind in Brussels .
In the unfortunate event that the Treaty of Amsterdam is ratified , such proposals may , after five years , be adopted by the Council by qualified majority , by joint decision with the European Parliament and on the basis of the Commission having a monopoly of initiative .
What does this proposal for " joint action ' contain ?
A status to protect persons who are displaced by acts of war , who are liable to be received in our countries .
This category is different from that of asylum seekers , that is , people who are persecuted for their opinions , and who can take refuge with us under the convention of 28 July 1951 .
In fact , the spirit of this convention is aimed at individual cases .
Now , the situation which was confirmed at the time of the war in former Yugoslavia - and unfortunately there is a danger of it being reproduced in future in other countries - is no longer that of some intellectuals fleeing more or less dictatorial governments , but concerns very numerous population groups who have been uprooted by civil wars , and often have no link to either of the two camps .
This situation raises a new and very difficult problem , about which , let us emphasize , we are not at present under any international obligation .
Must we accept these new refugees without limit , knowing that their number may increase to many hundreds of thousands , or even millions ?
On the contrary , since these are no longer just individual cases , must we not search systematically for other solutions ?
And if so , what solutions ?
The question at least deserved to be put .
It would also have been nice to read somewhere in this document that the first criterion is the interest of the citizens of the countries of Europe - which we are charged to defend , I would remind those who forget it - , the second is the capacities for reception , and the third is the wish of the displaced persons to go here rather than there .
It is really astounding that there is no mention anywhere of the first two criteria .
Even worse , the legal framework which is proposed by the common action corresponds to harmonisation upwards , throughout Europe , of social rights , economic rights and the right of family reunion for displaced persons .
These advantages will hardly predispose them to leave again .
In any case , this is not apparently a concern of the authors of the text , who have only indicated , in article 4 of the draft , that " in organizing the return , priority will be given to the furtherance of voluntary repatriation , in close cooperation with the international organizations concerned ' .
Finally , the procedural problems are no less worrying .
If the Council adopts the general framework which is proposed today , the application of displaced person status to any group of refugees will be decided by majority .
Can France allow itself to be forced to receive refugees from distant wars merely because its partners in the Union have so decided ?
It would be absolutely contrary to our vital interests to abandon control of our territory in this way .
We will be told that this general framework which the Commission proposes still has to be adopted by the Council , which , according to the current rule of article K 3-2 ( b ) , must give a unanimous ruling .

This barrier is not as solid as is believed .
First , someone thought of consulting the European Parliament - when no text provides for it - no doubt with the purpose of putting more pressure on the Council .
We have seen today the subservience with which the House has joined in this game .
But the essential thing is something else . We must keep in mind the danger that the obstacle of unanimity on such plans will explode with the application of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Do the people of Europe want to put their fate in the hands of irresponsible people who also have the effrontery - they are so sure of themselves - to announce in advance the anti-national policy which they intend to put into effect ?
This is one of the essential questions to be put when ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam is debated .
We think the refugee issue and issues concerning displaced persons are of the utmost importance , and we are very protective of refugees and their rights .
However , we would like to see these matters coordinated at the level of the Council of Europe and not at EU level . And we would rather not see a harmonization of the various countries ' asylum and refugee policies .
We supported the report because it calls for the humanizing of the reception of refugees .
At the same time we want to stress that it should not be used as a pretext to weaken the Member States ' sovereign authority to decide their own immigration and refugee policy in accordance with the UN Convention .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the report on temporary protection for refugees .
The enormous masses of refugees from the war in Yugoslavia are still vivid in our memory .
In the light of this experience , we can understand why it is so important that we work together on this area .
These are people in need and we should be aware of our own humanitarian responsibilities .
The Commission 's proposals are good , as they give people in need the opportunity for being treated equally by the EU .
We can get certain minimum rights in the Community .
To us , it is important that a war in a country does not devastate its people 's future .
If they are allowed into the EU , they should also be able to get education and jobs .
But we would like to have seen the burden actually shared .
So we should also work towards an agreement which spreads refugees over the EU as soon as they cross the EU 's borders .
Everyone must realise they are responsible .
This will be in everyone 's best interests in the long run , both the Member States and the refugees .
In cases where nation states are unable to find solutions to asylum issues , among other things , these should be solved through the UN , the Council of Europe and through contacts with international refugee organizations .
The EU is not a state , but should strictly be intergovernmental cooperation .
The refugee issue is very much an international issue which , in cases which cannot be solved nationally , are too big to be limited to the EU .
My vision of a Europe of the democracies is that each and every one of the independent States should conduct a general , human refugee policy .
I have nothing against a protocol concerning temporary protection for displaced persons being added to the Convention on Refugees .
However , I do find it difficult to see why this is being discussed in the European Parliament .
It would , of course , be desirable if the Council could unanimously agree on minimum rights in connection with this issue .
( The sitting was suspended at 1 : 15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for motions for resolutions :
B4-0826 / 97 by Mrs André-Léonard , Mr Fassa and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on Afghanistan ; -B4-0840 / 97 by Mrs Karamanou , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the violation of women 's rights in Afghanistan ; -B4-0852 / 97 by Mrs Lalumière , Mr Dell 'Alba , Mr Dupuis and Mr Hory , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on Afghanistan ; -B4-0860 / 97 by Mrs Maij-Weggen , Mr Mann and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on Afghanistan ; -B4-0874 / 97 by Mrs Aglietta , Mr Van Dijk , Mrs Roth , Mr Gahrton , Mrs Schroedter , Mr Telkämper and Mr Ripa di Meana , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on Afghanistan ; -B4-0875 / 97 by Mr Sornosa Martínez , Mrs Pailler , Mrs Castellina , Mrs González Álvarez , Mr Papayannakis , Mrs Eriksson , Mr Ojala and Mr Gutiérrez Díaz , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Afghanistan ; -B4-0888 / 97 by Mr Pasty and Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on the situation in Afghanistan .
Madam President , Parliament must make a strong protest to the Taliban .
Commissioner Bonino 's arrest is a slap in the face for her important work on humanitarian aid to Afghanistan .
Partly because of the lack of response from the United States on Afghanistan , the Union has a particularly important role to play and we must be ready to play it .
We must use all our influence to improve human rights in that country and of course the Taliban 's unacceptable policy on human rights must be properly and consistently condemned .
In providing aid the Commission must work with NGOs which place human rights and equal treatment for men and women at the top of their agenda .
In the political sense we must stand firm in not recognizing the Taliban authorities .
The Union must take steps to restore peace .
Other countries must be persuaded to follow the same line .
Only a lasting peace can put an end to the continued suffering of the Afghan people .
And furthermore this is the only way we can put a stop to the growth in opium production and trafficking under the Taliban leadership and that is why an amendment has been tabled , which we shall be pleased to support .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the reverberations of the pain and grief , the fear , despair and screams of the women of Afghanistan have finally reached the European Parliament where they will be transformed , I believe , into a global message of solidarity , support and , above all , of action to halt the nightmare experienced by the people of Afghanistan under the irrational , bloodthirsty power of a band of young , illiterate fanatics , who , one year ago , took over two-thirds of the country and who claim to be acting in the name of Allah and Islam .
The power of the Taliban takes us back centuries , to the darkest years of the Middle Ages .
The lives of women there have been transformed into a tragedy which not even the imagination of the Ancient Greek tragic poets could ever have conceived of .
The Taliban did away with any notion of democracy and human rights in the country , depriving the women of any possibility of education , work , freedom of speech and movement , and even of the right to medical and pharmaceutical care , since the only general hospital in Kabul for women operates with inadequate electricity , water and medical equipment .
The women , living under this singular and abhorrent system of apartheid , are forced to wear the tobourka and to reduce going out of doors to a minimum , resulting in the appearance of osteopathies from lack of sunlight and vitamin D. By the way , what does the World Health Organization have to say about this ?
In Afghanistan , disobeying the authority of the extremists is tantamount to the death penalty . Women are flogged , sprayed with burning acid , stoned and murdered for crimes such as not having their ankles covered !
If their hands or face show , if they allow their children to play with toys , if they go to the market unaccompanied by a male relative , punishment is death by stoning , while television , radio , applause , photographs , singing and dancing are prohibited .
Girls who are victims of rape must , in accordance with the laws of the extremists , have four male witnesses to prove that they did not provoke the rape themselves !
Of course , such witnesses are never found .
In such an event the family is obliged to kill the girl , in order to protect its honour .
Horror and revulsion !
What twisted mind could think of all this at a time of technological revolution , and in the year 1997 ?
After all that , it is no wonder that the Taliban reached the point of attacking the Bonino Commission , the Commission responsible for the humanitarian aid which the European Union provides for the people of Afghanistan .
The Taliban , of course , maintain most vehemently that they are acting in the service of Islam .
However , we know that Muslim intellectuals throughout the world claim that Islam has nothing to do with all this .
The motive , of course , is power and the control of the country , of a country which has been struggling for eighteen years to find its way to democracy and progress .
To conclude , I would like to call on the Council of Ministers , the European Commission , the governments of Member States and the international organizations to stop all aid to Afghanistan , unless this aid goes directly to the nongovernmental organizations , and to undertake global action to resolve the political problems of Afghanistan through peaceful means , and to institute respect for human rights and democratic freedoms .
The Socialist Women 's International , of which I am Vice-President , has already begun to act in this regard .
Mrs Karamanou , I can understand that you are very keen to say a great deal , but if everyone were to overrun one minute we would need a third as much time again for our debate , and we are very short of time today .
So I really must ask speakers to keep to the time limit .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , our group modestly requested that following the mission of Mrs Bonino to Afghanistan a debate would be organized to listen to her directly , and to hear her impressions , particularly what she felt during the three hours she spent " in sheet metal ' , if I can put it like that , in the prisons of the Taliban .
But the big groups did not want that , so Commissioner de Silguy is now obliged to turn from his monetary preoccupations to devote himself to the Afghanistan file .
I thank him for being there .
And I thank the Commission for having had , through Emma Bonino , the courage to raise again the question of the Taliban and their mediaeval regime , which particularly oppresses Afghan women , as everyone knows , with a severity unparalleled in any other country .
I am very happy that the Commission has made this gesture .
It has reminded the European Union and the international community of their duties .
The Council must express itself , the Union must express itself , UN must take a clear position on the attitude to be adopted towards this regime .
The European Union must make its voice heard , particularly regarding the fate of Afghan women .
From this point of view , I am very happy that a paragraph of the resolution which we are going to approve shortly states that 8 March is a symbolic date to be dedicated to Afghan women .
I would like to ask Commissioner de Silguy , as a member of the Commission , what he thinks of this idea of the Parliament , if he can make it his own , and if we can see together how to ensure that 8 March 1998 is a day dedicated to Afghan women and thus to the freedom of women and men throughout the world .
Mr President , the detention of our European Commissioner Emma Bonino in Kabul a few weeks ago was not only an unheard-of diplomatic scandal and a tremendous insult to the European Union and Mrs Bonino , it was also a clear indication of how serious the situation is , particularly for women in that country .
Since the Taliban came to power there has been an unprecedented campaign of terror against women , young or old , married or widowed .
Women can no longer work , they have no right to education , access to health care is much more difficult for them , they are forced to cover themselves completely and when they have to go out it is under very strict conditions and only if accompanied by a male relative .
This can only be described as outright terror .
And we are also surprised that there has not so far been more protest in the world .
The treatment of Mrs Bonino , who has given so much help to Afghan refugees , should certainly reinforce the Union 's protest .
Mr President , another comment that follows on from what my Socialist colleague just said .
The Taliban 's treatment of women is really a disgrace to Islam as well .
It would be good if the Arab world could state more clearly that this is not what Islam ought to be .
However I think that in this case the Western democracies and the Arab democracies should unite in opposing this reign of terror because what is happening there is a disgrace to the Arab world and a disgrace to Islam .
Madam President , under the guise of Islam the Taliban regime is oppressing women in a truly horrendous fashion .
Of course we see women oppressed in other Muslim countries too but nowhere in as many ways as in Afghanistan .
This does not really have anything to do with Islam , it is simply an unprecedented abuse of power by the Taliban .
They are really nothing more than a bunch of ruffians who use this as a means of increasing their power .
An initiative is urgently needed to resolve the conflict in Afghanistan peacefully and ensure that human rights are restored .
It seems to me that a code of conduct is urgently needed for aid workers outlawing any form of sex discrimination in humanitarian aid work so that in any event we try to isolate the Taliban there .
This is an issue on which joint action by the Union is appropriate .
Madam President , Afghanistan is not returning to the Middle Ages : incredible as it may seem , it is regressing even further .
The Taliban regime is currently one of the most barbaric and anti-democratic in the world .
There are scores of clear and abhorrent examples of this , such as the total lack of women 's rights , the continuous violations of basic rights , and even , as we witness every day , the barbaric executions and punishments meted out to the civilian population : a civil population which barely survives in conditions of poverty and destruction , because , Madam President , the consequences of the civil war are being compounded by Taliban mis-government and the continuation of the Cold War .
I believe we must be quite clear : the Taliban are mainly to blame , but the international community and its leading members must begin to assume their responsibilities , because the mistakes of the 1970s , 1980s and 1990s are still being paid for today .
And we cannot restrict ourselves to condemning the atrocities of the Taliban and the treatment to which Commissioner Bonino was subjected . We must act .
And there are a number of very clear , simple and forceful things that we can do .
We can continually condemn the Taliban regime from the standpoint of the European Union and in the United Nations , and we can call on countries such as Pakistan , Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates , which have relations with the European Union , not to have diplomatic relations with the Taliban . If they fail to respond , we can bring some sort of pressure to bear on them .
In the context of the transatlantic relationship , which we talk about so much , we can ask the US Government to call on Pakistan , Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to say something about the Taliban regime . We can call for a genuine arms embargo , including the spare parts which keep the weapons in service , to be imposed once and for all ; we can call for aid to be granted to NGOs so that they can in turn directly aid the civilian population , employing a clear code of conduct ; and we can , of course , put the protection of women 's rights at the forefront of all our action .
There must be an international conference on Afghanistan ; and , Commissioner , I believe that it is time to decide on a European Union joint action in the context of the CFSP , to follow up Mrs Bonino 's bold , courageous and unequivocal actions .
Madam President , the situation on human rights in Afghanistan is growing increasingly threatening .
The population is suffering from the civil war , which has lasted nearly 20 years , with catastrophic economic results , and it is suffering under the self-aggrandisement and lack of human respect of the Civil War Party .
The Taliban is a stone-age fundamentalist regime .
Its politics are aimed at the female part of the population .
They are systematically excluded from public life by means of draconian measures . Medical assistance is forbidden , rape and terror of unbearable kinds are daily routine .
These self-styled holy wars have further victims : religious and ethnic minorities , the politically active and intellectuals .
In the Islamic world they are acknowledged only by Saudi Arabia and Pakistan .
This isolation shows that the Taliban is not so much interested in religion , as in power and money .
The European delegation in Afghanistan has shown how little they care for the Convention on Human Rights .
We must take care that with help from the European Union efforts are not relaxed , that the NGOs participate , and that this help takes concrete forms . We must strive to achieve a peaceful end to the conflict .
The Council of Ministers cannot remain uninvolved for much longer .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is very worried about the situation in Afghanistan , and our emotion , or rather disgust , about what happened when Mrs Bonino was arrested is surely only equalled by yours .
The pursuit of armed conflicts and the frequent violations of human rights by the various factions hit the civilian population hard , and the Commission is particularly worried by the position of women , whose status is more and more precarious , as rightly denounced by Mrs Karamanou .
The rigorous order which the Taliban have imposed restricts the fundamental rights of women and tends to make them second-class citizens .

Also , Mr Dell 'Alba , regarding paragraph 9 of the resolution , I can support with pleasure your proposal to devote special attention to the position of Afghan women on the next Women 's Day , 8 March 1998 .
Also , I can assure you , Mr Carnero González , that common action under the CFSP was already agreed on 18 October 1996 . It is in force and it was confirmed at the last meeting of the Foreign Affairs Council at the beginning of October .
Nevertheless , the Commission emphasizes the need for continuing the dialogue with the de facto authorities who control Kabul , and it insists on our moral obligation to continue our aid and humanitarian efforts through the NGOs .
Why continue the dialogue ?
Quite simply because to isolate Afghanistan today would inevitably favour a radicalization of the Taliban regime .
Indeed , hopes for liberalization are linked to resumption of the international dialogue , to the action of the United Nations , and of course to peace .
Also , we must continue to deliver humanitarian aid .
I would remind you that the European Union is the principal supplier of aid to Afghanistan , that all the aid which it grants goes through the NGOs , and that the allocated sums during the past two years amount to ECU 120 million .
I would therefore say that to interrupt the donation of aid when winter is approaching would aggravate the very difficult , not to say unbearable , situation of the civilian population .
Political considerations must fade away in the face of a simple fact : our failure to act would create many victims , which that country can do without !
In December 1996 , the European Union approved the embargo on arms supplies to Afghanistan .
The Commission wants that embargo extended to any country providing military assistance to the belligerents .
The UN is making significant efforts to find a peaceful solution .
These efforts must be encouraged .
However , signing a peace agreement - which you have mentioned several times - assumes that all the regional players directly or indirectly involved in the conflict are brought together .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0829 / 97 by Mrs Cars , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the situation in North Korea ; -B4-0841 / 97 by Mr Ford , Mr Malone , Mr Needle and Mr Thomas , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the famine in North Korea ; -B4-0853 / 97 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the famine and political situation in North Korea ; -B4-0861 / 97 by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , Mr Rinsche , Mr Decourrière and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the serious famine in North Korea ; -B4-0873 / 97 by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , Mrs Müller and Mr Holm , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the famine disaster in North Korea ; -B4-0876 / 97 by Mr Alavanos and Mrs Eriksson , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the famine in North Korea ; -B4-0889 / 97 by Mr Pasty and Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on the situation in North Korea
Madam President , North Korea fulfils all the classic requirements to be called a tyranny .
Even worse is the fact that it is a tyranny where power is handed down from father to son .
North Korea 's people are forced to live in a permanent disaster .
The information which leaks out indicates suffering on a vast scale .
Children are dying of starvation , and malnourishment has reached such proportions that there is a risk of cannibalism .
North Korea is like one huge concentration camp , in which the prisoners , that is , the citizens , are brutally abused , both physically and mentally .
The regime has closed the door and put on a blindfold .
The outside world must enable it to take care of those who are suffering and look its people in the eyes .
Let me add that it would be sad if there were Members of this Parliament who through misguided socialist solidarity closed their eyes to the suffering of the North Korean people .
Madam President , as someone who has visited North Korea , at my own expense , with two colleagues , Clive Needle and David Thomas , I am pleased to speak in this debate .
It is a sad country . The climate , culture and history have conspired against it .
They have had the worst floods in 63 years and the worst drought in 52 years in the last eighteen months .
The result has been that the daily distribution of food has shrunk from 700 grams a day to 500 , then to 300 and is now a starving 100 grams .
Since 1989 agricultural production has fallen by 50 % , production of coal by 65 % and fertilizer by 75 % .
During our visit they had the bizarre situation of being unable to mine coal because there was no electricity for the machinery to work .
The UN has recently indicated that 17 % of North Korean children are suffering from malnutrition .
We visited a children 's centre , a paediatric hospital , a series of orphanages and nurseries to see that for ourselves .
The NGOs on the spot , the UNDP , UNICEF , MSF , Children 's Aid Direct and representatives of the European Commission all confirm what we saw for ourselves .
Some would say : ' So what ?
It is the last of the Stalinist regimes ruled by a puppet king in control of the military which , according to the United States , has nuclear weapons . ' I would echo Mr de Silguy in the last debate .
It would be a crime against humanity to visit retribution on today 's children for yesterday 's perfidies .
Who would advocate infanticide as a new weapon of mass destruction ?
It is madness to drive a country with 1.5 million troops and nuclear weapons into a corner .
We can afford to put $ 4 000 million into the KEDO programme .
The USS Independence protecting us against North Korea and the Japanese is costing a $ 1 million a day .
The alternative is possible war , famine and pestilence .
A soft landing would suit us all .
That is why we will try to modify the resolution during the vote .
North Korea is slowly starting to open up .
The NGOs and the European Commission confirm this .
To push demands for immediate and complete access to a country still formally at war with its neighbour would be to ask them to open up more than South Korea .
It must open up and it is opening up - it won 't help to demand the impossible .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I challenge the idyllic picture which my predecessor has just painted of what is happening in North Korea .
The only thing missing was little angels floating by chirping and it would be perfect .
What is happening in North Korea today is the result of forty years of the maddest of regimes .
Ceaucescu almost seemed like a choirboy beside those who reign in North Korea , and some people want to make us believe , today , that the problem is merely one of drought , of shortage of food , whereas we are confronted by a crazy regime , which throws itself like the Pharaohs into projects in honour of Kim Il-Sung I , II and soon III .
We are confronted by an absurd regime , and some people - our socialist friends - claim that we must temper our resolution , that we must not bluntly condemn the government .
Perhaps we can criticize the North Korean authorities , but only a little .
This is really insanity .
We are asked for a separate vote on point 2 , the only purpose of which is that Western journalists should be able to go to North Korea and travel around there , to check whether , at least , the food aid does not finish in the pockets of the existing holders of power , but actually benefits those who need it .
We , the radicals , have introduced a little amendment so that , unless the situation in that country changes drastically , if no privatization or political reform is carried out there , it will be put under international supervision in six months , because it not only does not guarantee liberty , it does not even guarantee bread for its inhabitants .
Madam President , although we are concerned today with a degree of urgency about North Korea , we must still be absolutely clear that we are not discussing a normal country .
North Korea is a country which behaves as though it were free of all moral obligations .
It is a totalitarian state unlike any other .
It cannot be compared in its actions with any other country .
For this reason it is , in my opinion , quite wrong for us at a time when we are confronted with the biggest famine in the second half of this century , to try to convince some people that this is just a matter of catastrophic flooding , periods of drought and the like .
There was famine in North Korea even when these terrible environmental catastrophes were not taking place .
They just amplify what is taking place there .
Let us be honest with ourselves .
Even the Chinese now admit that this is due to the politics of North Korea , and these politics , Mr Ford , have not altered in recent times .
There has been famine much longer than just over the past four years .
The figures speak for themselves , even if they are not clear .
All NGOs active there , the various organizations already mentioned , give varying figures .
But every one of them talks of many millions of people subjected to this famine , of some 800 , 000 starving children , of the first evidence of cannibalism , and of aid being rejected again and again by North Korea as being political agitation .
That is not acceptable to us .
For that reason we must make a clear statement from this Parliament that we make both our short term and our long term aid subject to certain conditions .
Short term aid must be quite clearly subject to the condition that we say we want to know where our aid is ending up .
It is just not acceptable that the majority of the aid actually reaching North Korea really benefits the military and does not reach the civilian population in anything like the quantity required .
As for long term aid , it will also be necessary to make this dependent upon real improvements within the country .
I think the proposal by Mr Dupuis , that we should begin with the privatization of land , would be a very important example .
I think it is our duty as a Parliament to vote accordingly .
Madam President , the famine is growing worse .
And what is the regime in North Korea doing ?
It is making it difficult or even impossible for the aid which is arriving to be distributed in the country and so benefit the people .
That is something we can only condemn in the European Parliament .
The Commission must carry out a rapid expansion of its humanitarian aid , and at the same time develop a more long-term strategy to be able to prevent similar situations from arising in future .
The EU 's behaviour is , however , double-edged .
At the same time the EU is giving a huge amount of money to North Korea for the country to build two new nuclear power stations .
However , when the nuclear power stations have been built there will be no distribution network to distribute the electricity .
This is nothing but wasted money and a policy which the EU should not be involved with .
We should be helping the citizens of North Korea to survive the famine , not to build a load of nuclear power stations .
Madam President , as has been said , the people of North Korea are suffering from an unprecedented famine that is producing a real massacre .
The situation is worsened by the well-known closure policy of the Pyongyang government which prevents us appreciating the real extent of the food crisis affecting that country .
But the famine is very serious and we believe the Commission should give full food aid to the people of North Korea as a matter of urgency .
I hope that the Commission will answer this point clearly and will respond to the propaganda that has been made in this Chamber in the face of a tragedy : the propaganda of those who would like to see the aid given to a people subject to forcing a government we may condemn into political negotiations , without in any way altering the gravity of the situation .
We are all aware of the need for reforms in North Korea and I hope that these will take place shortly .
But I think that the urgent thing now is humanitarian aid and Europe cannot turn its back on this tragedy ; it would be very serious and would amount to complicity .
Madam President , first and foremost , this is a humanitarian problem . That should be the central concern of the European Parliament .
I thank my colleagues Mr Ford , Mr Thomas , Mr Needle and Mrs Malone for bringing back information concerning the famine in North Korea and for alerting us to the plight of starving children there .
I am glad that the EU has been the biggest donor to North Korea in recent times .
But I should like to make one political point : it is imperative to reconvene the talks between South and North Korea under the copresidency of the USA and China .
We must do everything in our power to encourage that search for political solutions .
I know that our colleagues in South Korea are keen for that to happen .
I hope that North Korea can reciprocate .
That must be the best mid-term hope for these starving children .
Madam President , I must say that it is not something that happens to me every day but this time I am in complete agreement with the resolution on the famine in North Korea .
So I would just like to say a few words about the amendments .
Firstly the three amendments by Mr Dupuis , which I consider a useful addition in that they refer more explicitly than the resolution itself to what is really responsible for this disaster : the communist regime in which the rulers and their families live in almost unbelievable luxury and the rest of the population in almost unbelievable poverty . Mr Ford did not mention the slow martyrdom of two hundred thousand political prisoners .
In fact the misery and famine were not caused by the devastating floods but mainly by the years of Stalinist government .
Nevertheless Amendment No 4 by the Group of the Party of European Socialists does not condemn the government but simply criticizes it .
Mr Ford usually uses slightly more forceful language , certainly where representatives of the democratic national right in Europe are concerned .
But now that we are talking about real political murderers and criminals on the left , Mr Ford suddenly tones his language down .
I find that very interesting .
Finally a word about the three Green Group amendments on American and European support for the building of two reactors .
It is not the first time the Green Group has dwelt on this subject .
Nor is it the first time that they have been mistaken , because the two new power stations are for the urgent replacement of two especially dangerous existing power stations which , furthermore , produce plutonium for the government for military use .
Anyone opposing the scheme is actually arguing for a new and perhaps even more dramatic Chernobyl .
For me the most important lesson today is the shamefaced but real solidarity that Mr Ford and the Group of the Party of European Socialists have with the monstrous communist regime in North Korea , a regime that they are not prepared to condemn but at most mildly criticize .
We shall not forget that .
Madam President , the isolationist policy of the North Korean government means that precise data on the extent of the humanitarian problem cannot be available .
Mr von Habsburg , the figures which are circulating for the number of famine victims are all estimates which are very difficult to verify .
However , it cannot be disputed that the situation is very worrying .
The European Union has been giving significant humanitarian aid since 1995 , the year in which Korea was the victim of serious floods .
This aid has been increased to meet the food shortage .
The total aid for 1997 thus rose to about 230 , 000 tonnes of cereal equivalent .
Part is distributed via the World Food Programme , and part bilaterally .
As well as this aid , there are specific nutritional programmes for children and a complete set of health aid actions , which are supplied by UNICEF and the various NGOs , Médécins Sans Frontières , the International Federation of the Red Cross , etcetera .
Today , Mr Pettinari , the European Union , with ECU 66.5 million , is the biggest aid donor to North Korea .
Independent checkers are working in the country , in close collaboration with the World Food Programme , UNICEF and the NGOs , to ensure that our aid is used effectively , and of course to ensure that it is not deflected from its purposes .
The Commission has successfully adopted a firm position so that the monitoring teams can work without hindrance .
The result of these urgent actions is positive .
The officials of the World Food Programme estimate that the nutritional state of young children has improved .
Nevertheless , the food situation of Korea remains - and I share the feelings of many of you - very difficult .
Additional aid measures may have to be adopted in the coming months .
For this , the Commission is waiting for the result of the research by FAO and the World Food Programme on the quality of the harvests in Korea .
But it is clear - and I believe that here I am associating myself with a comment by Mr Dupuis - that economic reforms are necessary .
I would also say that political reforms are necessary to solve the structural deficit of food production in North Korea .
Aid relieves the risk of famine , but does not cure the evils which cause it .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0825 / 97 by Mrs André-Léonard , Mr Fassa and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the withdrawal of the UN investigation team from Congo ; -B4-0832 / 97 by Mrs Aelvoet and Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the UN mission of inquiry in Congo ; -B4-0850 / 97 by Mr Dury and Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the refusal to allow a UN mission of inquiry in the Democratic Republic of Congo ; -B4-0856 / 97 by Mr Hory , Mr Dell 'Alba and Mr Dupuis , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the UN mission of inquiry into human rights violations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ; -B4-0863 / 97 by Mr Chanterie , Mr Stasi , Mr Tindemans , Mr Verwaerde , Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo ; -B4-0877 / 97 by Mr Pettinari , Mr Carnero González , Mr Ojala and Mr Sjöstedt , on behalf of the Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the UN International mission of inquiry into human rights violations in the former Zaire ; -B4-0890 / 97 by Mr Pasty and Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ; -B4-0830 / 97 by Mr Bertens and Mrs Larive , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the European Union 's position on the promotion of human rights in China ; -B4-0847 / 97 by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on promotion of human rights in China ; -B4-0855 / 97 by Mr Dupuis , Mr Dell 'Alba and Mr Hory , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the EU 's position on the promotion of human rights in China ; -B4-0862 / 97 by Mr McMillan-Scott and Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the EU 's position on the promotion of human rights in China ; -B4-0872 / 97 by Mrs Aglietta and Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the promotion of human rights in China ; -B4-0828 / 97 by Mrs Cars and Mr La Malfa , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the situation in Kosovo ; -B4-0837 / 97 by Mrs Aelvoet , Mr Cohn-Bendit , Mr Gahrton , Mrs Müller and Mr Tamino , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in Kosovo ; -B4-0848 / 97 by Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Kosovo ; -B4-0854 / 97 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in Kosovo ; -B4-0865 / 97 by Mrs Oostlander , Mrs Pack , Mr Habsburg-Lothringen , Mrs Maij-Weggen , Mr Posselt and Mrs OomenRuijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in Kosovo ; -B4-0878 / 97 by Mr Manisco , Mr Sjöstedt , Mrs Sierra González and Mr Mohamed Alí , on behalf of the Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on human rights violations in Kosovo ; -B4-0858 / 97 by Mr Pradier , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the conditions in Khiam detention centre ; -B4-0864 / 97 by Mr Soulier and Mrs Peijs , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation of Souha Bechara , held in prison in southern Lebanon ; -B4-0879 / 97 by Mr Wurtz , Mrs Castellina , Mr Marset Campos , Mrs Miranda , Mr Ephremidis , Mr Alavanos and Mrs Seppänen , on behalf of the Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the release of Souha Bechara ; -B4-0849 / 97 by Mrs Hoff , Mr Wiersma , Mr Bösch and Mr Swoboda , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the political situation in Slovakia ; -B4-0827 / 97 by Mrs André-Léonard , Mr Fassa , Mr Bertens and Mr Nordmann , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on Algeria .
Democratic Republic of Congo
Madam President , on 3 October last , the United Nations Mission for Human Rights was called to the UN headquarters for consultations .
The Congolese Government , in fact , was preventing it from investigating the alleged massacres in the country .
The High Commission for Refugees and many non-governmental organizations decided to suspend their operations in the eastern part of Congo and were then forced to leave the territory .
It is fairly difficult , if not impossible , for the new Congolese authorities to be able to run their country on the path of democracy and development without European Union aid .
But we cannot fail to stress that they should earn this Union aid , respecting human rights , the fundamental principles of democracy and , above all , cooperating constantly , and with no uncertainties and obstacles , with those who are there to help them .
Madam President , we regret the complete absence of any readiness for cooperation by the Congolese Government , and should like to express our deep concern about the departure of the UN mission of inquiry from the Democratic Republic of Congo .
This delegation arrived on 24 August and was forced to leave Kinshasa again on 3 October .
I think that only damages the peaceful future development of Congo .
We should like to emphasize that the UN measures must be carried out , and appeal to President Kabila to cooperate fully with the UN mission of inquiry , and to permit it unlimited and unconditional access to the interior of the country .
Otherwise , Congo is threatened with isolation and that would also endanger the resumption of cooperation .
We acknowledge that European cooperation with the new Congolese Government and authorities is crucial to promoting democratization and development of the country , which has to recover from dictatorship and war .
We further stress that prerequisites for such cooperation must be the maintenance of human rights , democratic institutions and international law .
These requirements must be met , and the UN is an important institution for that .
I hope that Mr Kabila is ready for cooperation in this respect in future .
Madam President , first of all , let there be no ambiguity about our move .
We are intervening in defence of human rights , and perhaps we should state clearly that we are delighted that the Mobutu regime has ended .
We hope that this will be of benefit to the whole population of Congo , and after all , that is what we must get to work on .
It is true that the new regime must be clear from now on about respect for human rights , and it would really be a pity if Kabila wastes the opportunity which the mission of inquiry offers , because this must produce the truth about the killings and massacres which have actually occurred .
We know that Mrs Bonino has also brought us evidence about this .
We really want the mission of inquiry to be able to work .
This has not been the case until now , and we regret it .
We regret it for obvious reasons , because we think that a regime cannot base its authority or create international confidence unless it is based on the common values of respect for human rights .
So we say to Mr Kabila : open your borders , let us do the inquiry , which will be done objectively , and then , together , we will try to reconstruct Congo with all the aid which the European Union can provide .
Truly , we have here only one concern , which is the fate of the Congolese and their marvellous country .
Madam President , with the members of my group and most Members of this Chamber , I certainly associate myself with the criticism which has been made of the obstacles which the authorities of the Democratic Republic of Congo have put in the way of the United Nations mission of inquiry .
I also associate myself with the feelings of everyone at the fate of the civilian Rwandan refugees , who were hostages of the former Rwandan and Zairean dictatorships for so long .
I want to thank Mrs Dury for the details she has just provided about these dictatorships , because in the end I cannot help comparing the interest which our Chamber is bringing to the situation in former Zaire and its lack of interest in , for instance , Congo Brazzaville .
On one side , we condemn every month those who have been able to raise an army of liberation , supported by the population , to destroy a tyranny which several Member States of the Union had protected for thirty years , in the name of mutual corruption .
On the other side of the river , a dictator who was driven out at the ballot box returns to power by force , and thanks to the help of several foreign states , and in this case we find nothing to say in our emergency resolutions .
Anyone would think there is no emergency in that situation !
If we want to keep some credibility in our interventions , we must be careful in future to treat attacks on human rights and democracy equally .
Madam President , many of us had hoped that the end of the Mobutu dictatorship would bring the new Congo to greater democratic achievements and development .
However , since the first moves made by President Kabila , it seems to be necessary to continue with an active and firm policy with regard to the new Kinshasa authorities .
The European Union cannot , in fact , accept that the Congolese President is defying the entire international community and preventing a United Nations mission from investigating accusations made against the Kinshasa Government for making indiscriminate massacres in eastern Zaire .
Europe should make respect for international legality and the implementation of the UN mission in Kivu a fundamental condition for the resumption of cooperation with the Democratic Republic of Congo .
And so it seems advisable to us for the Commission , and above all the Council , to coordinate this necessarily firm position with the United States , so that President Kabila does not have any way out and can be forced , by the international and European initiative , to observe at least some of the rules of democracy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has been taken in by President Kabila , who never intended to agree to anything democratic .
Today 's resolution did not need to express indignation , simply to call for the aid to be stopped .
Aid to an absolute ruler is money wasted .
We found that before with Mobutu .
This debate is supposed to be topical .
I am certainly glad that I have a colleague who shares my opinion .
Today we should have talked about the other Congo , Congo Brazzaville .
What has happened to the protests from the Commission and Parliament against military intervention in the country by neighbouring Angola , against a dictator it is true .
We give a great deal of money to Angola as well .
I did not think EU money was intended to fill the humanitarian gap that has opened up since the government in Rwanda hired hundreds of mercenaries , allocated the oil revenue to weapons from Russia and ordered 130 aircraft in America in order to rush to the aid of its neighbour .
I am in favour of maintaining public support in Europe for humanitarian aid to Africa and we cannot do that if we continue to support despots in Africa .
Commissioner , I urge you to dissociate yourself from African despots .
Madam President , Mr Tindemans has asked me to represent him .
I should just like to say that although Mr Kabila 's second name is Desiré , he would not be our first choice of candidate for President .
He was brought top power by American commercial interests , and we Europeans have the task of taking energetic steps to see that even worse violations of human rights than in the Mobutu era do not occur . We should also be insisting that the United States of America work with us within the framework of Atlantic cooperation .
This concerns support for the position of the UN Commission , but also an energetic human rights policy , without which chaos will break out in the most central , most important country in Central Africa , which is also the largest and richest in raw materials .
China
Madam President , at the meeting of the UN Commission on Human Rights last March the Union staked everything on its relationship with China and the credibility of its human rights policy .
Because of the discord between Member States the UN missed an opportunity to expose human rights violations .
But another result of the discord was that China was able to punish a number of Member States with impunity .
The lack of unity made the Union a very weak partner for China .
Now the Union has to show that it has learned its lesson .
The Maastricht Treaty requires that Union should have an active common human rights policy .
The events of March , as I said , showed that this can only be done jointly .
To make that possible the Union now has to start the preparatory discussions on a Community framework before the next meeting of the Commission on Human Rights .
The resumption of the political dialogue with China is welcome but national positions need to be harmonized .
We hope that this resolution is an important signal and at the same time an invitation to the Council to explain what has happened in order to avoid a repetition of the debacle a couple of months ago .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Unionist Party has therefore decided this morning to request an oral question with debate next month , so that the Council can explain its strategy .
Hopefully it will then become clear that the Council has also learned its lesson .
Both human rights policy and an unequivocal relationship with China are more important for the Union than dancing to the tune of China 's rulers .
Madam President , some people have one minute worth and speak for two .
I shall endeavour to keep to the two minutes .
I should like to concur with what Mr Bertens has said .
We need to have a common approach , a common opinion .
Although the European states have been unable to achieve that , at least we should do so in the European Parliament .
Today we have a resolution which in my view makes a common opinion possible .
You are aware that we have had a series of resolutions to which I , on behalf of my party , was unable to give consent . This was because human rights have been bound up here with a series of political questions on which one may legitimately have a variety of opinions .
I believe that the human rights question in China is so urgent - and not just for the principle of maintaining human rights , but also for the healthy economic and social development of China itself - that it is right for us to take this initiative .
It must be our obligation - and for this we need a dialogue with China - to convince the Chinese side that as long as human rights are not widely recognized , as long as there is no progress in this respect , there cannot be the necessary advances in economic and social systems .
A society which does to acknowledge human rights , in which they are spurned , cannot be a society that meets with broad acceptance and it simply cannot organize all human resources to achieve economic progress .
Of course , economic progress in China continues apace , but that will soon meet limits if the process of economic development does not give rise to better conditions .
For these reasons the proposals we have produced should be fully supported , and I hope that at least in this House a unified and critical , though frank and solid , front can be presented to China .
Madam President , I note the good resolutions by Mr Swoboda .
Above all , I note the excellent proposal by Mr Bertens , of the liberal group , with a view to a statement by the Council for the next part-session .
I think my group will fully associate itself with it .
We must really get a move on so that we are not taken for a ride by the Council , like last year .
We must obtain either a clear position saying that there will be no resolution , thus showing that the European Union speaks a double language , with fine speeches about human rights when there are speeches to be made , but nothing concrete when the opportunity presents itself , or a change of position by five states which I shall name - Italy , France , Great Britain , Greece and Spain - which finally rejoin the ten other Member States and fight for the European Union to position itself clearly on the question of human rights .
A question which has been made even more relevant in recent days by President Jiang Zemin , who has spoken of the differences of rights depending on where one is on the planet .
We know what that means .
I believe that it is particularly difficult , Mr Swoboda , to talk of dialogue under these conditions .
Madam President , as colleagues will recall , we adopted a resolution in my name in this House on the subject of EU-China relations in the long term just before the summer break .
That report dealt with a very wide spectrum of relationships : the economic , the political and , of course , the question of human rights .
The fundamental point is that human rights in China remain absolutely dire .
Last year there were 6 , 000 death sentences which is equivalent to the total for rest of the world .
The European Union , represented by the Commission on this occasion , has recently come to an agreement under which the human rights troika , in other words the dialogue between China and the European Union , will be resumed without conditions .
I congratulate the Commission on this achievement , in particular Sir Leon Brittan , because this means that we can once again engage in discussions about these very sensitive subjects .
Most importantly , because there are no conditions , it allows the European Union to proceed , if it wishes - and I hope it does - by tabling a resolution in Geneva at the next session next year to redeem our failure last year : the CFSP came under a lot of criticism because we could not unite on this question .
While recognizing many Member States have deep economic ties with China - and these are developing - we should not go down the road the Americans are going down , which is almost to ignore the question of human rights and the political dimension in favour of economic ties .
China takes Europe quite seriously , but not perhaps as seriously as it should .
I should like to tell the Commissioner here this afternoon that last year Mr Qian Qichen , the Foreign Minister of China , said that he could only take the European Union seriously when it had a single currency .
I would like him to bear that in mind .
Madam President , I agree with the speakers who find that not an awful lot has happened with regard to human rights in China .
I have here the latest report from Human Rights Watch on human rights in China in 1997 .
It shows that not very much has really happened .
It is therefore obviously reasonable for us to adopt a resolution like the one I have signed here today .
At the same time I must admit that I was given something to think about the other day when Professor Tommy Koh , who is the director of the Asia-Europe Foundation in Singapore , was here in the European Parliament and commented on our way of dealing with China .
He supported all the substance of our criticism of China , but questioned the methods .
We must recognize that this is perhaps the fortieth resolution criticizing China which the European Parliament has adopted in a very short space of time .
The effect which we can observe has been limited .
We should criticize China , but we should still think about how we should improve our way of dealing with the Chinese so that we also bring about better human rights in China .
Mr President , when I met the new Chief Executive of Hong Kong , Tung Chee-hwa , earlier this week , I raised a number of concerns relating to recent developments there which do not augur well for the protection of human rights .
I questioned the narrowing of the franchise for next May 's election in the former colony which will result in only 180 , 000 of the 2.7 million voters being able to vote .
The use of universal suffrage would be more appropriate .
The introduction of the concept of national security into legislation is also a retrograde step , in particular if it is going to be used to restrict basic freedoms and especially the right of political dissent .
The repealing of four labour laws on 16 July by the Provisional Legislative Council was also discussed .
These laws protected basic trade union rights and their removal is a very worrying development .
We had a very frank exchange of views and as Parliament 's rapporteur for Hong Kong I intend to monitor the situation very closely to ensure that basic human rights and freedoms are not eroded .
But I would also say that I very much appreciate that when Mr Tung came to visit the European Union , his first stop was the European Parliament .
I thank him for according our institution that respect .
Kosovo
Mr President , we in this Parliament have often , far too often , been forced to observe Serbia 's unjust oppression of the Albanian population in Kosovo .
In spite of agreements entered into , the Serbs deny the Albanians , that is , the majority population in Kosovo , the education and culture they have a right to .
Peaceful demonstrations are crushed by an excess of police violence .
We , who are elected representatives of the people of Europe , demand of Serbia that the government initiates negotiations with the Kosovo Albanian leaders about the future status of the region as soon as possible , and that it immediately gives the EU the right to open an office in Pristina .
We remind honourable Members of our proposal for an international conference concentrating on the Kosovo issue .
Must thousands of people always have to die before the outside world acts ?
It would be wonderful if our resolution led to results now .
But if that does not happen , we must never tire .
In our battle for human rights , Kosovo still stands high on our agenda .
Mr President , no-one in this Chamber is unaware that the Kosovo problems are closely connected with the general problem in the Balkans and the fact that the Albanian communities present in Yugoslavia and Macedonia are closely connected with the problems in Albania .
Having an attitude that takes these problems into account and that guarantees respect for minorities wherever they are is an element of stability and security in that highly risky area .
For this reason , we can only deplore the fact that the student demonstrations have been blocked totally unacceptably with police intervention by the Serbian Government .
For these reasons , we confirm the need , as already stated , to open a European Union office in Pristina , we confirm the need for respect for that dialogue and those agreements already effected between Milosevic and Rugova that should guarantee the opening and maintenance of university education systems for the Albanian minority .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately , we must deal once more with Kosovo , which is still a powder keg , and probably the most dangerous powder keg in Europe .
Recent developments have been far from positive when we look at incidents on Pristina in Kosovo itself , and when we see what tendencies the Serb elections have partially reinforced . They have unfortunately shown that the opposition in Yugoslavia has not been strengthened in any way , nor has it found a way of creating a democratic policy which also respects human rights .
The glimmer of light emanating from Montenegro is not sufficient to alter and improve the situation to any important extent .
There is no alternative for the Yugoslav authorities to starting a dialogue that takes account of the basic rights of the minority in Yugoslavia - which forms the majority in Kosovo , after all .
It is not the intention of this Parliament or of the European Union to call for alterations to borders .
On the contrary , we must clearly signal that the borders of European states are not up for discussion .
There must be within Yugoslavia , however , a solution achieving real autonomy and real maintenance of human and civil rights .
It is also important because there are developments in nearby Macedonia and FYROM that give cause for concern .
Although these are not comparable with what is going on in Kosovo , they do lead to unrest amongst the very large Albanian minority .
Some of the draconian punishments , though , appear to me to be too strict and too unproductive .
The Kosovo powder keg can at any rate have an effect on surrounding areas and states .
All the more important that we strive by every possible means to convince Yugoslavia that it must solve its own problems , particularly in Kosovo , with our help .
Mr President , on the subject of Kosovo , as just now on the subject of Congo , I would like to try to go against the dominant ideas .
I do not underestimate the democratic problems which may occur in Kosovo , or the possible attacks on human rights , but I want , once again , to warn against the temptation , to which the majority of this House is subject , of demonizing Serbia .
I would suggest that there will be no stable peace in the Balkans if the Serbs are kept apart from their history and their future .
I now put three simple questions . Which of our states would allow the interference in its internal affairs which we commit every month in Serbian affairs ?
Secondly , whether it is the territorial limits of Bosnia yesterday , or the autonomy of Kosovo today , if we are so attached to the guarantees laid down by the laws of Yugoslavia , why were we so eager to dismember Yugoslavia ?
Finally , in encouraging the aspirations of the Albanians of Kosovo for autonomy , without any precautions , are we not taking the risk of feeding the implacability of Albania , and thus bringing all the borders of the region into question ?
I propose to you that we leave anti-Serbian manicheism behind , and work seriously for a peace which is real because it is equitable , rather than a partisan destabilization .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately I do not have enough time to answer Mr Hory .
I should have been delighted to do so .
I have not heard so much nonsense all at one time for years .
As I know the area better than Mr Hory - I have been in it constantly for seven or eight years - I have long been afraid that the dead quiet existing in Kosovo is about to come to a very bloody end .
There is about to be full retribution taken for the fact that the Western nations have been averting their eyes for eight years .
No one has so far made any attempt there to help the Albanians , who for the past eight years have been beaten , tortured and robbed of their most basic human rights .
And that is without even mentioning the fact that no one has attempted to restore to the Albanians in Kosovo , where they represent a 90 % majority , the rights stolen from them by Milosevic .
Our Western governments even forge agreements with Serbia for the return of the Kosovo refugees , a return to their executioners .
Unlike the USA , all European governments have unfortunately recognized Yugoslavia without the stipulation that steps for a solution of the Kosovo crisis had to be taken .
Unfortunately , the USA - like everyone else - also failed at Dayton .
Kosovo should have been on the table at Dayton , as this would have been the only way for Milosevic to learn that we are intent on seeing that people are not treated in the way they have been for years in Kosovo .
For seven years there has only been a shadow of an education system in this area , whose diplomas have no validity .
Young people are being defrauded of their future , and I am afraid that it will be just these young people who will one day be revenged on us .
Young people form a high proportion of the Albanian population .
We are sinning against it ; we , and particularly the Serbian Government in Yugoslavia .
I hope that perhaps an opportunity will emerge from Montenegro to ensure that Yugoslavia organizes itself in such a way , that everyone who lives there can be subject to democratic government .
Mr President , western policy with regard to Kosovo is an accessory to murder .
Eight years ago Milosevic unlawfully occupied Kosovo .
Yugoslavia was destroyed by Milosevic and the Serbs when in 1988 , in violation of the Yugoslavian constitution , they removed Kosovo 's autonomy .
Since then they have been governed by a brutal police regime .
We have got to do something at last .
First of all , we must use pressure , not just eyewash , to see that at long last an office is opened there , similar to the one the Americans were able to establish in Kosovo without any difficulty .
We snivel , but we do nothing .
We have got to use pressure .
Secondly , we must supervise elections there with international observers .
That is essential , otherwise the police state will not disappear .
And thirdly , we must again use pressure to force Mr Milosevic to keep his vague promise to Mr Rugova , because Mr Rugova , like Ghandi , chose the non-violent approach .
We denounced him , so the young people there are resorting to weapons .
That is our fault and there is blood on our hands to this day .
Mr President , the situation in Kosovo has two features .
There is no contact between the Albanian population and the authorities and both parties are , so to speak , caught up in their own rhetoric and in the Balkans in particular you cannot risk loss of face by negotiating with anyone .
Recently the students have also entered into the picture , alongside political leaders like Rugova and Demaci .
There is more and more talk of attacks , even on refugees who have settled in the area and in my view leaders like Rugova and Demaci do too little to distance themselves from this .
With the introduction of the idea of autonomy in the area , the parties have also become enmeshed in their own positions and in this case you cannot , as it were , negotiate with the enemy without that well-known loss of face .
They say that the Serbs do want to talk about a solution but not about political status for Kosovo .
The Albanians first want their conditions met .
It seems to be time for the EU to mediate in absolute secrecy , gradually establishing positions which are then signed by both sides .
Then it might be possible to introduce the idea of autonomy , with the Albanians having their own identity but probably under the Serbian government .
EU mediation could be very significant here .
Belgrade will not be forced .
We know that from experience .
But Belgrade might be persuaded , and at any rate it is worth a try .
Souha Bechara
Mr President , throughout the case of Souha Bechara , it is in fact the state of lawlessness prevailing in that region which has to be condemned .
Between the territories where Lebanese legality applies and the territories of the south where law emerges under the democratic control of Israel , there is an area which in principle is Lebanese , but which in reality is controlled by a few warlords who are fed , armed , paid and commanded by Israeli soldiers .
But since this area is an area of lawlessness , where the arbitrary will of those who are armed rules , they arrest , they imprison , they even execute , without any complaint from anyone .
There is one prison , at Khiam , under this lawless regime .
Souha Bechara , a girl who admittedly attempted an act of tyrannicide on the person of one of these warlords , has been detained there for almost ten years .
This prison must be demolished , and the detainees must be transferred to a legitimate jurisdiction .
The major role the Israeli Government plays in the region identifies it as the one whose duty it is to end this disgrace .
Mr President , eight years ago , on 25 May 1989 , the European Parliament drew attention in a resolution to the case of Souha Bechara .
She has now been in prison for nine years .
She was 21 when she went in .
She is now no longer a girl but a young woman of thirty who has no idea what will happen to her because in all those years she has not had a trial . I think she is guilty but everyone , guilty or not guilty , has the right to a trial , including this young woman .
Guilty or not , and I think she is guilty , that is not the point , no one denies that , not even her mother , but her mother would like to see her again , and I think that is what we are asking for this afternoon .
The family has no access , the lawyers have no access , the Red Cross has no access .
I do not think that is what we mean by legal proceedings .
Mr President , we are asking you to inform the Israeli Government of what is going on so that it can take firm and positive action as a constitutional state .
Mr President , I have read the motion for a resolution on the Slovak Republic with interest .
I have something to say against it , however , and that is that insufficient differentiation is made between the Slovak peoples and their current tyrants .
Those of us who are older , those who have some experience of dictatorships , know very well that whilst there are guilty people , there is also a wider population that one cannot necessarily punish for the fact that some monster has gained power .
That particularly applies to the situation on Slovakia .
For that reason I have to say with regret that I shall have to reject two of the amendments .
They are Amendment Nos 7 and 8 , which go too far in identifying President Kovacs with Mr Meciar .
Meciar is one thing , Kovacs quite another .
Kovacs is on the side of the people .
We should do everything possible for the people , but we should resist tyrants .
Mr President , if there is one point on which the European Union cannot compromise in its relations with associated countries , it is that of human rights and democracy .
The case of Mr Gaulieder , who has been ousted from the Slovak parliament , is the last in a long series of examples which are enough to show that Slovakia is doing everything to mortgage its relationship with the European Union , to which it is linked by an association agreement .
In Agenda 2000 , the Commission does not mince words in denouncing the behaviour of Slovakia .
It is pointless to add that the request for Slovakia to join the European Union must remain a dead letter for as long as this state does not resolve to adopt behaviour which is worthy of a state of law and compatible with the Copenhagen criteria , which is a precondition of starting the accession process .
The effect of the irresponsible and unacceptable role of some Slovak institutions is to isolate Slovakia even more , and as some of the speakers before me have emphasized , this is to the detriment of the Slovak people .
Mr President , the Joint Parliamentary Committee with Slovakia produced a specific working programme last spring .
This was unanimously accepted by both sides .
Slovakia is certainly welcome as a member ; its economic development in particular is very satisfactory .
The Gaulieder case , the question of minorities , the treatment of the opposition , the election laws and one or two other things give cause , however , for considerable doubt .
If the required points are not put into action by the end of November as agreed , this will lead to serious problems .
The European Union can wait .
That will not be a problem for the European Union .
But I think that those members of government who are responsible for it will present the bill to the Slovak people , and obviously vice versa .
Mr President , I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in the debate as I am the second vicechairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee with Slovakia .
It is absolutely right that Parliament should , at this stage , make it perfectly clear to the government that we expect democratic standards to exist in that country .
Those certainly were the requirements that were imposed by the Joint Parliamentary Committee and agreed unanimously with our Slovak colleagues : that by the end of November , they would establish certain criteria for democracy in that country .
Sadly , the Gaulieder example demonstrates that , to date , they have not arrived at that position .
Having said that , I think we should always make it perfectly clear that our conflict is with the government of Slovakia , not with the people of Slovakia .
We should also make it perfectly clear that we regard , in the European Union , it as important that the people and the country of Slovakia should ultimately achieve their rightful place inside the European Union .
We would be pleased to see the people of Slovakia inside the EU .
Algeria
Mr President , on Wednesday morning , our Chamber approved a resolution on Algeria being put down in the emergency debate .
Two hours later , the Group of the European People 's Party , which had accepted the debate , retracted on the grounds that it had voted by mistake .
Mr President , is it credible that , on a subject as serious as the crisis which is raging in Algeria , a whole group should vote by mistake ?
I doubt it .
Have we the right to remain silent on Algeria when we intervene all over the world ?
Some people think our resolution of September is enough , that the public hearing with the Algerian authorities and civil society , scheduled for 25 November , could be compromised if we express ourselves today , that the ad hoc parliamentary delegation could be cancelled .
I say that these are excuses .
We must have the courage to express ourselves , and to say loudly and clearly that we want the truth .
By being silent , we become accomplices .
No newspaper today is silent on Algeria .
Libération puts it on page one , and asks the question : ' Who is doing the killing in Algeria ? ' Unbearable tales of the barbarism which rages daily are told by the entire press , crushing evidence denounces the military for being passive , if not for being implicated .
This is impossible to verify unless an international inquiry is quickly put in place .
But the Algerian authorities systematically reject any inquiry , on the grounds that it would be an interference in Algerian internal affairs .
Three countries - France , Italy and Spain - have requested that the European Union form a crisis unit , to define a common position and action on Algeria .
The UN and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights have called for the opening of a dialogue , and some people want the European Parliament to be silent !
No , no , no !
No more standing still !
The European Union must declare itself !
Algeria is a Mediterranean partner .
Our cultural , economic and historical links oblige us to act .
The silence of the European Council is unacceptable .
The international community has the instruments to intervene , and above all to unfreeze the Algerian crisis .
The United Nations can send a mission of inquiry , invoking the fact that there is a threat to peace , and the Algerian authorities cannot oppose it if the UN Security Council authorizes it .
Today , for the fourth time in two years , the Algerians are voting .
The indifference of the population is obvious and entirely understandable .
They have been given a glittering picture of peace , and they have had nothing but war !
Since 1991 , neither the military nor the authorities in power have succeeded in restoring calm .
I will willingly give the benefit of the doubt to President Zeroual , on condition that he accepts light being shed on the massacres , that the guilty are judged and sentenced , that he is ready to reconsider his position on the eradication of terrorism , and finally that he accepts freedom of expression , and thus of the press .
Mr President , a state of law must guarantee the security of its citizens .
Let him quite simply act so that Algerian society can live at last .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs André-Léonard , I think the last part-session of this Parliament must have passed you by , at least as far as Algeria is concerned .
We did not vote yesterday as a united group .
We were against it because we had already passed a resolution on Algeria last time , after a full debate .
During that the hearing on human rights was agreed , which we obviously not only accept fully , but will also take very seriously . Furthermore , Parliament resolved to send a delegation to Algeria .
Unfortunately - I have to address this critical remark to the Presidency - such resolutions of Parliament have to travel a long road , and I do not understand why the Presidency and the Council of Presidents have had to delay and are still delaying , and have to await the hearing .
Here I agree with Mrs André-Léonard .
The problem is so urgent and so serious , and long discussions with the Algerian Government and Parliament will probably be necessary in any case before we can send this delegation , that I do not understand why there is delay .
We could probably have dispensed with today 's resolution and another short debate , were the House to react more speedily to its own wishes .
It surprises me somewhat , as a relative newcomer , that this House passes a resolution , and yet there is still a committee saying : all right , do we want it or not ; perhaps it should be deferred ?
If this House expresses the genuine , clear wishes of several - indeed , many - groups , then surely these should be carried out as quickly as possible .
Now a short comment on the declaration itself . I completely agree with the contents .
This is an unacceptable situation .
We must make the Algerian Government aware that this is not just an internal problem , but one for the whole Mediterranean region .
So we will not cease supporting efforts to seek a settlement of the situation in Algeria .
Mr President , the situation in Algeria remains serious and is totally unacceptable .
The EU and this Parliament are rightly concerned , as recorded in the resolution adopted in the last part-session .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , we are on the eve of a hearing currently being planned by the Sub-Committee on Human Rights , a hearing on human rights in that country .
The Algerian Foreign Minister will shortly be coming to the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
The Sakharov prize might be awarded to an Algerian woman - I think she has a good chance .
It is my group 's view that we first have to take these steps before moving on to the initiatives proposed in the resolution - however sensible these might be in the future .
We see the resolution adopted last month as relevant and balanced and therefore cannot support this resolution today .
Mr President , during the September part-session - as we have been reminded - Parliament adopted a resolution on Algeria which asked the Algerian government to intensify the dialogue with all the political forces and national democratic elements which reject the use of violence .
In line with that resolution , a delegation of the European Parliament is being formed to go to that country .
Under the circumstances , I find the reasons for a new debate on Algeria difficult to explain .
Why this initiative ?
Is it to try once again to put the fundamentalist forces and their armed wing back on the rails of negotiation with the authorities , after the failure of this proposal at the time of the September part-session ?
Our group will vote against the proposed resolution of the liberal group , which is a provocation on the very day of the municipal elections in Algeria .
Nevertheless , I make use of this debate to reaffirm our condemnation of the barbaric acts which are perpetrated by the fundamentalist groups , and our support of all those who fight against fundamentalism , most of all the Algerian women .
As the president of the Algerian union of democratic women recently said , the key to the solution lies with us . So let us affirm more strongly our solidarity towards the Algerian people , particularly by reinforcing cooperation in association with the active forces of the country .
Mr President , of course , one can always question how often we should criticize a particular country and take it up in resolutions .
But as far as Algeria is concerned , a new factor has appeared .
French newspapers are reporting well-founded suspicions that the Algerian Government may itself be involved in the massacres which are being attributed to the Islamic fundamentalists .
While it is true that there is no proof as yet , when such a respected paper as Libération takes it seriously and also reports that the paper itself is not allowed to send any journalists there in order to check the matter out , then it is very serious .
I am inclined to think that there has been a tendency in this Parliament to treat the Algerian Government as the only player capable of settling the matter , while in reality it might be the case that we have two players in Algeria who are both as bad as each other .
At any rate there are suspicions which mean that we are justified in re-examining the case and looking at it from a new perspective .
I am , therefore , able to agree substantially with Mrs André-Léonard .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , six countries today , in three continents .
This leads me to think that attacks on human rights are not , unfortunately , the prerogative or monopoly of certain countries or regions of the world .
That is regrettable .
I shall start with Congo , that is the Democratic Republic of Congo , since the resolution only concerns that country .
I will remind you that the Amsterdam summit and the General Affairs Council have expressed the intention of the European Union to establish constructive relations with the new government of the Democratic Republic of Congo .
However , article 5 of the Lomé Convention links European aid to respect for human rights and international humanitarian law , and to real engagement in favour of democracy and the establishment of a state of law .
The Commission will progressively resume its cooperation with the Democratic Republic of Congo depending on the progress which is recorded in these fields . This is what is called constructive conditionality .
The present situation in Congo is far from satisfactory .
First , the Congolese government continues to block the United Nations inquiry into human rights .
It prevents the High Commission for Refugees from carrying out operations to protect and assist Rwandan refugees .
Second , the government also delays starting the democratic process , which is indispensable to the recovery of the country .
The Commission regrets that the constructive dialogue which was started at the time of the troika mission to Kinshasa and continued at the meeting with the foreign affairs minister , Mr Karaha , in Brussels , has not been followed by results .
The Congolese Government must put its commitments to democratization and human rights into effect , and it must allow the United Nations to carry out the work for which it has been mandated .
The Commission is immediately pursuing its humanitarian aid programmes to help Congo to heal its wounds . ECU 81 million have been assigned for this purpose .
China is the second country under discussion .
The Commission is following the issue of respect for human rights and fundamental liberties in China with the greatest attention .
This subject has been taken up regularly with the Chinese authorities within our bilateral dialogue , since it began in 1994 .
In particular , the Commission will give the greatest attention to the observance , in Hong Kong , of the agreements which have been made with Great Britain .
Mr McMillanScott referred to them just now .
I can say to him - although he is no longer among us - that we take this question seriously , without even waiting for the arrival of the euro on 1 January 1999 .
China is currently participating in the preparation of the first Sino-European meeting of experts on human rights . This preparation is taking place at this very moment in Luxembourg .
The Commission hopes that this dialogue will achieve results .
It is willing to provide China with all the technical assistance which is necessary to help the implementation of its international commitments , particularly within the United Nations conventions on protection of human rights and fundamental liberties , to strengthen civil society and the state of law in China , for instance , by training judges and jurists or organizing exchanges of experts .
I can assure you that the Commission will keep the European Parliament informed on the progress which is achieved on this matter .
The third problem is that of Kosovo .
The Commission would like to take this opportunity of joining with the Parliament in condemning the violent repression of which the people who demonstrated peacefully on 1 October were victims , and of expressing its constant concern about the general situation in Kosovo .
The rights of the Albanian minority must be guaranteed , and Kosovo must be given a large degree of autonomy within the borders of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
The Commission and Council have repeatedly expressed their wish to open an office in Pristina .
They invite the Yugoslav authorities to give their agreement , which is legally indispensable .
I do not think , incidentally , that this is an interference in internal affairs .
The Commission supports CSCE in its wish to resume its mission in Kosovo , and calls on the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to be willing to accept the presence , on the ground , of the high commissioner of CSCE to national minorities .
For the European Union , the start of a real dialogue on the status of Kosovo is a necessary condition for the development of bilateral relations with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
Acceptance of this demand will be taken into consideration in the examination , next year , of a possible extension of the autonomous commercial measures .
The fourth point concerns the situation of Ms Souha Bechara .
First , the Commission wishes to see the implementation of Resolution 425 of the Security Council of the UN , asking Israel to put a time limit on the occupation of southern Lebanon .
The Commission expects Israel , as the responsible occupying power , to observe international standards on human rights , and the fourth Geneva convention on protection of civilians in wartime immediately .

The Commission is devoting the greatest attention - I can immediately reassure Mr Pradier , Mr Querbes and Mrs Puech on this point - to the arbitrary detention of Ms Souha Bechara and some other persons in Khiam prison .
This question , like all other subjects associated with the occupation of southern Lebanon , is regularly raised during contacts with the Israeli authorities .
The Commission asks the authorities concerned to hold a fair trial and to authorize visits by the International Red Cross .
The Union will be better placed to exercise a positive influence on questions associated with human rights when the Euromediterranean association agreement has been ratified .
The Euro-Israeli political dialogue will then offer an excellent forum for this purpose .
The fifth subject concerns Slovakia .
The Commission is following the development of the situation in Slovakia with the greatest attention .
On this , the Commission is determined and optimistic .
First , it is determined , and intends to raise the questions of human rights , the proper functioning of Slovak democratic institutions and protection of minorities at each of its contacts with the Slovak political authorities .
Democracy has rules which do not allow compromises .
First , the representatives elected by the people must be able to exercise their mandate freely and entirely independently .
In this context , the decision of the Slovak parliament not to reinstate Mr Gaulieder , despite an injunction of the Slovak constitutional court , is worrying , and Mr Goerens is right .

Second , the opposition must be able to participate in the normal functioning of parliamentary activities .
The Commission thus vigorously deplores the impossibility , for the representatives of the opposition , of joining the parliamentary committees which are responsible for controlling the secret services and the army .
Third , minorities must benefit from the protection of the law .
The significant deterioration of relations between the public authorities and the minority of Hungarian origin is disturbing .
The Slovak authorities must continue their efforts to meet the democratic standards which are recognized in other European countries .
The Commission is nevertheless optimistic .
The Slovak President , Prime Minister and Parliament have publicly undertaken to remedy these deficiencies .
The desire of Slovakia to join the European Union is strong .
Its authorities are conscious of the efforts which must be made .
I can assure Mr Bösch that the Commission will carefully examine all recorded progress .
The partnership for accession , which is currently being prepared , will give a large place to the question of human rights and the proper functioning of institutions .
It is clear that the protection of fundamental liberties is a sine qua non of belonging to the European Union .
Lastly , Algeria . The Commission shares the concern of the European Parliament regarding the recurring murders of civilians in Algeria .
At the time of your last part-session in September , the 17th to be exact , Mr Marín gave a long explanation of the whole of this dossier , and the debate very accurately exposed the extent and complexity of the crisis through which Algerian society is passing .
The Union cannot avoid being concerned about a conflict which is such a short distance away , has already made tens of thousands of victims , and every day seems to reach new limits of horror .
Algeria is an important partner of the Community , within the Euromediterranean partnership which was launched in 1995 in Barcelona .
The long term objective remains the creation of an area of peace and shared prosperity .
The Commission received from the Council , on 10 June 1996 , a mandate to negotiate to prepare an association agreement between the Union and Algeria .
This agreement must obviously be based on respect for democratic principles and the fundamental rights of the human being , as stated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Two cycles of discussions have already taken place .
Some people have wondered whether this is the right time to pursue these negotiations .
Let me remind you that they are indispensable in the eyes of the Commission .
A large part of the violence has its roots in the serious economic and social problems through which Algeria is passing .
All actions which help the economic development of the country can contribute to reducing this violence .
The Union must persevere at the moment when Algeria is passing through its worst difficulties .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0839 / 97 by Mr Eisma , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the forest fires in Indonesia ; -B4-0842 / 97 by Mrs Pollack , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the forest fores and air pollution in south east Asia ; -B4-0868 / 97 by Mr Fernández Martín and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the forest fires in Indonesia ; -B4-0871 / 97 by Mr Dell 'Alba and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the fires devastating the Indonesian tropical forest ; -B4-0881 / 97 by Mrs González Álvarez and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the forest fires in south-east Asia ; -B4-0892 / 97 by Mrs van Bladel and others , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on the forest fires in Indonesia ; -B4-0893 / 97 by Mr Telkämper and Mr Holm , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the forest fires and air pollution in south-east Asia .
Mr President , the Indonesian Government 's policy of opening up remote forest areas for economic development has serious shortcomings .
Indonesia does not even have the resources to monitor environmental violations by companies effectively .
The Indonesian forestry service is too short of manpower and funds to exercise the necessary control .
Also it is not at all clear who is responsible for fighting the forest fires and who should take action .
We have drawn up this resolution together and it strikes us that the European Commission has certainly taken the initiative in helping Indonesia fight the fires , but in both cases it seems to me a little too late .
That is why I am so much in favour of paragraph 13 of the motion for a resolution , in which we call for a European green beret force to be set up as a kind of intervention force specialising in natural and environmental disasters .
I would like the European Commission to take this initiative .
Then Europe would mean something in the world .
Mr President , the forest fires which have been raging in Indonesia are nothing short of a global environmental catastrophe .
Some blame El Niño but the drought caused by that rain failure is itself the result of climate destabilization , to which large-scale tropical deforestation is continuing to contribute - a vicious circle .
Carcinogenic smoke , which has spread for more than 3 , 000 km , will have a lasting effect on the health of 70 million people , many of whom have no access to a reasonable level of health-care or even unpolluted water .
The culprit is the Indonesian Government turning a blind eye to illegal clearances and the greed of the private companies they support which , just like the oil companies in America , have no concern for the dramatic effects on the world climate their actions are causing .
Sadly for the planet , the Indonesian timber barons are more concerned about denying guilt than preventing a recurrence of this tragedy in the future .
I call the attention of the House to the article in The Economist only last week which was predicting exactly such an event .
I call the attention of the Commission - in addition to what Mr Eisma has said , rather than repeat it - to paragraphs 10 , 11 and 12 of this resolution , and trust that this disaster will concentrate minds in those in government in south-east Asia to play their part in building a more sustainable future , which is something they certainly have not been doing in the past .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the previous speakers have already referred to the enormity of the catastrophe unleashed by the forest fires currently raging in south-east , especially Indonesia .
Areas greater than any of the largest Member States of the Union are on fire .
The joint motion for a resolution , drawn up by six political groups , refers to the devastating effects of the fires on the health and small-scale economies of millions of people in the areas affected , and I wish to endorse those statements .
However , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to underline as forcefully as possible the concern caused by the growing number of natural disasters of this kind and by the absence of measures to rectify certain of the developed world 's industrial activities , which threaten the environment and cause climate change , in the face of the lack of action on the part of those who are obliged to adopt more effective preventive measures .
The statement to the National Geographic Society made just a few hours ago by President Clinton , announcing his proposals concerning the reduction of CO2 emissions , is quite simply inadequate .
It is inadequate in terms of both the final objectives and the deadlines announced .
We are on the eve of the United Nations Conference on Climate Change in Kyoto .
We are obliged to make an effort to ensure that the Kyoto Conference is not a failure , as has been the case with a number of previous conferences of this kind in the latter part of the century .
We cannot simply wait for disasters like that occurring in Indonesia to happen , and then provide funds and send experts to put out the fire , whilst simultaneously remaining paralysed in our efforts to adopt measures to prevent global warming , which is the origin and cause of a great many disasters .
Mr President , when we first heard of those catastrophes the media blamed El Niño for the forest fires in Indonesia .
When we thought more about the real causes we discovered that it was over-exploitation of tropical forests : not only to produce timber , but also the conversion of those forests to produce oil plantations .
Therefore , my group has proposed that a system of civil liability should be introduced in the framework of an international convention on forests .
Of course , we know that there is severe opposition to the creation of such a convention and we have recently seen this at the negotiations in the recent intergovernmental forum on forests in New York .
As a rapporteur on the communication on research and development in developing countries , I urge the Commission especially to ensure that sustainable management - not sustainable exploitation , as we say here in our motion for a resolution - for tropical forests is introduced .
The Commission should help us in this .
Mr President , the resolution in front of us naturally reflects concern for the environment in Indonesia and the region , but in my view the resolution focuses almost exclusively on the environment and completely ignores the needs of many small farmers in the area who have to find land to make a livelihood .
The resolution does not offer them a single solution .
I also find it a little hypocritical that we in Europe still cannot take firm action on our own problems by finding common standards for emissions .
I do find the resolution a little one-sided , however worthwhile the suggestions it contains .
My group will vote for this resolution , but I myself shall vote against the one-sidedness , which to me is unacceptable .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am surprised by some of the remarks made here , in which events have been portrayed as though this were a matter mainly of natural catastrophe and hardly capable of being influenced .
Some colleagues have made it clear that this is a close-knit web of natural factors , but it is bound up with very many important political , social and economic factors as well .
Slash and burn is frequently the cause not only of local catastrophes , but also of international and global effects . There are two reasons for slash and burn .
Either major corporations want to clear large areas ; in the Indonesian example this could be for housing , agriculture , or production of palm oil . Or it may be because small farmers see no other way of acquiring land .
In both cases there are serious inroads into the natural life cycle , but as far as major corporations are concerned , as is particularly the case in Indonesia , this is especially serious .
It is not that we are against economic progress , nor that we are against clearance , even in tropical forest , but there must be sustainable agriculture .
Short-term profit must not be the main motive , as is the case here .
Everything possible must be done , therefore , even by the European Union .
I should really like to ask the Commission to give these things greater attention , in order to take measures against such practices and to arrive at a sensible method of agriculture which particularly favours the small farmers , those who this case are frequently driven out .
I think it is particularly dubious that there have been many press articles maintaining that a lot of these companies have some property association , or otherwise have some personal involvement , with President Suharto 's relatives .
There is a lot of political corruption at work here .
I believe that all these factors should be investigated by the Commission and the Council in order to prevent or to stop this evil process , which is destroying people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you know that forest fires are a recurrent problem in Indonesia .
Every year , the farmers burn almost a million hectares to free land or for cultivation to produce food - Mr Swoboda alluded to this a moment ago .
The importance of the present fire is due to the extreme drought , which has encouraged it to spread extremely rapidly .
To support the efforts of the Indonesian authorities , the Commission and the Member States have jointly created , in Jakarta , a European Union Fire Response Group ( Eufreg ) , consisting of experts on forest fires .
This group is responsible for communicating all useful information to the government , evaluating the situation on the ground from day to day , assessing needs which may arise , for example , for fire-fighting equipment , and advising the government on the actions to be taken .
The specific proposals of Eufreg on the possibilities of intervention are expected next week , and of course we shall keep your Assembly informed on these proposals .
The Commission is now proceeding - and I am now replying to the comment of Mrs Pollack , particularly on points 10 , 11 and 12 of the resolution - to evaluate the medium term and long term regional impact of these fires , and the Commission will , as far as it can , help the government and the local populations to overcome the consequences .
However , I must add that the experts today judge that only heavy rain can stop the fires completely .
Finally , I would not like to finish without replying to Mr Eisma , who put a question to me about point 13 , concerning setting up a European corps of green helmets .
The concern on which this initiative is based is evident , but the Commission considers that the qualified and experienced resources which exist in the Member States can be used and coordinated efficiently by the competent services , within the mechanisms for cooperation and expertise which already exist .
Today it is therefore right to mobilize them .
Mr President , I should like to establish that the Commissioner in his speech , for which he is not responsible , has not dealt with the main points of our arguments .
I should also welcome a written answer to our questions .
That was a reply that did no justice whatever to this resolution .
We shall provide all the elements which you want .
I will pass on your request to my colleagues , Mr Marín and Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate of the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0823 / 97 by Mr Graziani and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the earthquake in Italy ; -B4-0824 / 97 by Mr Monfils and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the earthquake that shook Umbria and the Marches ; -B4-0835 / 97 by Mr Ripa di Meana and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the earthquake in Central Italy ; -B4-0844 / 97 by Mr Colajanni and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the earthquake in Italy ; -B4-0882 / 97 by Mr Manisco , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the earthquake in Italy ; -B4-0891 / 97 by Mr Azzolini and others , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on the earthquake in Italy ; -B4-0836 / 97 by Mr Novo Belenguer and Mr González Triviño , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the floods in the Community of Valencia ; -B4-0838 / 97 by Mr Gasóliba I Böhm and Mr Vallvé , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the floods in the City of Alicante ; -B4-0843 / 97 by Mr Pons Grau and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the torrential rains in the Autonomous Communities of Valencia , Andalucia and Murcia ; -B4-0869 / 97 by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the floods in the Communities of Valencia and Murcia ( Spain ) ; -B4-0883 / 97 by Mrs Sornosa Martinez and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the floods in Levante ( Spain ) ; -B4-0831 / 97 by Mr Kreissl-Dörffler and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on forest fires in the Amazon region of Brazil ; -B4-0886 / 97 by Mrs González Álvarez and Mr Papayannakis , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the fires in the Brazilian Amazon region ; -B4-0845 / 97 by Mrs García Arias and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the hurricane in Mexico ; -B4-0885 / 97 by Mrs González Álvarez and Mr Novo , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , and Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the disaster in Mexico ( Hurricane Pauline ) ; -B4-0833 / 97 by Mrs Schörling and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the serious acryl amide poison scandal during tunnel construction in Sweden ; -B-0884 / 97 by Mr Sjöstedt and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the environmental poison scandal in the tunnel construction through the ridge of Hallandsåsen ;
Earthquakes in central Italy
Mr President , the earthquake that affected Italy is unfortunately still having disastrous effects in one of the regions most dear to Italian culture , to European culture , I would say to world culture : Assisi , the homeland of St. Francis , where the great masterpieces of Giotto and Cimabue are to be found .
Historic memorials to a great culture are affected by this disaster , and unfortunately the effects are still being felt even after some time .
I think that it would be quite reprehensible if the European Union failed to pay particular attention to this , not so much to the disaster in itself but to what this disaster means in terms of the loss of cultural wealth of humanity . It should pay particular attention to the homeland of St. Francis , the birthplace of cultural movements of great European significance , of great world significance , where today the people are living in terrible conditions , and there have been many victims .
Mr President , the earthquakes in central Italy have apparently not only caused human suffering but destroyed cultural treasures .
The Union should not look on passively , it should try to understand and follow this human and cultural tragedy and alleviate the distress .
It must obviously make a contribution to the rebuilding of the ruined houses and provide shelter for the thousands of homeless .
We must see what specific help can be counted on for the restoration of the basilica in Assisi and the Giotto and Cimabue frescoes .
Over a thousand historic buildings were damaged in the earthquakes and as Mr Graziani said that is clearly a severe blow to Europe 's and not just to Italy 's cultural heritage .
The Union must therefore find ways of helping with the restoration work , for instance through the Raphael programme or the structural funds earmarked for Italy .
Finally , of course , a word of sympathy to the families of the victims .
Mr President , Assisi , mentioned by Mr Graziani , Foligno , Nocera Umbra , Colfiorito and many other municipalities of Umbria and the Marches have sustained much damage with irreparable losses of monuments , works of art , churches , houses , with much suffering for the population .
The proposed joint resolution put forward gives us hope , as seven political groups have felt the need to take action and , by recourse to the Commission , to prepare the path in some way for an agreement assisting reconstruction with European resources .
Umbria and the Marches fall under objective 5b and have around ECU 150 million for the period 1994-99 .
The negotiations that will be concluding in Brussels on 5 November , between President Santer and Mr Ciampi , could decide on the allocation of ECU 500 million obtained from other structural funds intended for Italy and not yet used by the authorities responsible .
The correct flexibility called for by the two regions affected in spending these sums should naturally also provide firm guarantees for a reconstruction consistent with the culture , architecture and landscape affected .
Mr President , the tragedy that has affected Central Italy has two particular features that require more complex and innovative measures and intervention than usual from the Italian Government and the European Commission .
In the first place , the region affected is one of the richest in historic and artistic wealth , at both Italian and European level .
It is not just a question of great individual monuments such as Assisi , which is the wealth of humanity , but a city fabric , made up of dozens of centres ranging from the Middle Ages to the Renaissance , that has been partially destroyed or seriously damaged .

Secondly , the tremors that have continued for twenty days now , which is an exception , keep the anguish of the populations alive - tens of thousands of people are housed in tents with winter on the way - making it difficult for the work involved in shoring up the dangerous buildings to continue .
The desire for recovery is persistent and surprising : schools are being run in tents , craftsmen are trying to work in makeshift accommodation , as are the municipal authorities .
But help will soon be on the way .
There is still an enormous amount of difficult work to be done because the fundamental features of an extremely civilized world of historic places , of democratic fabric organized around municipalities in a network of small and medium-sized highly skilled craft businesses has to be reconstructed .
For this reason , seven political groups are proposing a resolution asking for emergency aid which I believe is already being provided .
The Commission is asked to provide exceptional aid to face the problem of the homeless , houses and public buildings , but also support for the recovery of production and , above all , and this is something new , we want to look at the possibility of using the structural funds allocated to Italy that have not yet been committed .
I think this is an interesting path for other similar cases as well .
A whole range of proposals is thus put forward to face the complexity of the situation arising in this part of Italy consistently .
We clearly need guarantees that the architectural features will be observed and , what is also interesting , we want two research programmes to be implemented on the prevention of earthquakes and on the new restoration technologies .
Mr President , much has been said by my colleagues on the disaster that began in Italy in Umbria and in the Marches , in central Italy , on 26 September .
The only thing I can add is that , as I come from the regions devastated by the earthquake , I can give personal testimony about what has happened and about many friends who still alive today but unfortunately will be living in situations of great discomfort for a long time .
We have talked about the enormous sacrifices the people are facing from the psychological point of view and from the material point of view .
The key issue , which other colleagues have also mentioned , certainly seems to be the aid the European Union can guarantee today to the regions affected .
As requested in point 4 of the resolution , we consider it important , necessary and advisable for exceptional funds to be allocated to these populations .
As spokesperson for the Group Union for Europe , I would like to inform Parliament that we thought of adding a section to paragraph 4 , asking the Council and the Commission to assess the possibility that , in the event of natural disasters in one Member State , and therefore not just for the specific situation of Italy , the portion of structural funds allocated to the Member State and not yet used could be reallocated to deal with the emergency situations .
I believe this is an important option for discussion and an important decision for this House to take today , not just for the situation in Italy but for disasters within the European Union in general .
With regard to the specific situation of Italy , we find from speaking to and being in constant contact with DG XVI and Commissioner Monti 's office that this could be implemented .
The Italian Ministry for the Budget is working along these lines .
Italian regions which have not used part of their structural funds have shown they are prepared to hand them over to the regions devastated by the earthquake and therefore to central Italy .
I would like to hope that this principle will be accepted and that this evening the House will make a specific statement .
I repeat this not just on account of the disastrous situation in Italy today , but to meet the needs of other Member States .
I would also like to stress the importance of the research programmes we are talking about in the joint resolution for prevention and safety in the regions devastated by earthquakes and for the study of new technologies .
Mr President , I too would like to remind this Chamber of the tragedy being experienced by thousands and thousands of European citizens , as well as Italians , victims of the umpteenth disaster .
I want to remind you because Europe can make itself felt - once again - in these circumstances too .
Those unfortunate Italians affected by the earthquake , benefit - if I can say that with a touch of irony - from the good fortune of belonging to a state which has only managed to spend one-tenth of the structural funds allocated to it .
Consequently , if we succeed , through the efforts being made by all the groups , the Commission and the Italian Government -and I am really pleased Commissioner Silguy is listening to us this time - in completing this operation of placing unused structural funds at the disposal of the people who have suffered thousands and thousands of Italian lira worth of damage , I think it would be an excellent result and it would be really useful for the whole of the European Union , its image and its ideals .
Mr President , we have all seen the disastrous effects of the earthquake which has devastated the regions of central Italy .
Our solidarity goes out first and foremost to the people experiencing the tragedy of the earthquake , but should also lead us to consider the devastation suffered by the immense artistic wealth of the region .
In Italy , a veritable contest in solidarity has developed to come to the aid of the victims , a solidarity which today , in view of the exceptional nature of the earthquake and its tragic consequences , requires special emergency aid and special funds , in addition to the structural funds allocated to Italy , within the scope of the 1992-99 programming period .
However , beyond the more urgent aid and in the light of the exceptional duration , the extent and anomalies of the telluric motion , we believe it advisable and urgent to be able to prevent any type of disaster by finding new possibilities of prevention , also resorting to the new technologies offered by modern science .
For this purpose , the Commission needs various specific research programmes for the study and prevention of earthquakes , together with research into new technologies aimed at the reinforcement of the architectural wealth existing in the areas at risk of earthquake and at risk of natural disasters in general .
Floods in Spain
Mr President , I would first like to express my sorrow at the loss of life caused by the recent floods in Valencia and Murcia .
It is no coincidence that we agree in the joint motion for a resolution that the seriousness of these floods lies in the regularity with which they occur , in an area which is prone to deforestation and erosion on account of its geomorphological features .
We are therefore calling for the provision of urgent financial assistance to repair the damage and the preparation of a rehabilitation and reconstruction plan for the rebuilding of everything that has been destroyed by the floods .
However , I would stress that the most important thing is to call for the establishment of a specific budget heading for measures to prevent and alleviate the effects of these recurrent floods .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , in order to avoid too much repetition , it is true that these floods occur regularly in the Alicante-Valencia-Murcia region of eastern Spain , and that on this occasion there were five deaths , which is the most regrettable thing .
It is also true that more than 10 billion pesetas worth of damage was caused to housing , infrastructure and agricultural land .
As my colleague said , therefore , we are calling on the Commission to provide urgent financial assistance .
It should be recalled , moreover , that one of the amendments to a report on civil protection that we examined recently proposed the establishment of a specific budget heading to cover disasters of this kind , which unfortunately occur all too frequently . We hear about them every month in the part-session , and a specific budget heading would perhaps make it easier to provide more effective and rapid assistance when it is needed .
Fires in Brazil
Mr President , no-one could have been surprised by the news that the forests are on fire in the Brazilian Amazon .
For many years human hands have been making irreparable errors in this ecologically most fragile of areas . For years slash and burn has been carried out without any thought , and for years other infrastructure changes have been made to permit even faster deforestation and removal of the timber , so that rain forest can disappear even more rapidly for ever .
It is a fact in all this that there has been no long term utilization of the rain forest for industrial purposes and under the auspices of multinational concerns .
The only people who can really manage the essential rain forest ecosystem are the Indians who live there .
They are the first to suffer under the current smog blanket , not the aircraft captains and car drivers in Manaus .
They have for years been the first to be expelled by fire-raising cattle ranchers and by Caterpillar tractors serving the tropical timber merchants , and they are also pressurized by landless peasants from other parts of Brazil .
If only there were land reform in Brazil , if the Brazilian Government were to introduce and enforce efficient laws against slash and burn practices , if research results from the G7 pilot programme - into which a lot of money has been poured - were put into practice , then the rain forest would be under less of a threat , and sustainable and ecologically produced goods could be on sale at a fair price .
And then the tropical hardwoods could stay where they are today in the interests of local people , the multinationals and our ecosystem .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , earlier my colleague and countryman , Fernando Fernández Martín , said that the forest fires in Indonesia and Brazil were bad news for the Kyoto Conference .
And that is true .
There are two fundamental causes of the fires in Indonesia and Brazil : the interests of loggers , and the demands of farmers .
The two have to be dealt with completely differently .
The loggers , for whom the fires produce economic benefits , have to be dealt with by means of fair legislation that provides for penalties .
As for the farmers , it should be recalled that a short while ago more than 40 000 peasant farmers marched 1000 kilometres in Brazil calling for the fair distribution of land .
Indeed , this is one of the causes of the fires .
We believe that the following two measures should be adopted : the imposition of penalties on loggers who are destroying a natural resource which is the heritage of all mankind ; and the fair distribution of land so that peasant farmers are not forced to burn the rain forest .
Hurricane in Mexico
Mr President , I should like to begin this speech by saying that I am very pleased to be able to congratulate the Commission for once , since it seems that the humanitarian aid supplied through Echo was extremely rapid and effective .
However , our group believes that the seriousness of the damage caused by Hurricane Pauline , with 120 deaths and three states affected - we visited one them , Chiapas , but all three suffer equally from poverty and inadequate housing and infrastructure - lies in the fact that it simply served to aggravate a situation that was already bad .
We are therefore calling for the aid provided to match the losses incurred in these terribly impoverished areas , for this is the only way to ensure that quality of life is not further reduced in the region .
Mr President , I also believe that the aid granted by the European Union is highly appropriate , since it demonstrates the EU 's solidarity with Mexico , which is currently strengthening its relations with the EU as a whole , as witness the fact that a new cooperation agreement will be signed on 8 December 1997 .
As Mrs González Álvarez said , although the information that we have is only provisional , it is sufficiently worrying for the European Union to have to consider the need to increase this aid . I also agree with her that we must congratulate the Commission 's services , under the authority of Mrs Bonino , on the promptness and efficiency with which they mobilized this ECU 400 , 000 worth of aid .
Nevertheless , Madam President , I believe that the Commission must continue its efforts and find ways to increase the aid as more definite information becomes available .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner to convey to Mrs Bonino the request to increase the aid as more definite information becomes available , as has been done with other countries , such as the countries of eastern Europe .
Acryl amide poisoning in Sweden
Mr President , the construction of the tunnel through Hallandsåsen in southern Sweden is a major environmental scandal which I would not have thought possible in Sweden in 1997 .
The parties involved in this scandal are two governments , the National Rail Administration , which is building the railway , a major construction company , Skanska , which is carrying out the work and a French chemicals company , Rhône-Poulenc , which is supplying the sealing agent Rhoca-Gil for the construction of the tunnel .
This sealing agent contains many more times the amount of the toxic substance Acryl amide than the company previously disclosed .
The European Union is also involved because this is a TEN project which is receiving subsidies from the EU .
A full 1 , 004 tons of this sealing agent has been pumped into the mountain .
Of this 400 tons is pure Acryl amide .
If you knew how incredibly toxic this substance is then you would understand that this is a major environmental scandal - not only in Sweden , but it could be a major environmental scandal throughout Europe , since the agent has been used for more than twenty years throughout the entire world .
In Sweden , the country which we thought had the toughest environmental standards in Europe , this scandal was discovered by chance because some cows were paralysed and we had to investigate what had caused these cows to become sick .
How many people who suffer from mysterious numbness and sensations in their hands and legs , etcetera , have been poisoned by Acryl amide ?
Nobody knows .
How many current or future cases of cancer are due to as yet undiscovered discharging of this substance ?
These are questions which we must ask ourselves and which the Commission must also ask itself .
The Commission must therefore ensure that there is a proper investigation into whether the environmental impact assessment has been followed for this TEN project .
The Commission must also examine where and how this substance has been used .
Mr President , as the previous speaker said , a few weeks ago poisoned cattle were discovered in the area where the railway tunnel is being built .
Construction was then halted and the water supply was checked .
It then became apparent that the ground water - not only the water in the brooks flowing in the area , but even the ground water - was contaminated , which means that the drinking water intended for human consumption in this area is undrinkable .
For how many decades to come , nobody yet knows .
Ironically this has happened in connection with the construction of a railway tunnel , in other words , environmentally friendly transport .
But Acryl amide , which is contained in the sealing agent Rhoca-Gil , which is sold and distributed by the French chemicals company , is not only used in tunnels but also , amongst other places , in various mines .
In 1983 just 50 kg of this sealing agent alone was used in one of Sweden 's largest mines .
However , its use was discontinued after it was discovered that it caused injury to the miners who worked with the agent .
It is , of course , also the case now that there are workers who have been injured .
We do not yet know the extent of their injuries .
But we do know that there have been injuries among those who have worked on this project .
In other words : poisoned cattle , a herd of breeding cattle which has been destroyed , meat production which has been stopped because contaminated meat got into the production and ground water contamination on a major scale .
The Swedish government has seen to it that a police investigation has been started .
In addition , an independent committee is to investigate the matter .
However , I think that the EU also bears a large degree of responsibility because this is a TEN project , and it must find out whether this substance is still being sold on a large scale , how many EU citizens may have come into contact with it and ensure that in future it is controlled as a harmful substance .
Mr President , what has happened in connection with Hallandsåsen is , of course , a tragedy .
It is in Sweden that we must deal with the damage which has been caused .
However , I welcome the fact that it is the subject of discussion here , because it is , of course , important that both the EU and the individual Member States learn from what has happened .
The Commission must , therefore , now find out where and how Acryl amide has been used and continues to be used , and consider the need for a ban , but also check whether the manufacturer really has followed the applicable directives as regards labelling etc .
It is astonishing that anyone could handle hazardous chemicals in the way that has happened here .
The results can now be seen in a contaminated external environment and workers who have suffered injury to their nervous systems .
In one way chemicals are the curse of society .
We who make the legislation are fighting a continuous battle to keep up with new products which are introduced onto the market .
The European Parliament has energetically pursued the question of whether we should have a comprehensive environmental assessment for Transeuropean Networks .
However , that was not applicable in this case , since the project was decided long before Sweden joined the EU .
It is worth mentioning that the tunnel under Hallandsåsen is not itself financed by EU funds , even though the construction of the railway is part of a TEN project .
This does not of course make this any less of a disaster , but I still think that it could be of interest to you , my friends in the European Parliament , to know that the tunnel is not financed by EU funds .
I welcome the resolution and hope to see some action from the Commission .
Mr President , let me begin by expressing my regret at what has happened and directing my most sincere sympathy to those who have been affected .
In this , as in so many other matters , the easiest route is very often to demand new legislation and new EU directives .
Instead we should ask ourselves the question of what really went wrong ?
A number of questions remain unanswered .
Who is really to blame when everybody is blaming everybody else - construction companies , authorities and government ?
This must now be decided by a commission and by the judicial authorities .
Part of the truth is that even this is largely a national question .
Sweden 's Social Democratic government has for the past three years , since Sweden 's entry into the Union , delayed environmental legislation and thus the implementation of three EU directives and the environmental impact assessment .
The tunnel through Hallandsåsen is intended to become the largest time-saving measure on a very long stretch of railway .
It would be very unfortunate if we were to now fill it in and make one of the environmentally best transport alternatives impossible to implement .
It is not the tunnel that is wrong , rather it is the clumsy handling through incompetence and inadequate management .
Mr President , pollution has occurred in Sweden during the construction of the Hallandsåsan tunnel , significant pollution because it seems that the water table has been affected .
As we have been reminded , on 30 September , several cows which were drinking water at the tunnel exit presented neurotoxic symptoms and had to be destroyed .
Since then , the work has stopped .
A judicial inquiry has been opened to determine the responsibility of the various actors .
There has been very strong media interest around this affair , but for the moment the government commission of inquiry which has been set up has not yet given its conclusions .
And that is where the shoe pinches .
In fact , the product which is the origin of the pollution was manufactured by a French manufacturer about which people have been pleased to raise questions .
This product has been used for twenty years without any adverse effect on the environment , but to use it a rigorous procedure must be observed .
I remind you that the operator himself has declared to the press , on 8 October , that mistakes might have been made on his site , and that he took full responsibility for the bodily harm which his employees had suffered .
Of course , we condemn all pollution ; of course , we ask the Commission to make an inquiry ; but this condemnation of the supplier of the incriminated material , without proof , seems to us all the less urgent because the official inquiry has not given its conclusions .
Mr President , everybody involved , from the Swedish government to the subcontractors , bears a responsibility for the terrible scandal in Hallandsåsen .
The situation in the area is disastrous : the residents cannot use the local water , the area risks losing its appeal as an area for leisure and recreation , agricultural and horticultural produce are not fit for consumption , the market is overreacting and even undamaged produce is impossible to sell within a large area .
Unforeseen costs in connection with the construction of the tunnel may have affected environmental safety .
But essential savings , even in the state budget must never lead to a reduction of environmental controls .
The industry and the principle contractor involved are multinationals .
For that reason it is necessary and appropriate for the international community , in this case the EU , to react .
That is why Parliament must forcefully demand that the Commission investigates whether current laws are being followed and whether they could be improved .
I support the resolution , and I am also pleased that EU opponents from Sweden in this Parliament are now putting their trust in the EU 's institutions .
Mr President , it is sad to realise that the representatives of Rhone Poulenc have been lying about the Acryl amide content of this material .
They have had to admit it , although the same firm have , on various occasions , signed all sorts of declarations regarding responsible business and environmentally-friendly activity .
This very clearly shows that industry is not at all ready for any kind of self-regulatory procedure .
I know many in this Parliament appear to believe in this latter , but surely this example once again shows that there is a need for legislation .
As a member of the Committee on Budgets , I can say that we are soon going to be voting fully consciously on the report on products used in the construction industry .
In that connection there will perhaps be a chance to intervene in this matter and demand a stricter assessment of the risk of construction products .
It is obviously clear that materials are always coming onto the market , whose effects are not sufficiently well-known , which is also especially true when it comes to how they behave when released into the natural environment .
Mr President , one of Europe 's most outstanding areas of natural beauty has been hit by an environmental disaster .
The people around Hallandsåsen have had their water , plants and animals poisoned by a carcinogenic substance .
People may also have been seriously injured .
It is extremely important that the question of responsibility is investigated and that those who caused the disaster are held to account .
The company Rhône-Poulenc lied about the danger posed by the substance and thus put the health of the workers and residents at risk .
But the Swedish government and the railway company did not fulfil their responsibilities either .
The project was allowed to proceed much too far before the risks to the environment were taken into consideration .
The construction of the tunnel under Hallandsåsen may only continue if this can be done without risk to the environment and in consultation with the Båstad local authority , whose opinions should be accorded a decisive role .
The most important thing for the moment , though , is that quick and satisfactory help is immediately given to those people who are affected .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall start with the first two subjects , Italy and Spain .
Allow me to present the Commission 's position on both the earthquakes in Italy and the floods in Spain , and to assure you that the Commission sympathizes with the suffering of the European citizens who have been struck by these two disasters .
Regarding direct aid to the victims of these disasters , the Commission reminds you that the budget of the European Communities for 1997 unfortunately does not include credits for emergency aid within the European Union , since line B4 / 3400 was given a record amount for the second year running by the budgetary authority .
Let us return more particularly to the problem of the cultural heritage of which we have just been reminded .
To restore this in Italy , the Commission has released since 1 October 1997 , emergency aid of ECU 100 , 000 to hasten the restoration work on the Giotto and Cimabue frescoes , which were seriously damaged in Assisi .
The Commission is aware that this aid is insufficient , and the total four-year grant for the Raphael programme - ECU 30 million - would not be enough to restore the thousands of damaged historic buildings , and more particularly the Basilica of St Francis of Assisi .
Nevertheless , the Commission is disposed to examine the possibility of organizing , by agreement with the Italian authorities , some kind of European technical assistance to evaluate rapidly the extent of the damage , and to proceed to restore the damaged buildings in the best technical and scientific conditions .
The earthquakes in Italy have affected rural areas covered by objective 5b .
The presidents of the two regions concerned have therefore addressed to the Commission a request for the objective 5b programme to be adapted , because of the new priorities and new needs resulting from these earthquakes .
A meeting between the Commission and the representative of the Italian government was organized for this purpose .
It enabled us to define the magnitude of this disaster better , and to evaluate the damage .
The Commission - and I believe that I am answering all the speakers this afternoon - will do all in its power to respond to these needs , within the limits of its legal options to use the structural fund .
I would say to Mrs Todini that I have noted her suggestions about the research , and that I shall report on them to my colleague , Mrs Cresson .
Regarding Spain , the Commission considers that the indispensable reinforcement of prevention must , and can , be acquired using the existing cofinancing funds .
I think , in particular , of objective 1 , which applies to the Autonomous Community of Valencia .
The services of the Commission are at the disposal of the national and regional authorities , to find adequate solutions within EAGGF , ERDF and the cohesion fund .
All requests for reprogramming of actions or credits which have not yet been assigned , and capable of protecting the susceptible area from such disasters , will be advised by the Commission on the basis of financial appropriations which are established in the Community support frameworks .
EAGGF can thus finance the recovery of the damaged agricultural and forestry production material and facilitate the installation of preventive structures .
In this context , the activities of training experts and of making the population aware of prevention may be eligible .
Nevertheless , it is indispensable that appropriate financial resources should be provided within the Community regional support framework of objectives 1 or 5b .
Also , the Commission recalls that the Spanish Government proposed , last spring , by applying Community initiative Interreg 2c , an operational programme concerning the development of the territory and the fight against drought . This gives a privileged place to management of exceptional floods and risk situations resulting from the aridity of soils .
The instruction phase of this programme , the proposed amount of which will be of the order of ECU 140 million , is now being finalized .
The Commission will approve it when this phase has been completed .
Regarding the fires in Brazil , the Commission certainly shares the concern of the European Parliament about the consequences of the forest fires in Amazonia .
Within the pilot programme for preserving the tropical forests of Brazil - I recall that it had the effect of inspiring the Brazilian authorities to an Amazon development strategy which is better adapted to environmental constraints - a project for control of fires and deforestation has just been approved , at a cost of 20 million dollars .
The Commission will support this initiative .
Contacts have already been made for this purpose between the common research centre of ISPRA and its Brazilian partners .
The form of this project will be discussed next week in Manaus , Amazonia , during the fourth meeting of the participants in the pilot programme .
The fire control plan will make it possible to understand better the causes and consequences of these fires , by studying nine test areas in Amazonia .
The Commission wishes to help the Brazilian authorities to control sustainable management of the forests better .
It strives to multiply the incentives to this effect , for instance , by certifying products of sustainable management or by introducing an environmental clause within the system of generalized preferences .
Regarding Mexico , the Commission shares the concerns of Parliament about the situation caused by Hurricane Pauline .
Since the damage was announced , the Commission has reacted quickly and on 10 October it approved aid amounting to ECU 400 , 000 .
The number of dead is about 180 , 300 are missing , and the number of people affected is over 300 , 000 .
The material damage is significant , but difficult to evaluate .
In reply to Mrs Gonzáles Álvarez , the allocated funds are dedicated to emergency rehabilitation - water purification , temporary shelters - and to buying primary requisites - blankets , clothes , emergency kits .
Food aid is also included .
This aid will be carried out via the NGOs , and the Mexican Red Cross is currently evaluating the needs .
In the light of the conclusions of these evaluations , the Commission may , in addition to this first aid intervention , decide to grant additional aid if appropriate , and on this I shall pass on the requests which you wish me to make to Mrs Bonino .
Finally , on the last subject , the Acryl amide used in the construction of a tunnel in Sweden , I would remind you that Acryl amide is considered a toxic chemical agent , which has carcinogenic and mutagenic potential , in the sense of Directive 67 / 548 on the classification , packaging and labelling of dangerous substances .
It is also included in the first list of priorities for risk evaluation , which is approved by the Commission and the Member States .
The Swedish authorities are today analysing the consequences of the accidental exposure of the workers on the building site to Acryl amide .
I can tell you that Sweden is now moving on to relevant scenarios .
The study of these scenarios , which are aimed at seeing the effect of exposure to Acryl amide in the environment concerned , may re-evaluate the existing data on Acryl amide regarding human health and the environment .
The results of this work will be presented to the Member States next December , so that appropriate actions to reduce the risks can be considered .
Regarding the evaluation of the environmental impact , according to information from the Swedish authorities , this was carried out according to Swedish legislation before Sweden entered the European Union , even before it participated in the European Economic Area .
Consequently , I shall say , protectively , and according to our information , that it is very unlikely that the provisions of Directive 85 / 337 were applied .
Regarding your question about Community support for the Hallandsåsen project and the tunnel concerned , the financing of a series of improvements to the West Coast Railway was inferred in a decision of the Commission , which was approved in 1995 .
However , this decision did not mention the tunnel project specifically , and no payment for the work on the tunnel was made .
The Commission has done nothing to give its financial support to construction of the tunnel in future .
If a request for financing is submitted , the Commission would no doubt examine the question of observance of Community environmental legislation .
And to end on this subject , I would remind you that the proposed directive on drinking water , which was the subject of a political agreement in the Council last week , is intended to limit the presence of Acryl amide strictly to 0.1 microgrammes per litre .
As a result , the Commission and the Member States are doing their utmost to limit , as far as possible , the risks associated with use of certain substances , and to prevent accidents .
Mr President , this is not a point of order .
I would just like to express my thanks to the Commissioner .
I hope that the existence of the substance in countries other than Sweden will also be investigated since we know that it has been used .
I would also like to gratify my colleague Mr Olsson and say that of course I hope that people , animals and nature will live on , and live on as intensely as my continued criticism of the EU .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party was in favour of tabling a resolution on the situation in Algeria , partly in the light of a hearing at the end of next month .
We discussed it and thanks to a block vote in favour by the Group of the European People 's Party we were able to have the debate .
I understand that there is now a block vote against by the group .
In order not to embarrass them and to avoid the humiliation of a resolution being killed off , we are withdrawing our resolution .
Thank you Mr Bertens , I take note of the withdrawal of the motion for a resolution .
On the motions for resolutions on natural disasters - Italian earthquake
Mr President , as I mentioned a short while ago during the debate in the House , our group would like to propose an addition to paragraph 4 of the joint resolution .
We had proposed an amendment , but I would like to point out that it is an addition to paragraph 4 .
We would like to add the following : the Council and the Commission are also asked to assess the possibility that , in the event of natural disasters in a Member State , the portion of structural funds allocated to the Member State and not yet committed may be re-used to deal with the emergency situations .
I confirm once again that this is in addition to the provisions set out in paragraph 4 .
Mr President , excuse me , but I know that today is a day when it is difficult to have certain things accepted .
Mrs Todini is not proposing an oral amendment .
She is merely proposing that her amendment , which has been tabled under the Rules , translated into nine languages and included in your files , should replace nothing , but should be considered as an addition .
From this point of view it is perfectly acceptable .
Mr Dell 'Alba , thank you for that explanation .
We shall see the problem when the time comes , when it is the turn of Mrs Todini 's amendment .
Votes

The topic dealt with in Mr Barzanti 's report is very new and fairly difficult because it seeks to define the protection of intellectual property within a very different framework defined by the introduction of the new information and communication technologies , permitting many unpublished operations and many transmission channels and forms of reproducing the work .
Our group is voting for the resolution presented here with firm conviction because it confirms , albeit it with adaptations , the inspiration that has always characterized European legislation with regard to intellectual property , based on the protection of the author 's moral rights , which there is no reason to abandon in the light of the new situation created by the information society .
To this effect , it therefore continues along the lines laid down by the Bern Convention and in keeping with the Commission 's communication , which in turn follows the line of the recent agreement reached by the diplomatic conference held by the WIPO ( World Intellectual Property Organization ) , specifying important aspects and achieving significant votes .
However , we are not entirely at ease because , at the same time , within the framework of the OECD , intergovernmental negotiations are being held ( in which the representative of the European Union is also taking part ) on the Multilateral Investments Agreement ( MIA ) .
If this agreement leads to the conclusions that the guidelines laid down so far allow us to anticipate , we will be forced into a serious contradiction .
In fact , the MIA , rather than stemming from the European tradition , is more in keeping with the English , but above all the American , copyright tradition .
In short , intellectual property is considered to be an investment , protected by a system of legal licences that provide remuneration ( and yet not for performers ) , rather than by a system based on the attribution of an exclusive right of authorization by the author .

In declaring our group 's vote in favour of the resolution presented by Mr Barzanti , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , we wished to mention the possible contradiction that might arise between the future Community Directive and the commitment made by the Union in the MIA so that the Commission clarifies accurately as soon as possible that it will undertake to allow the inspiration reaffirmed here in Parliament to prevail .
The consultation which our colleague Roberto Barzanti proposes marks an advance in the awareness of the Commission of the emergence of new modes of communication .
It is not before time .
Indeed , this massive irruption of information into our society is radically modifying the concept of author 's rights and related rights .
It really is vital that the Union should give itself legislative tools which are not aimed at greater harmonization , but at full harmonization .
The effectiveness of the measures which will be decreed depends on us being consistent , but we must bear in mind that however coercive they are , these measures cannot be totally impermeable .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me this digression . A paradox is being born .
While our most brilliant economists never stop praising global liberalization , it is eroding the notion of private property .
I approve of the report and the general approach of our colleague .
My doubts do not represent mistrust , on the contrary .
I merely want everyone to bear in mind the difficulty and how much time we have lost collectively on the information society .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament are voting in favour of the report by Mr Barzanti .
The information society is making major demands on the copyright system we have had until now , and globalization has created a need for international rules on the subject .
On the one hand , it is about creating equal reasonable conditions for holders of copyright .
On the other hand , there must be arrangements which take account of new technological possibilities .
This applies to production , reproduction and distribution .
It is therefore pleasing to find that the Commission is now being challenged to come up with a collective approach to the area .
We very much hope that it takes up the challenge .
In Europe there is a tradition of a high degree of copyright protection .
In the radically altered world of today we must continue to concern ourselves with the preservation of those rights .
This is an immensely difficult and complicated task .
The Commission 's input on the follow-up to the Green Paper on copyright and related rights is thus most welcome .
On this basis we must now quickly proceed with the establishment of legislation demanded of the new information society .
Many questions from copyright to distribution rights still need to be answered .
When we ponder the question of moral rights in the digital age , we have to take into account both the interests of the holders of a right and consumers .
Colleges and libraries have a crucial public duty to observe the copyright laws in their everyday work .
Instead of debarment , it is necessary to clarify the right of someone to gain access to works , and to be able to copy or transfer them in the most acceptable way .
As far as the development of the information society for the people goes , it is an essential achievement that the World Intellectual Property Organization , WIPO , recognizes in their copyright agreement the right of the public to transmit messages .
The right can be adapted to fully-fledged digital transmissions .
For example , occasional copying , as part of a process , should not be prevented or made problematic by including it as reproduced material under the heading of copyright protection .
Regarding multimedia , there must be a special definition made of effective and fair procedures for compensation .
A feasible and fair copyright system is important , not only for the survival of markets , but culturally speaking also .
It is a question of maintaining equilibrium between copyright and the rights of consumers .
The information society , based , as it is , on intellectual resources requires both kinds of rights to be preserved .
Those who work as intermediary between the creator and end-user need to play their own part , but their judgement must not be to the detriment of creator and end-consumer .
The information society is , by its own nature , international , and transcends all borders .
That is why , along with Community measures , we must develop lasting international standards .
To realise full copyright protection we also need more powerful means to crush widespread piracy .
New technologies and the press
The next item is the report ( A4-0289 / 97 ) by Mrs Daskalaki on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the impact of new technologies upon the press in Europe .
Mr President , I have the great pleasure and honour of presenting today before the part-session of the European Parliament the findings of a project lasting more than a year within the framework of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media of the European Parliament as well as the findings of our consultation with all the parties involved : the report on the initiative of the European Parliament relating to the press .
The report was adopted virtually unanimously by the Committee on Culture - there was one abstention - and , I hope , by the House is timely in view of this present period in which the world press is in something of a crisis regarding newspaper circulation figures .
Moreover , the press is undergoing intense criticism from many quarters concerning the role it should play and the code of conduct which it must adhere to , while the debate on the boundaries between the freedom of the press and respect for private life is very timely .
With the historic and undisputed role that the press has played and still plays on behalf of democracy , freedom and human rights as our starting point , we have drawn up this report with the aim of , on the one hand , recalling to mind this special role of the press and , on the other hand , of instigating a broader dialogue on the new framework that is being worked out for the press in the new and particularly significant communication environment of the information society .
Downgrading the press is not on our agenda .
Quite the contrary , the influence of new technologies of informing the people of Europe is multi-dimensional and extremely important .
We do consider , however , that the combination and the complementarity of , on the one hand , the use of new media and , on the other hand , the custom of reading the press which is innate to European culture , will lead to the completely well-rounded and informed citizen .
Taking for granted the principle that must govern modern European society , that is that information is not simply one product among all other commercial products , although it also circulates in the market place , we call on the Commission and the Member States to create the appropriate conditions for dialogue and for the self-regulation of those involved , who are nevertheless the only people competent to redefine the function that the press is called upon to perform in the new communication environment and to propose solutions to the issues that arise in this unavoidably competitive environment and in the more general crisis concerning the credibility of public life and the indifference of a large part of the population to matters of public interest .
Believing firmly in the educational role of the press , particularly of some publications with a purely educational , cultural , scientific or other specialist content , we stress the need to support a European policy which will bring the press closer to young people , even starting in the schools .
Recognizing the importance not only of familiarizing journalists with new technologies , but also of their continuing responsibility for providing reliable , quality information , we particularly emphasize the need for their continuing education and training .
It is also necessary for the Commission and the Member States to encourage dialogue between journalists and their social partners on issues such as working conditions , new forms of employment and intellectual rights in the context of the information society .
Regarding the freedom of access to the networks of distribution as the inalienable expression of the freedom of the press , we call on the Commission and the Member States to monitor the national systems of distribution in an effort to provide equal opportunities of access to these systems .
Finally , respecting at all times the principle of subsidiarity , we propose the cooperation of the Commission and of the competent authorities in the Member States to look into the harmonization of certain regulations on issues that are of common concern to the press across Europe , such as the issue of VAT on newspapers and periodicals and press distribution charges through the post office .
Mr President , I hope that this effort , which began in our Parliament , will go on to find a broader response .
I thank all Members for their attention .
I will not use up all the time available . I think I have said what I wanted to say .
Finally , many thanks to my colleagues on the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media and to all of you in the House for your attention .
Mr President , I should like to echo Mrs Daskalaki 's thanks to the members of the Committee of Culture , because I think it is very important that in her initiative report Mrs Daskalaki has touched on this question , which is of such interest to the press as part of the new technologies .
A difficult situation is emerging for the press from its competition with the new communication services .
The figures show , for example , that from 1991 to 1995 daily newspaper copies sold in the EU member states shrank by 3.7 % , and also that the proportion of advertising copy going to the print media has been steadily diminishing since 1980 .
That is a main cause of worry for the press .
Since the beginning of the 80s television has been the main reason for the recession in advertising revenue . The situation in the competition between print media and others is now becoming increasingly critical because of the introduction of new forms of advertising in the electronic media , and the introduction of on-line information services .
For this reason I think it is very right that Mrs Daskalaki has emphasized in her report that the new media have had the benefit of community funding within the framework of initiatives for the encouragement of the information society , whereas the written press has received no such support .
We on the Committee on Culture ask not for direct support of the press by the European Community , but at least for measures towards indirect support .
Above all , I think the training of journalists is very important .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that in my report by the Committee on Culture on Agenda 2000 , particular mention was made of the necessity to train journalists in the new Member States .
I agree with Mrs Daskalaki that the written press and the other media should complement one another , and can certainly exist side by side in a new field of communications , but that the Commission should concern itself with the difficult situation of the press .
I welcome , therefore , the fact that with this initiative report the question of the effects of new technology on the press has been touched on for the first time in the European Parliament .
Mr President , I agree with what has been said that Mrs Daskalaki 's report addresses a critical issue for all of us in democracies .
We all agree that one of the central pillars of a democracy is a free press and a free and vibrant press is as much a sign of a healthy democracy as is a vibrant parliament .
New technologies are inevitable , and inevitably they will affect the nature of the press and conditions for journalists .
We should not seek to stop those changes .
We must seek to ensure that the vitality and the independence of the press are retained under the new conditions .
For these reasons we believe that recital W and paragraph 9 are wrong .
New technologies will require new legal rights to be identified .
Old copyright rules cannot simply be applied on the new Internet for example .
In Britain we certainly have a very dynamic press , sometimes some would say too dynamic .
But that vitality and growth are achieved by free enterprise , encouraging initiative and adopting the use of the new technologies .
Personally I have strong doubts about the call for the harmonization of VAT on newspapers and periodicals across Europe .
In my opinion newspapers should be VAT-free .
I never cease to be amazed how much the price of newspapers varies across Europe . The Times I can buy in London for 35p - I apologise for its headline about banning Labour MEPs - costs 400 % more when I buy it in France .
So it is paragraph 13 calling for equal opportunities of distribution that is far more important than the harmonization of VAT rates which in some countries would only mean the introduction of a tax that we do not already have .
There are two other points I wish to comment on .
Paragraph 16 calls for the Commission to submit the draft directive on media ownership so that we can be sure we protect press pluralism across Europe .
This is important .
Private monopolies can be just as inimical to freedom as state monopolies .
This is an area where there is a clear need for European rules as well as national rules .
Paragraph 10 calling for self-regulation by the press also touches on an important and topical issue and there have been attempts not to debate it in this Parliament .
I support self-regulation .
Following the death of the Princess of Wales it should have been clear to us all that the present self-regulation we see in European countries is not working .
I certainly hope that European journalists and publishers will get their houses in order on this issue .
This Chamber has a responsibility to address the issue and if self-regulation is not going to work , it may well be that the European Parliament and the European Union will have to look at the issue and find a legislative solution .
Mr President , in her report Mrs Daskalaki has given us a good overview of the effects of new technologies on the European press .
She notes that the audiovisual media have an edge over the written press .
Apparently people read more in the north than in the south but maybe , Mrs Daskalaki , that is simply because the weather is so cold there and it is wonderful to sit by the fire or lie in bed and read .
Whereas in the south the weather tempts people out to explore other activities .
There is an interesting conclusion in the Daskalaki report , namely that the regional written press has managed to hold its own very well .
In my opinion this has to do with the fact that with the growth of globalization people are becoming more and more interested in their own region .
We all come across that in other areas in our day-to-day committee work .
In my view the concentrations of power in the publishing world are a growing threat to the conditions the press need to be able to function effectively .
After the latest merger with Wolters-Kluwer the shareholders of Elsevier Read were rejoicing over a concentration of power in the field of scientific publications .
To my mind this is an unhealthy trend .
In my country the written press is controlled by four large concerns .
So far there is still pluralism but it cannot be guaranteed in the future .
In our region there seems to be an obvious link between the media and democracy .
Unfortunately there is now more and more debate about the media undermining our democratic institutions .
Not all , but it is a growing trend : distortion of the facts , biassed attitudes , manipulation of pictures and sound , not checking facts , not being prepared to correct mistakes .
It is my view that when it comes down to it the press has to reform itself .
It is very dangerous if it comes from outside .
I hope that will happen .
To conclude , our group agrees with Mrs Daskalaki 's observation that the new technologies can and should be used to create better conditions for the media and never , ever be a substitute for or a threat to journalistic activities or standards or journalistic ethics .
I thank Mrs Daskalaki for her report and am sure that Parliament will approve it wholeheartedly this morning .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , there is an old Dutch saying , ' The writer lives on ' .
That has been the motto of journalists since printing was invented .
In her report Mrs Daskalaki says that the new media will represent a real threat to the printed press and indirectly also an attack on democracy , culture and human rights .
Ladies and gentlemen , that is quite a claim .
Let me contrast it with the view of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , which is much more positive and , more importantly , closer to Parliament 's earlier resolutions which were adopted by large majorities .
I welcome the contribution Mr Perry has just made .
The new communication methods , like the Internet , offer unprecedented opportunities for disseminating and communicating information .
I myself , since I I have been connected to the Internet and have started e-mailing people all over the world , have read and written more than ever before .
In fact I do not understand why rapporteur says we live in a world where people read and write less and less .
You can read a book but you can also read from a screen and disseminate information that way .
In the report the new technologies are described as a threat to the press .
In fact existing newspapers and magazines often appear in electronic versions now and so have a wider circulation than before .
In the Netherlands a judge recently ruled that texts written by journalists could not be re-used for publication , on the Internet for instance , without their permission .
Thus if a newspaper publishes an article both in printed and in electronic form , the journalist is paid extra .
The journalist is paid twice and his or her article can be read by a wider public .
This has to be a good thing .
Europe is not heading towards the information society , we are already there .
In the 21st Century information and communication technology will influence all our lives .
In the digital age knowledge and access are essential to prosperity and democracy .
The press has to keep up with the trend .
Journalists have to educate themselves in the new technologies and use them in their work .
I can assure you this is already happening .
It is not possible or in my view desirable to stand in the way of new developments in information and communication technology .
Technological progress is inevitable .
Standing in the way of new technologies simply makes firms less productive , hinders growth and eventually leads to job losses .
With consultation and forethought new technologies can offer opportunities for the written press as well .
The new media offer a number of ways of handling the supply of news in an innovative manner and it is this Parliament 's task and responsibility to support such developments . They also provide new job opportunities .
What my group would like to see in Mrs Daskalaki 's report is one paragraph , or maybe more , on freedom of the press , because there could be a real threat to the press resulting from the rise of new technologies , in the form of censorship by governments .
The government is in danger of interfering in the new technologies , which was much less likely with the written press .
Press freedom can come under pressure .
Of course there are also offensive racist statements and pornography on the Internet ; we have already discussed this at length .
After all the Internet is a reflection of what is happening in our society .
But as far as my group is concerned the rule is : what is illegal off-line is illegal on-line , and it has been found in practice that national measures to restrict freedom of expression have virtually no effect on new media .
Worldwide computer networks like the Internet are media without intermediaries or frontiers .
Fortunately it is difficult or impossible for states and governments to have any control over them .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to say the following .
The written and audiovisual media are in a position of power in being able to report on various matters .
The recent negative report on the European Parliament is an obvious example .
New media like the Internet offer everyone the opportunity to air and disseminate their views worldwide and that restricts the press monopoly .
Thus news coverage is no longer dependent solely on the professional press .
In the opinion of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Partythis encourages freedom of expression and therefore democracy .
And it also ensures pluralism .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate Mrs Daskalaki on her report .
It makes the essential points and expresses , I think , the nature of our culture , which is the irreplaceable relationship with the written word .
Nothing less would be expected from a member of the press such as Mrs Daskalaki .
I would just like to emphasize some points .
Firstly , it is not true that we are dealing with the decline of the press . We have examples of a very significant revival in many countries of the European Union , with new forms of support and commitment from readers and friends .
It is flourishing in the provinces , and also a specialized thematic press is blossoming .
As examples I will mention the ecological press and the youth press .
These are messages of optimism . The question is whether it is worthwhile debating these issues at the level of the European Union and how we can help , without of course stifling the press and its freedom through our help .
I shall be brief , Mr President . Firstly , it is necessary to enforce transparency as to ownership .
Secondly , it is also necessary to support and safeguard the independence of journalists , with guarantees of their freedom and their professional status .
But it is also necessary and useful on our part to see how we can increase investments for the modernisation , for example , of the regional press .
In my country the regional press complains that the investments that it is proposing are not regarded as acceptable bearing in mind what is being supported in regional development and by European funds .
We can also support the training and education of journalists by means of the social fund .
And we can also harmonize systems of taxation which may make it easier for the journalist and the newspaper publisher to do their particularly difficult and sensitive job .
Mr President , there is another issue .
This is the matter of the unfair competition that the press has to suffer . Firstly , from outside the press .
As Mrs Daskalaki quite rightly says , the Television without Frontiers Directive is not observed in many countries , at least not in my own .
This constitutes unfair competition as regards the absorption of advertising allocations , for example , where this directive is most aggressively violated .
There is also unfair competition within the sector with the more serious , shall I put it that way , and the smaller press being among the worst offenders .
We have arrived at a point where newspapers carry on regular commercial trade .
And it is here that we could possibly help , by demanding that an investigation is carried out into whether such practices of selling newspapers together with carpets , creams , food , bookcases and I don 't know what else , are not stone-walled cases of tax evasion .
Finally , Mr President , we can also help through the exchange of journalists and newspaper owners , through getting to know them and through them getting to know each other , and through supporting forms of collaboration for the production of different types of newspapers etc. on a Europe-wide level , and at the level of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur rightly wants to defend the democratization of information by the press , at least keeping a certain status for the press against audio-visual competition .
But on the contrary , in most European countries , we are watching a retreat of democracy and pluralism in the press , because of two concomitant phenomena : on the one hand , the concentration of supply , and on the other , the weakening of demand .
I shall speak first about the concentration of supply .
Throughout this economic phenomenon , we find increasing uniformity and increasing control of political power over the press .
One could quote several examples , notably the press campaign which was waged in the West during the war against Iraq , which was really worthy of the most extraordinary brainwashing which has been seen for many years .
Everyone knows that in current writing journalists who do not conform are eliminated very discreetly and shiftily . There is no need for direct orders by governments .
There is also the weakening of demand , because a large part of the population reads less and less , or at least reading is becoming again the privilege of an elite .
It is the failure of democratization which reinforces the concentration of real power .
I believe that , given this situation , the various initiatives which have been taken , including this report , will remain pious wishes , because governments today do not really want the population to leave the torpor into which they have tried to plunge it .
Instead , they try to make democracy pliable , and without doubt this is the true reason , let us say , for the weakening of the press , even beyond the competition of modern technology .
Madam President , Mrs Daskalaki 's report shows very well the difficulties to which print media are subject , compared with electronic media .
New media cannot be wished away , however .
They are in any case used increasingly by newspapers and magazines .
Despite this , print media are threatened by an ambush .
Evidence of this is the decline in circulation of daily papers in the European Union .
This has less to do with the advance of new media , however , as with the trend towards print media concentration .
The only one to be successful is the one that has corresponding access to the market , that is , an appropriate distribution system .
Any policy which provides equality of opportunity for the various print media is worth supporting .
Only thus can a variety of opinions be maintained .
Newspapers and magazines should not be burdened by high postal charges , either , and thus elbowed out of the market .
Finally , one must ensure the encouragement and training of young journalists , and this training should receive EU support .
In order to equalise one disadvantage of print media against electronic media , print media should also receive global reporting guarantees .
The European Community should create the situation where newspapers can more easily open correspondents ' offices worldwide .
Madam President , I want to congratulate Mrs Daskalaki and in particular compliment her on the quality of her work , which is reflected in this report , but especially on the way in which she has cooperated with the other members of the Committee on Culture .
This type of cooperation is also needed between the electronic media and the traditional media .
To me electronic information does not threaten the press , it creates new opportunities .
However , contrary to what Mrs Plooij has said I think that Mrs Daskalaki has given a very good account of the cooperation that is needed and also the balance that has to be maintained ; we must not throw the baby out with the bathwater for the sake of the new electronic technology .
I would just like to make two brief comments .
Firstly , the pluralism we have mentioned must be maintained .
Opposite that is the problem of media concentration ; in my view this has to be resolved quickly by legislation , which we are awaiting .
The European Commission cannot get away with just a note on the subject .
The question is , of course , whether we are in a position to separate the economic ownership of the media and editorial freedom , as we have done in my country for instance with editorial regulations .
I would also like to draw attention to the distribution problems .
It is the monopolization of newspaper and magazine distribution in Europe that threatens press freedom . To me it is disgraceful that most of the committee chairmen in this Parliament prevented me from putting questions on this subject to the Commission on behalf of the Committee on Culture and holding a debate with the Commission .
Action is needed urgently , especially in the United Kingdom .
It is remarkable that nothing has been done there yet .
Anyone who has anything to do with the press knows that a distribution monopoly prevents the emergence of new media .
It is an issue which requires special attention .
Madam President , the information society that is so much talked about is not a natural disaster befalling us poor defenceless human beings .
The information society is a product of human ingenuity which makes new instruments and opportunities available to us to improve our quality of life .
And so I think that it should be faced by both individual citizens and the goods and service industries it affects .
The printed press , in forms such as books , is affected , but not necessarily adversely , by the arrival of multi-media industries and on-line services .
The Commission , the businesses in the multiple sectors which now produce information and professionals in those sectors must make it a priority to establish an urgent dialogue in order to find ways and means of harmonising the printed press with the new media .
It is also an urgent matter for us to adopt appropriate means of self-regulation , the most efficient and certainly the most realistic , to do away with the savage competition which produces serious attacks on the right of the individual to credible information and personal privacy .
The democratic character of life in Europe demands the continuity and strengthening of the printed press , even if not all the printed press contributes to this .
I refer to both the major press , which creates opinion and carries on investigative journalism , and the local press , which plays an irreplaceable role in social integration and maintaining links with their roots for societies located at a distance from the major centres and for emigrant communities , and even in explaining the meaning of European citizenship to local populations .
To keep the press alive we need to create regulations at European level .
We have to enforce compliance with the existing directive - as the rapporteur requests - but it must be said that directives are increasingly tending to lose their efficiency as legal instruments .
And I would conclude , Madam President , by saying that we also need to introduce press-reading modules into our school curricula , from the most elementary levels .
In this way we shall have citizens in Europe who think and are not the playthings of interests which pass over their heads .
The Daskalaki report is a contribution in that respect .
Madam President , I would just like to clarify something .
Nowhere do I talk about a threat , nowhere do I speak against new methods . Quite the contrary , I stress their importance and their exceptional contribution .
I talk about self- regulation , about complementarity and about a new framework that all can accept . That is what I wanted to clear up .
Madam President , the Commission is glad to receive this initiative report , and I am glad to thank Mrs Daskalaki personally for the quality of her work .
You put forward two principal points .
On the one hand , the essential role of the written press for the functioning of democracy , for pluralism , for human rights , as Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer very rightly commented just now .
On the other hand , the difficult situation in which this press now finds itself , particularly because of competition from the audio-visual media .
Certainly , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , endangering the freedom of the press , even a little , is inconceivable , because otherwise freedom itself would be threatened .
Nevertheless , the Commission is worried about the consequences of development of new information technologies for the equilibrium of the written press .
The rise of the power of a sensational commercial press , development of the readership and conditions of distribution also do not contribute to the strengthening of this sector .
Several of you have mentioned the problems of the media and private life , the problem of the system of ownership , all difficult , controversial subjects on which subsidiarity has a full role .
For instance , on distribution , the Commission has no competence .
It is thus a delicate matter to find a balance , and I shall not claim to settle these very difficult matters in a few minutes .
Nevertheless , I would like to make two observations .
The first concerns the traditional method of communication and information , which is the written press , and which risks being considerably weakened , with all the damaging consequences which may result in terms of loss of quality and independence .
The opinion of the Commission has always been that knowledge , information and culture are not merely products , they are not just cream or milk which can be compared to other commercial products .
Second , the Commission has always defended the necessity of preserving pluralism , and of avoiding new forms of concentration or monopoly in the ownership of the media .
Certainly , help for training of journalists , which was mentioned particularly by Mrs Schierhuber and Mrs Hawlicek , is important , and use is made of it .
Mrs Daskalaki , the Commission receives favourably the suggestions which are included in your report .
I think particularly of the specific initiatives which you envisage to guarantee the originality , the role and the permanence of the written press .
It is particularly important to examine the need for a legal and institutional framework to protect the employment and professional rights of journalists , to harmonize downward the taxes which apply to newspapers and periodicals , and to introduce common rules about reduction of postal charges and the cost of telecommunications and transport .
This is a difficult debate , and you can be certain that the Commission will continue to follow future developments in this sector with interest .
We are going to examine it all in detail , and the Commission is going to initiate a broad dialogue in order , on the one hand , to create the necessary conditions to broaden the debate on the new needs of the written press , and on the other hand , to study the problems which are set by the development of the information society .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Protection of minors and human dignity
The next item is the report ( A4-0227 / 97 ) by Mr Whitehead , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media on the Commission Green Paper on the protection of minors and human dignity in audiovisual and information services ( COM ( 96 ) 0483-C4-0621 / 96 ) .
Madam President , this report springs from the major debate on the Television without Frontiers Directive , which we had in this Chamber last year .
There were twin concerns at the end of that long debate .
One was about the proliferation of new services , like video-on-demand , teleconferencing , interactive communications from chat lines upwards and , indeed , the Internet .
All of them were filling the gap between television , as we have understood it , and telecommunications .
Many of them seemed to be eager to avoid traditional regulation .
We can acknowledge their energies and , indeed , their appetites without having necessarily to applaud them or always to endorse them , because there was a concern that these services , like the new abundance of digital broadcasting , could produce programmes that were harmful for some , although not illegal for all .
Such services after all are crossing all national regulatory boundaries with an impudent ease and they can be invasive for the young , the vulnerable or exposed minorities .
We all wanted to monitor how the directive was going to work .
We wanted funding for research into the possible applications of the ' V-chip ' , as the Commission Green Paper has also called for .
We wanted a study into the effectiveness of the various existing systems for classifying the content of programmes .
This very day the European Parliament has endorsed the wiping out of funding for both of those on line B3-2011 . I deplore that and I think my colleague , Mr Perry , would say the same .
You cannot will the end without willing the means as well .
I also deplore the fact that two separate directorates of the Commission were called on to make reports on new services and the Internet , although their convergence is plain to all .
The issue of convergence is now itself the subject of a further Green Paper , not yet circulated to mere Members of this Parliament , from DG XIII .
We need to look at what is common to the forms of monitoring we need for system , service and content alike .
When I hear that an as yet unseen paper on convergence is circulating which takes a rather hostile view to traditional views of regulation - I understand that DG X and , indeed , its Commissioner have protested this matter already - I would simply like to say that we in this House also feel that the issue of convergence ought to be right out there in the open with all the agencies of the Commission , and indeed of Parliament , discussing the matter .
My chairman , Mr Pex , and I produced separate reports but they in their way converge , and I hope he would agree with that when we were looking at the Net and the new services .
What are we saying here ?
Firstly , freedom of speech and freedom from harassment always have to be kept in balance .
We need both self-regulation , as the industries themselves have come to recognize , and a measure of overall scrutiny .
Even the Net is moving rapidly from creative anarchy to control , not from some new frontier of electronics but from the biggest players of the old game .
We need to respond to developments without frustrating the undoubted energy that goes into them .
My report calls for an effective framework of self-regulation , setting out how it can be applied at each level .
It asserts the public-interest objective here , which I believe to be paramount , and it makes the distinction clear between the generally illegal and the legal but sometimes harmful .
It suggests a full exchange of information between Member States to produce agreed standards and common action when they are breached .
The notion of voluntary compliance , supported to some extent by the Green Paper , is all very fine as far as it goes but codes created by commissions are made to be obeyed and not broken .
We have to help in that by tracing the traditional loop from broadcaster to user and the complex assortment as it now is of access providers , content providers and service provide .
We intend to set out in this report a framework for the protection of minors and human dignity which has to be achieved by minimal requirements for all content providers and understood definitions of liability .
It means tests of domestic as well as industrial self-regulation .
It means the whole citizen body involved in the monitoring of selfregulation and codes of conduct .
Finally , if you look at paragraph 25 of my report you will see that we are asking for an appropriate legal framework in each new service , balancing the interests and responsibilities of providers , consumers and the Member States alike on the experience of over 75 years of regulation in radio and television-broadcasting .
Those who told us in the television without frontiers debate that audiovisual services could have no claim on the new technology , now have the arrogance to assert that audiovisual services should be absorbed by the mega-technologies of the future .
We say no to that : culture and technology , content and concern always need to be kept in balance .
Madam President , I wish to speak simply to express the full consent of the socialist group to the report presented by Mr Whitehead just now .
It emphasizes fundamental points : we need speed in decision-making because we cannot wait any longer .
The questions brought up here , the need to ensure even on a European scale that it is possible to combat the ever more worrying use of the new services to convey illegal messages that are detrimental to the development of personality , should be taken with the utmost seriousness .

I think that to do this we need to reflect once again on the need for a real European authority whose legitimate actions are based on specific regulations , in this case on a regulation with a horizontal approach , i.e. one relating to all types of services provided , with the particular and specific characteristics that have to relate to the different types of services , but with the object , as stated in the copyright report approved a short while ago , of ensuring , among other things , that , even from the point of view of regulations , minimum standards are fixed by law to be observed by the suppliers of the new services that are more invading and more accessible than the traditional ones .

Therefore , it is not just self-control , which remains a fundamental approach , voluntary self-control , which is rightly mentioned in paragraph 14 , but also regulatory intervention which obviously does not mean censorship , but control , responsibility assumed by all those who , in providing these new services , should do so in the most correct manner and preventing them from conveying harmful messages and messages detrimental to the development of personality and offensive to human dignity .
Madam President , I agree with Mr Whitehead on many points .
He has produced an excellent report which in fact , as he just said , converges with mine in a number of respects .
But that is inevitable , because we had a very good and balanced discussion on this subject in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
There is and always will be a conflict between freedom of expression and the right of self-determination in information on the one hand and the protection of minors and human dignity on the other hand .
Electronic information is really no different from the traditional forms of information .
What is not allowed on paper and film is not allowed on the computer and the Internet .
The difference is of course the international dimension .
With electronic information there are no longer any frontiers .
International cooperation is therefore needed on legislation , particularly as regards criminal law and investigation .
It is important to make a clear distinction between what is forbidden and what is undesirable .
Ultimately it all comes down to imparting proper standards and values , in other words good upbringing and education .
I would also like to say that everyone in the network has a responsibility : anyone who is involved in disseminating , storing , transporting , transmitting and receiving information .
I fully agree with Mr Whitehead that self-regulation is the best solution to the problems outlined .
Where self-regulation is not effective there must be legislation , but enforcing it is and always will be the central problem .
Madam President , I would first of all like to say that we fully appreciate the quality of the report of Mr Whitehead and I would propose that we support its conclusions .
However , I would like to stress that he himself , and all of us , I believe , recognise that there is a great deal of confusion in our analyses , however essentially profound , theoretical and concerned they may be .
There is confusion .
It is clear that what Mr Whitehead calls balance between freedom of speech on the one hand and " freedom ' of crime on the other , is not adequate . Nor , of course , is the notion of self-regulation .
Since it might well be asked : will whosoever has the intention of making a profit from illegality and crime exercise balance ? Will he worry about balances and will he exercise self-regulation ?
I don 't think so .
It 's obvious .
And we come across that everywhere .
The debate we are having today reminds me of former debates on our relationship with the environment , on our love for it and so on , when we discovered that some people were making money , and indeed a great deal of money , from the destruction of the environment .
There is an analogy between the two .
I believe that it raises the extremely serious issue of implementing the principles of the state of law under new conditions .
And I disagree with some of my colleagues who say that there is nothing new .
There is something new .
There is a new environment that does not take account of nations and borders .
So there is the issue of scrutiny and monitoring , and indeed monitoring at the source of the criminal act before it happens . This is the right thing to do .
There is also the problem of ratification , as , by analogy , could be said in any state of law . What is new , however , is the question : in an environment that does not take account of nations and borders , who is to make this intervention lawful , not just legal , who is to make it lawful in society - legitimate , as our English friends would say ?
On what criteria is it to be carried out ?
With what checks and balances is it to be implemented ? Here is an issue which goes far beyond our debate , but which , and I would like to emphasise this , Madam President , emerges every time we discuss new problems of this kind .
It is a question of what political authority , legally and democratically elected and appointed , will do these things in a fair and lawful way .
In other words , it raises again the issue of the political unification of Europe in a most dramatic way , and , I would say , since the scale of Europe is very small , the issue of its role in the regulation of such matters legally and democratically at a global level .
However utopian this may seem , Madam President , it is just as utopian as what was said about new technologies five to ten years ago .
Madam President , in this Green Paper from the Commission and in Mr Whitehead 's very well-written report , several important questions are raised .
It is important to note that the preamble to the Treaty on European Union makes a direct reference to the European Convention on Human Rights , which among other things establishes the freedom of speech .
This right must be a guiding principle in our work .
I myself belong to the younger generation which has grown up with IT , the Internet and other audio-visual services .
I see this as an obvious tool for obtaining and exchanging information .
At the same time , however , this new technological development turns the usual situation in which the State can in some way control the content of the information on its head .
Now global information is what counts , and we have left the geographical boundaries of the nation state .
We must also say that there are a number of disadvantages with the new technology .
It is regrettable that the audiovisual services and information services can offend human dignity .
With regard to , for example , TV services I am positive that the consumers will be able to use some kind of filter system on a voluntary basis .
But what do we do about the global Internet ?
It does little good for us to discuss it here in the European Parliament or in the European Commission .
What is needed is a global solution through the UN or the WTO - I do not know which is most appropriate .
But if anything is to happen it is the global solution that counts .
The Internet brings with it fantastic opportunities .
I myself have , in my capacity as a politician , come into contact with people and citizens who I would perhaps never have come into contact with otherwise , but who now sit in front of their computers and can react quickly when I have been on TV or in a newspaper interview and ask further questions .
These are people from whom I might otherwise never hear .
This is a vitalising of democratic freedom of speech .
Unfortunately , this is not just a freedom for ordinary citizens .
It also involves , unfortunately , freedom for , for example , neo-Nazis who spread and exchange their despicable , poisonous myths , and paedophiles who can exchange information in just a few seconds .
Finally , I would like to take up paragraph 23 in Mr Whitehead 's final report , which was also included in the opinion from the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen 's Rights by Mrs Lindholm , which says that funds must be made available to parents and teachers , for example , who shall be informed about how to best protect minors from being exposed to material which can be damaging to their development .
It is important that this is included .
Madam President , at first sight I welcome the fact that the Commission and Parliament are devoting their attention to protection against harmful media products .
There is growing scientific evidence that scenes depicting sex and violence are harmful to the development of young people .
It is appalling that media magnates allow more and more dubious material , full of bad language , violence , sex and discrimination .
The universal principles of the Ten Commandments are flouted for the sake of profit .
I must stress that the point at issue is not so much human dignity in the abstract , but people themselves .
The English writer CS Lewis said that anyone who does not respect God 's law is , so to speak , giving up the human race .
The essence of policy is that parents and educationalists are responsible for their children in the first instance .
But with the flood of information and our fast-changing society parents need to be helped to fulfil their responsibilities .
I am thinking of inexpensive devices such as violence chips , pictograms on videotapes which are visible even when the video is showing , age classifications , pincodes enabling parents to block certain TV channels .
Of course parents need proper information on all these .
I think that is a task for the national governments rather than the European Commission .
Secondly the government also has a responsibility .
Crime prevention is in the interests of society .
The self-regulation of the audiovisual sector advocated by the Commission must be coupled with strict minimum standards of punishability .
And because producers have a tendency to go as far as possible , provision must be made for effective , heavy penalties for producers who transgress .
Freedom of expression is a great thing .
If we want to protect it , then we must not make it so sacrosanct that we allow that freedom to be abused .
If we as politicians do not have the courage to take firm action against obscene material , we are sealing the fate of every future child victim .
The important question for us and for you , Commissioner , is whether we are sufficiently aware of this .
On this point the Green Paper is disappointing .
Mr Whitehead 's report is a step in the right direction .
I hope he will support Mrs Seillier 's two amendments .
I would also draw the Commission 's attention to the many computer games which encourage children to behave aggressively .
Would it not be sensible to introduce a quality mark and age classification for these as well ?
Finally a point which my colleague Leen van der Waal has already emphasized in the discussion of the Pradier report on illegal and harmful material on the Internet .
The difference between punishable and harmful material is also relevant in the debate on media material .
But this often-used distinction is meaningless .
I cannot understand why something that is extremely harmful to youngsters should be good - or at least harmless - to adults .
All those undesirable intimacies , the sexual abuse of women and children , the growth of sex tourism and the demand for child pornography - are these vile practices not encouraged by audiovisual material that is to some extent perverted ?
Do we really know the answer to that question ?
The essential point is whether or not we want to do something about it .
We need to act not only on extreme perversions , but also on practices that are regarded as civilized , but are nonetheless immoral .
After all the great evils in our society begin from little things .
Madam President , history does not always repeat itself but often we can see eerie similarities .
At the end of the 19th century , we had the internal combustion engine and the car , which brought great advantages but obviously certain problems such as pollution and congestion .
It changed all our lives in the 20th Century .
At the end of this century , we have the new technologies in audio-visual , information services , Internet , digital television , etc .
These will bring great advantages which must not be lost , but they will also bring problems and will undoubtedly change all our lives whether or not we like it .
We have to be careful that , in dealing with these new technologies , we do not design a system like that of the man with the red flag who tries to block the advances of the car .
Normally I say that when we face problems of this nature in the appliance of science , we should turn to the science itself to find a solution .
But we have a problem here .
I disagree to some degree with my colleague , Mr Pex , who said it was really just the old systems and it was not a great change .
What is happening now is that the top shelf at the newsagent 's is being brought into our children 's bedrooms .
I don 't describe myself as computer-illiterate , but last weekend I thought I had better surf the net to see just what was available .
I have to confess I relied upon my daughter to help me find out just what would happen if you type in ' porn ' .
Thank goodness she was there .
She was able to spare some of my blushes and protect me from some of the awful stuff that was available !
However , I do think that science offers some solutions .
There are procedures that can monitor , check and , weed out some of the worst , and we have to hope that our sons and daughters are not so bright that they can be ahead of the industry .
The advice I would give to the Commission is to talk , talk and talk again to the industry .
They want to cooperate .
Work with them .
They are ready to help and I think there we might find some of the solutions .
Our job - and it clearly is our job - is to create the clear legal framework that will enable the industry to help regulate itself .
Mr President , I myself come from a country which two years ago was shaken by a very serious paedophile scandal and so of course I agree with the general approach of the report before us and also with the general approach of the Commission document on which it was based .
However I should like to make a few comments , not on the technical aspects , because I am no technical expert , but on the political aspects .
Firstly , though , I must say to the rapporteur that to me it is a mistake in this report to give in to a fear of what must be politically correct , in other words the thought crime of so-called racism - I do say so-called racism ! - because obviously I am only talking about the idea of national preference , to equate the idea with real crimes like paedophilia .
Secondly I naturally appreciate the concern of the rapporteur and the Commission at the use of new communication methods by people with sick minds .
I would just point out that nowadays there is very little to stop these people in the traditional forms of communication and in some Member States for instance you only have to go into any station kiosk to find the most sickening paedophile rubbish right before your eyes .
Finally I share the belief of the rapporteur and the Commission in the fundamental role of the family in protecting and bringing up children .
It is just a pity to have to say that in so many European countries traditional family life has been let down by the government and the European budget , if not penalized by the tax authorities and sabotaged .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the speed with which information technology and new services develop indeed demands a rapid reaction by legislators , in order to prevent abuse .
I believe that a regulation at European level is relevant here , even though I do see difficulties in establishing common European values .
I am particularly pleased that the important role of self-responsibility has been stressed in Mr Whitehead 's report .
Education of the individual is important , particularly family criticism .
In this respect I think it is essential to ensure in every member state a policy of education within families and schools , which imparts to our young people a sensible knowledge of how one copes with the media , both new and old .
I do not mean here the well-known advice , simply to press the off button .
On the contrary , within the family circle critical attitudes to the press must be exercised , and they can be fruitful only by means of a joint analysis of content and objectives .
Here too , education provides a well-known model .
For this reason parents must be included much more in media education .
I consider joint training and further education courses for parents and teachers to be very sensible in this area , as in many others .
The information campaign proposed in the report could indeed be very helpful here .
We must raise the awareness of this problem of everyone responsible for education and training , and give them sufficient information about developments in technology .
Many parents and teachers have enormous fear of first contact with new technology , and thus do not know of the danger for their children .
In addition , each puts the blame on the other .
They do not realise that media education must take place both in the family home and in the classroom , and start at nursery school .
We must start there .
Joint further education must be organised by cooperation between nursery schools , schools and parents .
The awareness of all participants can be raised in this way and we can effectively prevent damage to our children .
Technical security means , such as the V chip , should not be allowed to relieve parents and teachers of their responsibility .
My thanks to Mr Whitehead for his excellent report and I am particularly pleased that all the points I have mentioned are included in it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the new audio-visual and information services open up new possibilities for Europe to develop actions in the field of education and access to training and culture .
The growth of these services in the European Union assumes not only favourable economic and political conditions , but also effective protection of the general interests of the European citizen .
How should the general interest be protected in the context of the new services ?
This is the question to which the Green Paper has tried to give a partial response .
To do this , it is first necessary to know the specific character of the service which is on offer .
It is also necessary to know the appropriate legal framework , the appropriate degree of legal obligation and self-regulation .
In this perspective , the Green Paper on protection of minors and of human dignity was approved by the Commission on 16 October 1996 , just a year ago , to start a broad debate on one essential question : the protection of minors and human dignity in the audio-visual and information services of television and the Internet .
Thank you , Mr Whitehead , for your excellent report , on which I congratulate you .
It illuminates essential aspects of this debate .
First aspect : the debates which accompanied the issue of the Green Paper showed the interest of all parties concerned in an ethical approach to the information society .
The protection of minors and of human dignity is an indispensable condition of establishing a climate of confidence which is favourable to the development of new services .
The second aspect which your report illuminates concerns what the European Union must do .
The European Union , while taking account of the diversity of national cultural sensitivities and strictly observing the principle of subsidiarity , must promote a minimal consistency of the national frameworks of self-regulation .
Mr Perry , it is indeed necessary to supply the bases of cooperation at European level to all parties concerned - manufacturers , users , public authorities - and it is necessary to encourage evaluation of the actions which are taken .
I believe that it was Mr Barzanti who insisted on this point just now .
It is indispensable : self-regulation , yes , but matched by evaluation .
And self-regulation does not mean that in the end there will be no regulation , but we must not go too fast in this matter .
Third aspect : to reinforce the effectiveness of national actions , it remains essential to identify and formalize , at European Union level , common objectives - this is the first task of the European Union - regarding the protection of minors and of human dignity .
It is also essential to promote legal , responsible use of the information and communication services .
Fourth aspect : activities for information , public awareness and education must be put into effect .
On this point , I agree with Mr Holm and Mrs Heinrich .
Fifth aspect : while taking account of the world dimension of communication networks - Mr Holm mentioned this aspect just now - the development of a European approach will allow consideration of our fundamental values in the international debate .
Yes , it must be at world level , but first we must have a European position .
Sixth aspect , and I am replying to Mr Papayannakis : judicial and police cooperation , the third pillar , article K. Article K of the Treaty on European Union allows us to develop cooperation in the identification of illegal content and the prosecution of its authors .
The Commission favours this and will endeavour to do it .
Finally , I will reply to Mr Blokland on the classification system .
The Commission , with all the interested parties , will study this aspect , while of course taking account of cultural diversity .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Legal profession and Community law ( Robert Schuman Project )
The next item is the report ( A4-0323 / 97 ) by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing an action programme to improve awareness of Community law for the legal professions - Robert Schuman Project ( COM ( 96 ) 0580 - C4-0606 / 96-96 / 0277 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , the object of the proposal for a decision that we are now examining is to establish an action programme to improve awareness of Community law for those professions directly involved in the administration of justice .
The first thing that I should like to say is that the report of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , which consists of 23 amendments and was adopted unanimously in committee , endorses the principles , content and objectives set out by the Commission .
And that should not surprise us .
Indeed , in paragraph 31 of Parliament 's resolution of 13 February 1996 - the Anastassopoulos report - Parliament called on the Commission to establish a training and information programme for the legal professions most involved in the administration of justice in order to improve their awareness of Community law , with a view to enhancing the effective and uniform application of Community law by the Member States ' legal systems .
I repeat , therefore , that this report endorses the bases of the Commission proposal .
Thus , the committee agrees with the proposed global financial framework of ECU 5.6 million and underlines the importance of the project being a financial support operation - that is , an instrument which provides financial support for the efforts of the groups concerned , thereby underpinning initiatives which must primarily be their responsibility .
The report of the Committee on Legal Affairs also endorses the approach adopted by the Commission , to the effect that the project must be geared to practical rather than academic training and concern the application of Community law , since unfortunately the statistics show that this is still lacking amongst the professions most directly involved in the administration of justice .
We must insist .
From the point of view of the coherence of Community action , the Robert Schuman project complements other programmes carried out previously , such as the Leonardo da Vinci , Jean Monnet and Grotius programmes .
Consequently , what the Committee on Legal Affairs has done is support and strengthen the Commission proposal , especially as regards its scope and legal base .
Indeed , the Commission is proposing the legal base of article 100a , which , as we know , provides for the approximation of legislation in the field of the internal market .
The reason justifying this choice of legal base is the need to set the Robert Schuman project within the framework of global arrangements for the rigorous and effective application of Community law .
And the fact is , Madam President , that internal market legislation is now so wide-ranging that the efforts of the Community institutions to control its application are insufficient on their own .
Unless the professions most directly involved in the administration of justice become aware of their responsibility , the application of Community law will continue to be non-uniform , and will therefore continue to jeopardize the achievement of the internal market 's objectives .
With regard to the question of the legal base , another approach would be to opt for articles 127 or 128 .
However , the Committee on Legal Affairs ' deliberations led them to three conclusions : firstly , this is not the first time that the Commission has proposed a training programme under article 100a . To cite just two examples , there are the Matthaeus and Matthaeus Tax programmes .
Article 5 of these two programmes provides for the exchange of officials , and this type of transnational cooperation is not ruled out for the Robert Schuman project either .
Secondly , it is true that the case law of the European Court of Justice has been very broad in its interpretation of what is meant by training .
There is the Gravier ruling of 1985 , the Blaizot ruling of 1988 and another ruling of 1979 , but let us not forget that these involved the interpretation of an article 128 which was not the article 128 currently in force , but an article that was clearly ambiguous . It is therefore evident that this case law must now be revised .
And , thirdly , Madam President , what determines the choice of legal base to which I have referred is undoubtedly the objective .
And the objective here is to create a uniform body of case law : indeed , in all our legal systems , the body of case law which is built up on the basis of the rulings of the courts is the source of the law itself , and therefore ultimately forms part of Community law .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights therefore firmly maintains that article 100a should be the legal base .
Furthermore , the 23 amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs seek to improve the definition of the project 's scope , so that the legal base of article 100a is applied to those professions involved in the administration of justice .
Finally , we were pleased to incorporate into the report the three amendments concerning financial matters tabled by the Committee on Budgets , because they are fully justified .
Madam President , we cannot exaggerate the urgency of the need for clear and direct improvement of the awareness of Community law in the Member States . Let us hope that this project , which has clear goals , will be rapidly adopted and implemented .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a delegate of a country which has only been a member of the European Union for two years , I long held the opinion that ignorance or poor knowledge of Community law was an Austrian speciality .
During the debate within the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights concerning the Commission 's proposal , however , I had to listen with regret to reports from other long-established Member States and discover that the situation there is not much better .
Lack of knowledge of Community law amongst lawyers , judges and public prosecutors is not just a problem for the professionalism of these professions , but also a risk for the ordinary citizen , for businesses and for the functioning of the internal market .
Previously existing programmes , such as Leonardo , the Grotius programme or the very successful Jean Monnet programme have not covered all their important objective groups sufficiently well .
But even if we should now be successful in making the projected 450 , 000 lawyers and 100 , 000 judges better acquainted with Union law , that will not be enough to remove the existing deficit .
For that reason I particularly welcome the proposal by the rapporteur to add a resolution which requires Community law to be an obligatory subject in all faculties of law .
That sounds very obvious , but it is unfortunately not yet the case in many member states , including Austria .
All these efforts must be complemented by constant attempts to achieve better understanding of , and easier access to , Community law .
Currently it seems that it is not easy for even well trained lawyers , judges and public prosecutors to get access to Community law .
I hope that particularly the office for EU Publications , which has made some interesting suggestions here , will also be successful in putting the proposals into operation .
Finally , may I , on behalf of my group , thank the rapporteur most sincerely for her work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Robert Schuman project has a clear purpose : to improve the application of Community law in the Union - not to train magistrates - by increased awareness by the legal professions in Europe .
Although the Robert Schuman Action has modest resources , it wants to be ambitious and targeted .
It is about developing increasing familiarity by judges and lawyers with the principles of Community law .
The Parliament has always emphasized that improvement of the awareness of the legal professions is an indispensable condition for the better application of the rule of Community law .
For the good application of this law , and particularly for the good functioning of the internal market , it is essential that citizens everywhere should be able to know their rights and benefit from the rights which the Community legal order confers on them .
Indeed , without an automatic Community reflex by the legal operators in the management of their affairs , we run the risk of reducing Community law to a second-order legal system , application of which would become subsidiary to national law , which would be paradoxical to say the least .
Also , the Commission is delighted with Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi 's report - and I congratulate her on her excellent work - which has been adopted unanimously by the Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Civil Rights .
It respects the spirit of the Commission 's proposal , but further improves its formulation , and I must say to you that thanks to your amendments , you have reinforced the legal base which the Commission proposed .
Indeed , what is important is article 100A , since the purpose of this action is effective and uniform application of the rule of Community law , which is a condition of the good functioning of the internal market .
So by your amendments , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , for which I thank you , you have consolidated and made explicit the legal base which the Commission proposed .
The Commission is also able to accept all the amendments of your report , subject to a small editorial precision to be applied to amendment 20 , which contains a reasonable relaxation of the obligation of continuity , but which undoubtedly must be made more precise so that it is not emptied of its content , or so that there is no risk of doing so .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 9.01 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last session have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I should like to thank the services for the third attempt at minuting accurately what I have been saying day after day in this Chamber about the lack of a danger to health from using nickel in the new Euro coins .
I am sorry that I have to keep bringing this up , but I just cannot understand why it is that the European Commission is so intent on imposing on Europe a proprietary metal made by a Finnish company , known as Outokumpu .
I cannot understand why they are going to have a monopoly of supply .
I certainly hope that in the next few weeks we can sort this thing out .
Madame President , during the vote on Amendment No 4 relating to the budget - page 11 of the Minutes - Mr Samland spoke to raise an extremely important clarification and to say that the amendment certainly did not have the aim of questioning or contesting the legitimacy of the pension fund .
I think I recall , moreover , that I told him this was a very important clarification which we noted .
I would like that recorded in the Minutes .
Madam President , I do not rise to make remarks with regard to Labour gags - although some of us think they have been a bit of a joke this week -
( Mixed reactions ) but with regard to the point raised by Mr Hallam .
I seek some clarification .
I am a little confused as to whether Mr Hallam has caught the Commission nickel-less , or whether they have got their nickels in a twist ?
I would appreciate some clarification .
Madam President , I should like to draw attention to one point .
It is absolute nonsense that groups should allocate speaking time .
We are here until 1 p.m. , yet when we indicate that we want to speak , we are suddenly told there is no more speaking time , even though we are stopping before 11 a.m. !
Officially , we are here until 1 p.m. , and it is scandalous that group leaders simply allocate the time and then allow no more contributions to the debate .
I must ask for a debate on this , because this is foolishness at our taxpayers ' expense .
We are still on the Minutes .
I ask for that to be checked .
I believe that on the Breyer Report an application was not announced , and as a result two amendments which should have been called were not heard .
I should like that checked again .
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President , regarding the Minutes , it is the point I raised yesterday which was also raised by Mrs Ewing and Mr Tomlinson about the demonstration .
Like Mr Habsburg , I believe in saving taxpayers ' money so the staff employed here are not organizing demonstrations in Parliament 's time against the reputation of honorable Members .
Has there been any follow-up on what measures the presidency is going to take to ensure that there will be no recurrences of this ?
Has any disciplinary action against the offending people been considered ?
Madame President , I can reply very quickly to Mr McMahon .
I obviously enquired about the nature of the demonstration since it had occurred during my Presidency .
First of all , there were very few demonstrators , only about ten .
The demonstration was definitely not organized by the staff committee which was at pains to point out that it was not at all in agreement .
In other words it was a small , impromptu demonstration .
That is the information I wish to give you .
We are not debating any matter at the moment .
Statements on standing orders only , please .
Madam President , we are not having a debate on it , but it is somewhat disingenuous of the staff committee to say that they were not organizing it when they had put posters all around the building convening it .
They actually put a letter in every Member 's letterbox about it .
It was a personal attack on the Secretary-General of the Parliament , on the decision of the Bureau in drafting the draft estimates of the Parliament , and on the Budget Committee for having adopted a report that carries my name .
It was highly personal in what it said concerning myself as the rapporteur of that committee .
If you are going to accept that the staff committee had no part in it , then I think they have to explain why they put posters around the building .
I think there is a further problem that the Bureau has to examine .
As the last staff committee elections were inquorate , we presumably do not have a staff committee and I think the Bureau needs to examine why there are members of staff on sabbatical leave when there is no quorate staff committee .
Madam President , I would like to pick up on the points made by my colleague , Mr McMahon .
While I did not agree with yesterday 's demonstration , I cannot and will not accept that disciplinary action should be taken against trade unionists .
I have been a trade unionist all my life .
They are allowed to organize and demonstrate .
We should not be taking any action against them .
Ladies and gentlemen , something has already been said about that .
The matter will be discussed again .
Madam President , as the rapporteur for last year 's report on human rights , I would like to ask Mr Tomlinson to look at that report again , and to read the chapter on the rights of unions and union representatives .
The European parliament has pointed out that members of unions , employees , naturally have the right to demonstrate and to state their opinions ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mrs Roth , that debate is not on today 's Agenda .
We can only discuss the issue if it is part of the Agenda !
Madame President , I wish to speak on page 2 of the Minutes , and , in particular about Mr McMahon 's remarks .
And since there are in this Chamber Members who have things to say on questions ...
The Minutes have already been approved .
May I say that in fact two speeches have just been made in the Chamber ...
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I am sorry .
There must be no more debate . The Minutes have already been approved .
Votes
Madam President , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has presented an excellent report on raising awareness of Community law , and I should like to say here that this programme deserves to bear the name of Robert Schuman , for he formed our Community into an essentially constitutional one .
Today we are extending this Community eastwards , busying ourselves with agriculture and neglecting this expansion of the concept of a constitutional state .
I would ask that we put real effort into more intensive training of the legal services , courts and administrations of the associated states .
I was told by the Minister of Justice in Prague that they have called upon the ENA for this purpose .
I have a high regard for the ENA , but doubt that it is the ENA 's job to raise awareness of Community law .
For this we must do more to call upon the European Court of Justice , the European institutions , for action .
- Daskalaki report ( A4-289 / 97 )
With respect to the vote on the Daskalaki report , most of the UK Labour Members while supporting the thrust of this report , have reservations about paragraph 12 .
We have abstained on this paragraph as we believe that it is crucial that VAT remains at 0 % on newspapers and periodicals .
The written word and its liberal availability to all , without censorship or restriction , is an important principle of democracies .
We should avoid anything that might restrict this availability .
This is not a question for the EU .
These are purely national affairs which should be handled by nation states .
The EU is not and is not going to become a state .
The report on the future of the European press was begun out of a concern that the printed word is under pressure from electrical media and developing information technology .
Actually , the press itself exploits new technology in many ways .
The rapid change in the working environment is essentially a challenge regarding training , which can be met by recourse to EU training and media programmes .
Journalists belong to key groups in the information society , who need to be supported nationally and by the EU , in their further training to meet the demands of the international communications environment .
Journalists and editors do creative work , which must be the constant concern of all when pondering intellectual and ethical copyright protection , because a journalist 's work is used many times over in the news .
This fact also underlines the personal responsibility of the journalist for the content and quality of his or her work .
Recent events concerning the guarding of privacy of public persons have given weight to our own internal debate .
In talks it is worth considering the need for international rules of the game in the form of Council debate at European level on the printed word .
Journalists and particularly the local press , which is very close to the people , have a crucial role in the construction of a citizens ' Europe .
EU reporting should be made as clear and comprehensible to the people as possible if the current gulf that exists between the institutions and the people is to be bridged .
For this there needs to be thorough training in the areas of EU policy , languages and culture .
How then should the press be helped - if they should at all - with electronic data transmissions ?
Firstly , in communications we 're going to need both the printed word and electronic media to complement each other as forms of communication .
The traditional work of the press is a defense of democracy ; freedom and human rights have not disappeared , but there is a growing need to protect them .
This work is being threatened by a concentration of the communications field , of which there are recent examples in every member state , for example , in Finland and Sweden .
As an extreme case one might cite Italy , where one the country 's political leader had in his possession important electronic media .
To keep a balance , the printed word - the book , the newspaper and other reading matter - now requires support to raise people 's awareness .
People must become critical readers and engaged citizens when they are still in their childhood .
For example , in Finland the " Newspapers in the Classroom ' campaign is producing good results .
The press has to struggle against massive costs and many new forms of new technological support mainly serve electronic communications .
Harmonization among Member States should result in lower costs , such as in transport and VAT .
We must preserve access to distribution systems for all .
You know , the preservation of pluralism and the prevention of the start of communications monopolies must be the European communications society model .
At the same time it is the guarantee of freedom of speech .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for a thorough report in an important area .
However , I consider that the recommendation of the report on the harmonization of VAT provisions for newspapers and magazines with aim of achieving the lowest possible level of VAT ( paragraph 12 ) and the recommendation on the monitoring of the distribution system ( paragraph 13 ) cannot be considered to be justified .
I have difficulty in seeing any reason why we should harmonize VAT provisions for newspapers and magazines in the EU .
Newspapers are not in competition with one another across the Member States ' borders to anything other than a very limited extent at the moment .
Nor do I see any reason why the Commission should be involved in monitoring distribution systems for the printed press in the Member States .
The Member States are best able to do this themselves .
For this reason I have voted against paragraphs Z , 12 and 13 in the report .
Market organization in beef and veal
The next item is the report ( A4-0302 / 97 ) by Mrs Anttila , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 805 / 68 on the common organization of the market in beef and veal ( COM ( 97 ) 0161 - C4-0212 / 97-97 / 0122 ( CNS ) ) .
Madame President , we too support this proposal .
As you know , this is an old order from 1968 .
There are a few things which need to be tightened up to improve animal welfare , in both the 1991 and the 1995 directive .
The starting point here must be that transporting live animals is not in itself desirable , but is of course necessary .
The reasons are , first , the very great risk of infection amongst living animals and , second , animal welfare .
It is totally unacceptable that living animals should be carried around on the motor ways of Europe in poorly equipped trucks over long distances .
This puts the animals under stress , sometimes so much so that they die in transit .
The problem may exist because abattoirs have been concentrated in large groups , which means animals have to be transported for commercial reasons .
This may be a sign that a different approach is needed in this field .
But , until then , we need more stringent requirements on the trucks carrying the animals .
Likewise , border controls must also be tightened .
And last but not least , there is a need for commercial arguments which can help improve animal welfare .
Of course , animals can be slaughtered and then transported .
After cool , we now have refrigerated trucks .
I believe that the Parliament should not merely pass legislation which retains the old system , but should also think slightly ahead , and so I think that Parliament should discuss this matter at the Agricultural Committee and in other committees in future .
It is good that this report states that a veterinary surgeon should certify a consignment and that no preferential customs treatment will be allowed if the rules are not followed .
I think this is a step in the right direction , but , as I said , I think we should continue working on this matter .
Madam President , I would first like to thank the Commissioner for bringing forward the original document which is the base for this report .
In particular , I want to thank Mrs Anttila for her report on the transport of animals .
It is a very balanced report .
She has not made the usual mistake of condemning the whole system .
She has rightly insisted on the need to enforce the welfare rules which are already in place .
She has pointed to cases of deliberate cruelty and mistreatment of animals which have occurred in some Member States .
In June 1995 the Council of Ministers adopted wide-ranging rules on the transport of animals .
These rules had been proposed in large measure by the then Irish Minister of Agriculture , Mr Yates , and have been fully implemented in Ireland .
In fact , we have the most rigorous animal welfare regulations enshrined in Irish law and we are fully enforcing them .
Unfortunately , other Member States have not yet fully implemented the European legislation .
As the rapporteur has said , they must comply without further delay and the Commission must monitor the situation and impose severe penalties where the rules are not fully implemented .
Cruelty to animals most often occurs when the animals have left the farm .
For this reason , staff concerned with the transport of animals must be fully trained to ensure a high level of care at all times .
This is also a feature of the Irish rules and on the larger ships it is quite usual for a veterinarian to travel on board to supervise the stock .
Proper monitoring of the implementation of the rules of the directive is now urgently required .
The Commission must strictly manage the animal welfare provisions and ensure that they are respected throughout the European Union for animals imported and exported .
I call on the Commission to reject the amendment before us which has the aim of preventing the transport of animals outside the European Union by eliminating export refunds .
This would obviously destroy the beef market , not only in Ireland but in some other places and allow meat factories to further reduce prices to farmers .
Furthermore , there is no basis for such a proposal if we are really concerned with the welfare of the animals involved .
Animals can be , and are being , transported with full respect for their welfare .
It would be very unjust and damaging to make innocent exporters and farmers who do a thorough and careful job suffer because of the lack of concern and carelessness of just a few .
The rapporteur has reinforced the point that there is a remedy for such people , i.e. the withdrawal of export refunds .
The EU exports about 500 , 000 live animals annually .
Ireland is an island and we export over 90 % of our total production .
In fact , 1 1 / 2 million cattle must be exported every year , both as beef and live cattle .
The majority is as beef .
We are obviously dependent on the markets in Europe and elsewhere and if we do not supply the markets outside Europe , our international competitors most certainly will .
When there is a demand for live animals , we have to meet this demand within the strict rules and regulations outlined of course .
I agree with the proposal to introduce severe penalties where it is found that animals have been mistreated during production and during transport .
Such events , thankfully are rare , as producers are reasonable people and their total livelihood and profit depend on the animals under their care being in good condition at the end of their journey .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , at a lethargic Friday sitting , which was therefore wrongly considered to be closing the entire week , we bring up this subject , to which I would like to draw your attention .
It is not an especially agricultural subject , but it involves a series of issues , I would go so far as to say values , and it cuts across many other committees .
I will just mention the Committee on Transport and Tourism , where we have fully debated the problem of the conditions of travel and health of animals in transit , and it is good that we have this synergy of opinions and intentions , and efforts too , to try and reach a joint and multilateral solution .
We are clearly starting from a technical and economic requirement , the amendment to this Regulation No 805 / 68 .
As more authoritative colleagues who have been here longer have said , this is certainly not a new subject , but it is possible that because we have been talking about it for a long time and there is still a need for discussion , it means that there is no easy solution .
We have to take many factors , some strictly economic , into account before reaching a decision , such as the payment of premiums and other civil factors relating specifically to the transportation of these animals .

Showing great common sense , the rapporteur says she agrees with the Commission 's motion but recalls virtually all these values , with moderation but with decision , particularly with regard to the welfare of animals during transportation , in which connection the rapporteur proposes an amendment asking for the introduction of a supervisory system including regular spot checks and , where necessary , using an independent agency placed under the control of the Commission and financed by export return .
Control - the real point of this problem is the control system .
Some of you will recall , a few months ago , some scandalous television reporting to the detriment of an Italian port and another port in the south of France .
Horses were shown coming from eastern countries which had been treated in an unorthodox not to say barbaric way .
That was the final point in a long journey that began who knows where , conducted in just as unclear a manner and ending anywhere , it might be Hanover or any European port .
At that time , all that was noted was the distressing conditions in which these animals were arriving .
Hence we should recall what the rapporteur is proposing : carrier 's liability .
There should be guarantees that the maximum eight hours laid down are observed during transportation , that stopping places are provided for drinking , for feeding the animals and that those involved in the transportation , the carrier and also the driver of the vehicle , are trained to help the animals .
Think of the extent of the problem in the case of transportation to Islamic countries which , under the dictates of that religion , require live animals .
Think of the financial loss , also taking into consideration the long journey these animals have to make , if they start off , as very often happens , in the eastern countries .
There are therefore many considerations based on a single report which we still have to discuss , at least until we are clear over the basic issue : how to supervise those responsible .
Madam President , Mrs Anttila has produced an excellent report on the transportation of cattle , on which I would like to congratulate her wholeheartedly .
The transportation of cattle , and especially cattle for slaughter , has become a serious ethical problem , because cases have come to the attention of the public where animals have been treated in an inhumane and rough and ready fashion .
To improve matters , the Commission has now suggested an amendment to the decree on the export subsidy .
According to the motion for an amendment , it will be paid on condition that Community regulations are being obeyed .
This new principle , though , can hardly be considered very innovative .
On the contrary , it is astonishing that this condition was not imposed earlier , as the general conditions that pertain to agricultural subsidies have for a long time been that the rules are being observed .
Otherwise , the subsidy has been reduced or totally withdrawn .
Reducing the export subsidy is almost the only effective means whereby the EU can force the exporter to ensure that the animals are treated properly .
Naturally , it might be claimed that the exporter is unable to supervise the transportation process .
However , the exporter can have a far-reaching influence on the organization behind the transportation process , for example , by demanding an agreement to ensure that the transporting company is obliged to make good the loss of any export subsidy which may result from negligence or maltreatment of animals .
The most interesting aspect of the report now under debate is that the monitoring of transportation should be extended to the import of animals into the EU region .
This is clearly justifiable .
The amendment to the decree now being discussed will allow for broader scope for intervention in ethical matters of agriculture .
Furthermore , the production of livestock within the EU region is conducted in a dubious and ethically intolerable way .
Examples of this are the caged rearing of calves for the production of white meat for gourmet restaurants , force-feeding of geese , where the bird has food forcibly pumped into its stomach to make its liver swell , and increased beef production by means of Caesarian operation .
It is incomprehensible that a civilized international community can permit the existence of a totally unnatural breed of cattle to exist by means of repeated Caesarian operations , where the calf is pulled from the animal by cutting it open .
One of the cornerstones of European culture is a respect for , and the proper treatment of , animals .
It is quite appalling that we should be creating economic advantages for businesses that treat animals inhumanely and cruelly in the name of the free market .
The report states that the EU cannot oversee the handling of animals once they have arrived at their destination outside Europe .
Yet they may be subject to particular cruelty at that stage .
That is why we ought to try and reduce the number of animals being transported .
This could be achieved by introducing positive measures , such as the enhancement of , and aid for , the procurement of frozen food facilities and refrigerated transport equipment in both the EU region and in the countries the produce is being sent to .
A healthy outlook on the transportation of animals is extremely important for EU credibility .
I hope that the decree will be debated and got through speedily .
Mrs Wulf-Mathies , I want to address you personally .
Export refund are economic nonsense .
Export refunds , subsidies for the export of live cattle , are an accessory to animal suffering .
When we talk here about measures for improving controls , that should not hide the fact that the real point is to do away with these export refunds .
If the animals have been mostly paid for , when they are loaded onto the vehicles , then one can hardly wonder if they are treated in this way .
If you sell a horse , an Arab , to the Middle East for a million , you need not worry about its safe arrival .
If you subsidize animals for slaughter in this way , then exactly what we see in these pictures will take place .
These export subsidies must be stopped , therefore , and we shall be supporting resolutions that aim to do this .
Mrs Wulf-Mathies , do not deny what you really feel , but say that you too are against this foolishness , even if you are representing the Commission !
We must ensure that live animal breeders in North Africa are able to sell their animals , that they can do business with people there who want to eat meat in this way .
We must keep out of this .
Then we shall have made a sensible contribution to animal welfare .
People treat their animals sensibly , but we do not allow it .
That is the problem .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on the subject of the transport and welfare of animals , it is essential to make the payment export refunds for live cattle conditional on respect for Community standards .
The problem which we have discussed fully in the Committee on Agriculture concerns the supervision of animals until their arrival in the third country .
The nature of veterinary checks , in particular their frequency , their quality and the independence of the inspectors , has been put forward constantly since the beginning of the BSE crisis , and the Commission , more generally , sometimes testifies to the difficulties encountered in meeting standards with third countries .
It is fundamental that the veterinary inspectors should be qualified , independent of the transport or receiving companies and belong to an administrative service of the Commission or of a Member State .
As for the checks , they must be unexpected and carried out randomly .
We shall support amendments along those lines .
On the other hand , the Commission 's text suffers from an important gap concerning the case where animals are directly imported by third countries , without passing through European Union operators .
Mrs Anttila 's report fills this gap and proposes that the Commission puts in place arrangements to remove certain preferential advantages on imported cattle .
In conclusion I would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Anttila on her particularly effective work .
My group will vote in favour of this report .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur Mrs Anttila on her excellent report and for having incorporated into it the five amendments we submitted in committee .
Amendments Nos 1 and 6 are a useful specification that checks must be carried out by expert officials of the Commission or the Member States .
In addition it seemed to us to be important to specify that the Food and Veterinary Office is fully equipped to carry out these checks or have them done .
In addition , contrary to the wishes of some people , it seemed to us to be essential that the cost of these checks should not be borne by the refunds budget .
In fact , because the total amount of these is limited , bearing in mind the constraints which have been accepted by the European Union in the COM framework , to incorporate them into the refunds budget would involve further dismantling of the Community preference .
Amendment No 2 , which we tabled in committee and which was adopted , underlines the necessity for this rule to be fully in conformity with the aims and arrangements of the beef cattle COM .
In fact I would like to point out that the European Union exports almost 500 , 000 head of live cattle to Lebanon , Egypt , Turkey and Libya .
I would like to point out that if these countries wish to import this cattle live then this can be explained for three reasons : problems associated with refrigeration , the process of ritual slaughter and the preservation of jobs in the countries concerned .
If the European Union stops exporting live animals to these countries we should not assume that they will start importing carcasses , they will continue to import live animals but from countries other than those of the European Union .
Amendments Nos 3 and 4 , which we tabled in committee and which were adopted , specify that the restrictions and financial penalties which apply to the export of live animals from the European Union to third countries must also apply to the import of animals from these countries , if the conditions for the transport of live animals are not appropriate .
On this point I would like to recall that in 1996 the European Union imported about 500 , 000 live animals from third countries .
If we impose restrictions on our own exports we must apply those same restrictions to our imports .
In conclusion , Madam President , during the vote we shall oppose the amendments tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists which provide that no refunds may be paid on the export of live animals to third countries .
This proposal is totally absurd and totally contrary to our European interests , for as I have said earlier , if we no longer export live animals , other countries will do so in our place .
Let us not allow Australia and New Zealand to take away our markets , which for us are traditional markets , located into the bargain in a geographical zone near to our areas of production .
The transport of live animals from countries of the European Union will permit shorter journeys which will benefit animal welfare all the more .
Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mrs Anttila on her very good report and on her hard work in drawing it up .
The regulations represent one more step in the right direction .
Animal welfare is an issue which has generated a lot of public interest over the past few years .
It is an item that has been included in the protocol to the Treaty of Amsterdam , signed earlier this year , recognizing the need to take animal welfare into account when formulating policy .
The Commission 's proposals do so by making the payment of export subsidies dependent on compliance with the rules on animal transportation .
However , that in itself implies that the current legislation provides adequate protection .
I fully support the Commission 's proposal before Parliament today but I urge the Commission to examine ways in which further improvements can be made .
The rapporteur has drawn attention to the fact that the rules on animal transportation are inadequate in respect of transport by sea and do not protect the animals once they reach their destinations outside the European Union .
Mrs Anttila has rightly identified the difficulties of ensuring animal welfare once they have left the European Union : even if the rules existed in destination countries they would be unenforceable by us .
What is more , the commercial arguments for the continuation of the export subsidy regime are strong .
Surely by paying the subsidy only for carcases we could ensure that welfare provisions are being met without disruption to a very troubled market .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe responsible businesses have been providing for the delivery of animals in the best condition .
Many transport firms have allowed inspection in order to counter repeated criticisms of animal transport .
We should take note of this fact also in today 's general debate .
Unfortunately , there is always a reverse side to the medal .
This is what the report by Mrs Anttila emphasizes : that there are those who do not pay sufficient attention to providing transport suitable for animals .
It is now up to us to take the initiative and confront them with all the rigour of the law .
In order to improve the transport of live animals we must demand compliance with the following points :
Firstly , the frequency of controls should be increased , both within the EU and in third countries . Transport problems usually occur not because of faults in the legislation , but in its execution .
Secondly , specific transport conditions which meet EU legislation must be produced and , most particularly , agreed . That includes the recipient third countries .
Thirdly , we need strict and rigorously applied sanctions against gross negligence or premeditated transgression of animal welfare regulations .
And last but not least , Madam Commissioner , we require the European Commission so to set the export repayments for beef and cattle for slaughter , that there is no longer any economic incentive to export live animals to third countries .
In the international transport industry in particular , effective animal welfare is only possible with unified European legislation .
I do not deny that this is a very difficult and laborious process at European level , otherwise we should not have been talking about his subject for such a long time .
I am also aware , of course , that granting export subsidies is frequently open to general criticism .
Natural production conditions , environmental limitations , animal welfare criteria and animal health regulations in the EU mean , however , that our domestic beef product is less good value than that from the Argentine or the USA .
In commerce it is usual in such cases for rising costs simply to force businesses to move abroad .
Our farmers cannot do that , so that WTO agreements on the beef industry now provide for a drastic reduction in beef exports and subsidies on exports .
Between 1995 and 2001 they are due to be reduced from 1.1 million to 0.8 million tonnes .
Whilst that is one way , I think that European agriculture , what with BSE and growing surpluses , is going to be under constant pressure .
I think we should prohibit animal transport generally .
For the consumer that sounds good , but on the other hand consumers are not prepared to pay more for the product , just so that we can afford this luxury .
Mr President , I would like to join previous speakers in complimenting Mrs Anttila for her very objective and balanced presentation .
The common organization of the market in beef is an important measure in the overall framework of the common agricultural policy and is of great importance to my country , Ireland , where beef production is one of the main farm enterprises .
The fact that we export over 90 % of our production makes the Irish sector relevant to other Member States and , indeed , it is often said that Ireland 's beef production is Europe 's surplus .
We all know that the beef sector has come through a very difficult period , but many serious problems remain for farmers .
Cattle farming has always been a low-profit enterprise and even with generous EC subsidy many farmers are not making an acceptable profit .
Live exports are an important feature of Ireland 's cattle sector .
Many of the animals exported live are unsuited to our carcase beef industry and it is to the credit of the Irish Government that we have put in place state-of-the-art facilities for shipment of cattle to third countries .
If Europe does not supply the live cattle requirements , other countries will ; and surely we must have on our agenda the objective of maximizing the full potential of European agriculture .
In conclusion , we must reappraise the proposals in Agenda 2000 for Europe 's beef sector and , in the context of world trade talks , provide a greater degree of protection and opportunity for Europe 's beef farmers .
Mr President , I would like to put a couple of questions to Commissioner Wulf-Mathies .
When I was working on my report on the transport of livestock in Europe and elsewhere , I rapidly came to the conclusion that the European Union is in no position to exercise proper control over the welfare of animals during transport or even just to ensure that the European legislation is being complied with , and there are a few comments that should be made on that subject .
I would like to ask Commissioner Wulf-Mathies how she thinks successful control can be exercised outside the Union , not only during transport but during unloading and later at the abattoir , if it is not being done properly in the Union .
Is it not true that before long control will cost so much that it no longer compares with the advantages to the cattle sector in Europe of exporting 500 , 000 head of cattle a year ?
Really it is a very small part of the total cattle trade in Europe and it is completely ludicrous that we , this Parliament included , should continue paying export refunds .
We should stop immediately .
Madam President , firstly I hope you can correct an earlier decision not to accept a vote from me because I was not here .
I am here .
I have been here since Monday and will remain here until this par-session ends .
As far as the matter in hand is concerned , there are few things which have stirred up the Swedish public as much as when TV was able to show pictures of the unimaginable animal cruelty which takes place in connection with the export of live animals from the Union .
These exports have only one cause , the existence of export subsidies for this trade .
There is only one way to end these exports , and that is through us abolishing the subsidy .
The extra controls which are now being recommended are , of course , a step in the right direction .
However , opportunities for cheating remain , and we do not have any way of checking how these animals are treated in the recipient countries .
For this reason I am going to vote for Amendments Nos 11 and 12 .
I hope that everybody else will do so as well .
The reason is simple : our tax-payers do not want their taxes to be used to subsidize advanced cruelty to animals .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , I would first like to thank Mrs Anttila for her excellent , carefully prepared report .
Then I should like to start with the provocative question : why do we actually have animal transports , if everything is so terrible as has been depicted here ?
I should like to make the following comment on that : we suffer from a continuing overproduction of beef .
This has been exacerbated by the BSE scandal .
Beef consumption has sunk rapidly and we still bring in very many animals from third countries .
That is the situation confronting the European farmer .
The Council , Commission and Parliament are now searching for ways of reducing the resulting crisis .
What are our possibilities ?
The most expensive and most unproductive method is to store beef .
It will be returned to the market later , sold cheaply , and the quality will be affected .
The next method of reducing the quantities of meat is an early sale premium .
It has been recently resolved to do this , but presupposes that we have a market for veal , that there are consumers in Europe who will eat this veal .
Otherwise that is also just a drop in the ocean and it will only have a secondary effect .
I do not want to describe the next method more exactly , as it is described by a word from the Bible , and there are also many good things in the Bible .
It is not exactly a suitable example , but this method is not used in most states , because it meets with ethical objections .
That is where we are now .
We have a market in the Middle East and North Africa , but selling animals there requires extremely long transport times .
That is the problem .
As long as we want to make use of this market we should at least so design the conditions for the animals that they become bearable for them .
In any case , I move that the export of meat must have priority over all other methods .
That is supremely important , and it is really not possible for us to stop all animal transport completely .
I have checked the figures in my country . There are currently 48 % live cattle transports , consisting of breeding and slaughter animals .
There is nothing against that , if those farmers build up a cattle herd in order to produce milk and meat for their own population .
In other words , we should bear this in mind and not lump everything into one category .
We must continue to encourage slaughter and breeding animals , so that they can reach these markets .
In this way we will achieve a sensible result within our development policy .
Otherwise , transports should only be carried out by experts who can handle animals and who abide by Community regulations .
If that does not work , then no export subsidies should be paid .
We should be guided by this principle .
Madam President , on a point of order .
This is a most interesting debate on farming and farming subsidies .
Would it be appropriate to ask if all the speakers could indicate or have indicated - I am sure most of them will have done - if they have a particular financial interest in this debate .
It occurs to me that one or two of them might be farmers and their financial involvement and interest in the decision-making process would then affect how they voted and what they said .
We ought to know .
I am sure they will have declared it under the Rules of Procedure .
I do not know exactly . I just wanted to say that I am a farmer and have an interest .
But I am in favour of the abolition of the export subsidies .
Naturally I have an interest .
I look at that rather differently .
In my view that affects the integrity of every single Member here in the House .
We do not want to discuss that sort of question .
And of course we shall not ask the individual speakers .
Madam President , the free market has really run up against its own ethical boundaries if animals are to be transported live throughout the world .
This really ought to be stopped .
I think the only solution is for the EU to cut the refund made for the export of live animals .
It has been mentioned here that the Arabs buy live animals from New Zealand and Australia .
This is obviously a difficult problem .
But I believe the EU could make sure that also in world market negotiations the rights of live animals are recognized in future and that an effort is made around the world generally that transportation be stopped and that the slaughter of animals takes place as near as possible to the place they were originally raised .
The EU has a pretty massive ethical responsibility to ensure that these European values spread .
Mr Virrankoski mentioned that European values include a respect for animals .
This should be the starting point for us to endeavour to influence the entire world regarding this issue .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do not think it matters whether we are talking about beef or cattle , every one of us sitting in this hall has an interest , either as a producer , a seller , or a consumer .
The Commission proposes to make the granting of refunds for live cattle exports , under the COM for beef , dependent upon the welfare of the animals during transport .
I must say to start with , that it is a Union objective to do away with the live transport of slaughter cattle in favour of carcass exports .
That should be our aim in the long term .
Until that time , however , conditions for the animals during movement must be improved .
For this reason an official vet should certify the correct transport of cattle , and the payment of export subsidies should be dependent upon production of this official certificate .
Farmers have a great interest in the correct movement of animals , because the condition of the meat depends very largely on how the animals are transported .
In recent years there has been some move in this direction .
We have seen the proportion of live exports in the EU sink by 6 % in three years to reach about 10 % at present .
By way of contrast , the proportion of breeding cattle exports has risen from 16 % to 28 % , and I think that speaks for itself .
We have also seen that the export of carcass meat is favoured over that for live slaughter cattle , receiving much higher export subsidies .
For us to stop all cattle exports , however , would require the EU to support two things .
Firstly , abattoirs would have to be built within the EU to enable the slaughter criteria of the recipient countries to be met .
In that way the animals could be slaughtered in the EU and the meat could be exported .
To make meat exports possible , the Union would also have to provide funding and expertise for the construction of suitable freezing installations in the target countries .
The transport of breeding cattle is not a matter for concern , and strict animal welfare regulations , which are in the farmers ' favour , can be taken for granted .
It is the Commission 's job to execute and monitor the regulations on animal welfare .
Parliament must be kept regularly informed about them .
It is equally essential that not only adherence to regulations is monitored , but that sanctions are also imposed in cases of contravention .
I should like to give full support to Mrs Anttila 's report .
Madam President , a few weeks ago this Parliament called for an end to payments to live cattle .
We would look ridiculous now if we reverted to a weaker position .
What the Commission is proposing is simply that export refunds would not be paid if the rules on welfare during transport were broken .
But this is unrealistic .
It is impossible to comply with and when the animals leave the EU it is impossible to monitor them .
In 1995 600 , 000 were exported from the EU and half of those came from Ireland .
I do not agree with my Irish colleagues .
What is going on is unacceptable .
European Union taxpayers have to subsidize heavily something that the vast majority of them are opposed to .
We are using taxpayers ' money to subsidize an inhumane way of treating animals .
It is madness from an economic point of view , too .
We in Ireland are exporting jobs as well .
We are exporting live animals to be processed in other countries and then we complain about the unemployment problem in Ireland .
It is absolutely ridiculous and it has to end .
The writing is on the wall .
European Union taxpayers no longer want to see films on television documenting the cruel and inhumane treatment of animals .
It is not live beef , as some people have said , it is live animals which feel pain just as we do .
We cannot support this any longer .
Madam President , we have already had occasion to debate this very important and sensitive question of the transport of animals several times in this Parliament .
We know that the matter is not settled , but I consider that on the last few occasions we were able to progress gradually towards some degree of compromise and consensus .
And there is one point which has appeared unequivocal throughout our recent discussions .
That unequivocal point is the importance that animals should be treated well , and hygienically , while they are being transported .
And why is this point unequivocal ?
Because the fact is that , firstly , it is just from the point of view of animal rights ; and , secondly , it is vital to the improvement of the quality of meat - and it is important that this should be emphasized - which is in the interests both of the producers who sell meat and the consumers who buy it .
Mrs Anttila 's report is a work of a high quality , well-reasoned and full of sensible suggestions .
The various proposed amendments to her wording do in fact improve on her suggestions and put the seal on a very positive contribution to the original text .
In particular I think the proposal that in some cases the payment of refunds might be partially limited or even refused in cases of failure to observe and respect the requisite legal conditions - as regards either hygiene or well-being - is a good idea and may help to make up for the finance which is being cut here ; it may help to finance the strengthening of the technical resources , and especially the veterinary resources , that are needed by the European Union and Member States .
This is a very useful and positive proposal .
With all due respect , I think it is absolute nonsense to be suggesting here that the payment of refunds for exports of live animals should be abolished .
That would make no sense .
Furthermore , Mr Souchet has already spoken on the point here and justified it .
The point is thoroughly justified , and the only pity is that anyone should defend the abolition of aid for exports as though it were a kind of religious creed .
It is not ; it is something which is perfectly justifiable in the present context of the European Union .
In conclusion , Madam President , I would like to say one thing : not long ago , an English colleague asked Members to declare whether or not they had any interest in this matter .
I would like to say that I have no interest . I am not a cattle-breeder .
But I do wish to state that this demand , in the form in which it was put to Members who are farmers , is actually an insult to the honesty of his colleagues .
And I therefore protest !
Madam President , we must remember that the Union has decreed that community funds can be used in relation to the transportation of animals as long as their welfare is respected .
However , this has not happened by any means .
For example , in Finland , at the end of last year , a documentary was shown on the loading of animals for Beirut .
It rightly outraged the Finnish people .
Not all drivers ' morals live up to the spirit of the decree , clearly .
So Mrs Anttila 's proposal in her report to improve veterinary certification and the proper transportation of animals is to be supported .
What is obviously happening in the transportation of animals sometimes , perhaps often , is that the conditions and welfare of the animals are being neglected , and thus spot checks and added vigilance are needed .
The Union has both the right and obligation , in this case , to bring in measures , as whenever Union taxpayers ' money is being spent , it is right to make sure that anyone receiving a subsidy is implementing the wishes of the Union and its citizens .
If that is not happening , we must be bold enough to withdraw the aid .
The bearer of a transportation permit must clearly be responsible for his load .
With regard to the welfare of animals , we must recognize that transportation per se is a bad thing .
And the longer the journey the worse it gets .
The export refund on live animals fits in with Union policy incredibly badly .
The rapporteur 's Amendment No 9 is also worthy of support .
We must remember , too , that the amount for the export refund for live animals has declined in recent years in comparison with meat exports , so clearly the refund is not an incentive to increasing exports of live animals .
So the question is : when can we put an end to this refund ?
Today we have heard that overproduction of beef in the EU area , as a result , for example , of BSE , is the commonly given reason for the transportation of live animals and the export refund .
Ladies and gentlemen , that does not follow at all when it comes to the Mansikki cow and if , instead of speeches , we want to really show respect for animals , we should not make them pay the bill for this kind of operation .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report , and in furthering its aims we hope to heighten our respect for animals , not only on paper , but also in industry .
Unfortunately , we often need financial pressures or checks in order to discover humanity in people when it comes to animals .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first let me thank Ms Anttila for her very balanced report .
The Commission is , like yourselves , growing increasingly concerned about violations of animal welfare standards , which are repeatedly observed during live cattle transports , particularly those over long distances .
Although the Community has passed various regulations for animal welfare , not just within the Union but also covering movement partially through third countries , it cannot be denied that enforcement of these regulations by national authorities , and adherence to them by those in the trade , continues to be difficult .
For this reason I can fully understand criticism made during this debate .
With this proposal the Commission intends to make the payment of subsidies dependent upon adherence to animal welfare standards as they apply to animal transport .
First let me say a few words about the amendment resolutions , and assure you that the draft now before you of an amendment to Regulation 805 / 68 on the common organization of the market is not going to end up undermining the basic rules .
Amendment No 2 is , therefore , superfluous .
The Commission has a lot of sympathy for the first part of Amendment No 1 , which requires export subsidies to be dependent on veterinary certification of the correctness of transport .
If it cannot accept it , however , it is because the exporter may not be able in every case to demand such a certificate from the receiving country .
This would lead to discrimination .
Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 concern the application of Community regulations in third countries .
The Commission would like nothing better than to accede to this demand , but without the relevant legislation it cannot do so .
You will be aware that negotiations are currently being held with eastern European countries with the aim of getting these countries to declare their readiness to acknowledge the Community 's veterinary laws .
Concerning Amendments Nos 8 and 9 , which require regular spot checks to be funded out of export subsidies for live animals , I should like to say that the costs of such spot checks should follow normal commercial rules .
These include the fact that the exporter must bear the costs of checks .
Subsidies could be automatically increased according to the additional costs , but they are set in accordance with the current market situation and to that extent already take account of the exporter 's situation .
The aim of this regulation is to make adherence to animal welfare standards a prerequisite for the payment of export subsidies .
The export of live animals forms an important part of the general market mechanism for beef .
For that reason the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 11 and 12 , which are in contradiction to the aim of our proposal .
My comment on Amendment No 10 is that , whilst it is factually correct , such purely factual observations should not be part of a legislative text .
As for the other amendments , the Commission does not consider it practical to include these proposals in the text of the regulation itself .
It will , however , take heed of them in the implementation regulations .
Here I would refer in particular to part 3 of Amendment No 1 , which calls for spot checks .
This could be a thoroughly practical proposal and will be considered when the implementation regulations are being decided .
The same applies to your request for subsidiarity in the application of sanctions where certain animal welfare rules are violated .
As you know , the application of regulations is guided by detailed implementation regulations laid down by the Commission according to the usual management committee procedures .
Thus , Parliament will of course be kept up to date , in accordance with the Plumb-Delors Agreement .
Finally , may I once more emphasize that the Commission places as much value as you do on the appropriate transport of cattle , so that they arrive att heir destinations in good condition .
I would ask you , therefore , to use your parliamentary contacts with third countries to support our negotiations on achieving suitable regulations .
For that reason I would point out again that as far as third country imports are concerned , the associated states have committed themselves as part of the European Agreement to making their laws comply with those of the EU .
For that reason we are currently negotiating parity agreements with these states on veterinary matters and plant protection , in the form of supplementary agreements to the association agreements .
These agreements will also contain regulations on animal welfare during transport , so that conditions for animals will be improved not just during transport within the EU , but increasingly so in third countries as well .
Because the question has been asked , I shall also just touch on the fact that the fixed subsidy rates do not favour the export of live animals .
Quite the opposite : the ratio between subsidies for live animals and for beef between 1993 and 1997 has fallen from 65 % to 47 % .
To that extent there is also a trend , wherever practicable , for export subsidies , and thus the number of transports , to be reduced as much as possible .
I repeat , the proposed regulation is intended to contribute markedly towards improving controls , and in the view of the Commission it will do so .
The Commission assumes that one of the most effective sanctions is the removal of export subsidies where animal welfare regulations are not obeyed , as that would lead to considerable financial penalties .
We assume , therefore , that this proposal will play a substantial part in improving animal welfare during transport .
I would point out also , that veterinary controls are provided for , not just on loading , but also on arrival in the third country , in order to rule out any abuse as far as possible .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , anyone who wants to make an explanation of vote should actually be present !
That is not the case here with everyone who announced their intention to make an explanation .
You are right , Mrs Pack .
That will be recorded .
You cannot record it .
You must now call them , and if they are not here they cannot make a written explanation either .
Although we can see that from here , I will call them if you wish .
Mr Morris , Mr Waidelich , Mr Cushnahan and Mr Lindqvist , are you all present ?
All right , now we can proceed with the business .
If the Van Dijk report on a related issue had been binding it would have effectively destroyed the Irish cattle trade .
Irish beef farmers export 90 % of their cattle and we are very dependent on our ability to export live cattle .
This option was not available until recently and its resumption is estimated to be worth £ 60 million annually .
It is important that it is allowed to continue and I believe the Anttila report , if passed in its original form , strikes a proper balance between the rights of animals and the rights of farmers to carry out their trade .
Irish farmers have always operated the highest standards of animal welfare .
Irish regulations on this issue are also strict .
I have every confidence that the highest standards ensuring animals do not suffer will be implemented in Ireland to the satisfaction of all concerned .
I have voted yes to the report , but can certainly not accept any export subsidies for animal transportation to third countries .
I have therefore voted yes to Amendments Nos 11 and 12 .
Export subsidies create unnecessary animal transportation which causes unnecessary suffering for the animals .
As the rapporteur responsible for introducing the eight-hour rule - the maximum journey time for animals destined for slaughter - I would like to say that export subsidies for live animals lead to extensive cruelty .
In 1995 600 , 000 live cattle alone were exported to the Middle East .
Dealers made in excess of £ 200 million out of this type of public spending .
It is wrong to use public funds in this way .
It leads to subsidizing cruelty .
The Commission justifies itself by saying that export refunds would not be paid if the welfare rules were broken .
This is unrealistic , once these animals leave the EU borders it is impossible to monitor their treatment .
The main exporters are from Germany , Ireland and the UK .
Apart from the cruelty these animals suffer on the journey and the suffering caused by unloading with ropes and slings , there is further cruelty they are subjected to at the slaughterhouse .
Support the ending of export subsidies .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for a thorough report in an important area .
I would like to stress the importance of well-drafted rules for the best animal protection possible during the transportation of animals , which is an issue which must be granted the greatest degree of consideration in connection with export subsidies .
I would particularly like to emphasize my support for Amendments 11 and 12 which say that no export subsidies should be paid for the export of animals from the Community to third countries .
Apples , pears , peaches and nectarines
The next item is the report ( A4-0301 / 97 ) by Mr Rehder , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the improvement of the Community production of apples , pears , peaches and nectarines ( COM ( 97 ) 0035 - C4-0135 / 97-97 / 0031 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will try not to get my apples mixed up with my pears and I would like to ask for a serious discussion because we are not talking peanuts , here .
This regulation will wipe out yet another burden on the European taxpayer inherited from the past .
Unfettered growth in fruit and vegetable production within the common market led until a few years ago to unfettered rises in costs of stabilizing the market .
In 1993 alone , ECU 776 million were spent in the fruit and vegetable sector on this , and at times - and this is a scandal - in some Member States almost 70 % of the harvest of a single type of fruit were destroyed .
The pressure to dump many thousands of tonnes of precious food - described in the Euro-speak euphemism as withdrawal from the market - has quite rightly infuriated Europeans against Europe as an entity .
Even today it is difficult to explain to the average European gourmet , using the logic of European trade , why an apple in only an apple when it is larger than 70 mm .
The market regulation for fruit and vegetables has finally set workable limits on this senseless waste of taxpayers ' money .
I consider that the present proposal for the area of land to be grubbed up , at 10 , 000 hectares , is sensible and also financially bearable , and that it will be a foundation stone for the necessary measures .
The Commission assumes that as a result of the new grubbing-up programme withdrawals from the market will fall by 80 % , and that in four years time the annual costs of ECU 28 million will have been cancelled out .
Madam Commissioner , we too pay attention to finance .
We shall be looking in four years time to see if that is really accurate .
The final objective of a thoroughly overhauled common agricultural policy must be , however , to reduce state or Community intervention to zero .
For the taxpayer as well , intervention is only justified when it concerns the maintenance of the environment and , above all , the maintenance of future-proof jobs .
Agenda 2000 , which so many people mostly criticize , and which apparently few of the general critics seem to have read to the end , offers good starting points for the twin objectives of , first , maintaining jobs in rural areas , and , second , reducing costly overproduction .
Of course we welcome the fact that many points in the European Parliament 's proposals of December 1996 have been taken up .
That applies particularly to our suggestion for creating an integrated policy within and for rural areas , in which there should be concern for maintenance of a regional agriculture and , equally , concern for additional jobs , improved infrastructure policy and specific environmental protection .
Those , too , who even here in Parliament - they are no longer present , unfortunately ; perhaps Mr Habsburg could give them a ticking off - have made great rhetorical play about rejecting every essential and long overdue reform of the common agricultural policy , and those who continue to bury their heads in the sand - to the great detriment of small farmers in need of our help - even these should finally recognize that only in this integrated initiative can there be an effective end to depopulation and loss of significance .
Europe only has a future when rural areas , which make up 80 % of the continent , also have a secure future .
I should also like to ask those representatives of the Group of the European People 's Party - they do not seem to be here either , but perhaps they are , posthumously , I almost said - who abstained in the vote , to acknowledge that such abuses have occurred .
In ancient Greece , the cradle of democracy , it was usual for those who abstained to be driven out of the Council .
These have all now driven themselves out .
Nevertheless , I would ask the surviving colleagues of these expellees to vote now for the measure .
Then I think we should between us be able to produce a fair and sensible policy .
Madam President , I should like to start by congratulating Mr Rehder on his report .
As usual , he has done an excellent job .
The proposals are one of a series of measures which the Commission has taken to reduce expenditure on the withdrawal of apples , peaches , pears and nectarines from the market and to stabilize the income of producers .
I welcome this development .
In fact , it will only affect up to 10 , 000 hectares throughout the 15 Member States .
The purchase and destruction of fruit and vegetables with EU funds does little to improve the image of the European Union in the eyes of the taxpayer , particularly when retail prices limit the amounts of fresh produce in the diets of many of our citizens .
We are all well aware of the scare stories and food mountain stories .
The nature of the produce means that it must be processed and preserved , or destroyed .
In 1994 and 1995 , inspections by the Court of Auditors revealed that the destruction of fruit had , in certain regions of the Union , polluted the groundwater to such an extent that it had infected water supplies to householders in the vicinity of the destruction sites .
The full extent of the damage to the environment that this practice causes is not yet evident , but it was of such concern that an inquiry into the environmental aspects of the common agricultural policy as a whole was launched .
This report has not yet been published .
Even those of us with only the most rudimentary scientific knowledge are aware that the dumping of tonnes of fruit and vegetables with high nitrate contents amounts to an environmental hazard .
This is a commendable initiative , to better balance supply and demand .
I hope that you will all support this proposal in this House , this morning , as I can see so many people are here to take part in this interesting debate .
I nevertheless ask the Commission to ensure that withdrawal prices are reviewed regularly to ensure that they do not encourage over-production .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are examining the proposal for a Council regulation on the improvement of the Community production of apples , pears , peaches and nectarines .
This reform proposal is based on what was decided for apples in 1990 , and for peaches and nectarines in the marketing year 1994-1995 , with certain modifications which take into account the experience gained .
Now the measures also include pears .
The total area affected will be 10 , 000 hectares for apples and pears and 10 , 000 hectares for peaches and nectarines .
These areas will be apportioned between the Member States on the basis of the orchard area , production levels and withdrawals of each Member State .
Experience has shown that total grubbing-up operations , such as those carried out in 1990-1993 and 1994-1995 , are of limited effectiveness and more difficult to monitor , since they require complete information about and total control over the fruit orchards of applicants .
We therefore consider that the measure should be extended to include partial grubbing-up as well as total grubbing-up , with the proviso that the area to be grubbed up must be at least 0.5 hectare in size , in order to avoid abuses .
In order to ensure that the measure is effective it will only apply to productive orchards of more than 300 trees per hectare . It will be financed by EAGGF Guarantee funds .
This measure will help to eliminate the mass destruction of surpluses at the Community taxpayer 's expense , which provokes such bad press and has caused more indignation among the European public than any other measure under the CAP .
This is due to the ethical questions raised by the destruction of valuable food products in perfect condition , for which there is a great need in other parts of the world , but which , for various reasons , are not placed on the market , causing surpluses in the countries of the Union .
In order to ensure that this one-off premium is effective , it is proposed that the measures should only apply to orchards of more than 300 trees per hectare and to areas of at least 0.5 hectare in size , and that the orchards eligible for this fixed premium should have trees of a maximum and minimum age , to be set by the Member States .
It is also proposed that the measures should only apply to orchards which meet certain ecological , environmental and social requirements , with the Member States being allowed to determine , in the framework of the future regulation and under their own responsibility , the specific regions to which the measure will apply and the details of its application .
We therefore support Mr Rehder 's report and the amendments adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which we believe will improve the introduction and implementation of this measure .
However , we do not agree with Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 9 , since we see no reason for changing the method of apportioning the areas proposed by the Commission , which , as I said earlier , will be on the basis of the orchard area , production levels and withdrawals of each Member State .
We believe that Amendment No 7 is arbitrary , discriminatory and partisan .
With regard to Amendment No 8 , we prefer the original wording of article 1 ( 2 ) ( 2 ) .

We do not understand Amendment No 9 , since we are unsure what the objective criteria for designating priority categories of producers , rather than products or orchards , will be .
Do the authors of the amendment mean that they must be tall , blond and blue-eyed ?
Very well , that is a joke .
We cannot support this amendment , because we believe that the conditions established by the Commission and refined by the Committee on Agriculture 's amendments are sufficient .
We therefore consider that this proposal for a regulation represents a positive step for the sector and for the public image of the European Union , and our group will be supporting it .
Madam President , we too support this report , because it breaks through the so-called open doors as well .
When a report proposes to reduce quantities that are damaging the market with a surplus , and which in particular help to clear the Community scene of images that are certainly unpopular , such as those of fruit mountains destroyed by bulldozers , it can only be met with general acceptance .
In this report drawn up by Mr Rehder , however , the technical proposals also seem to us to be balanced , the measure with which it is intended to face the serious matter of surpluses which , as we all know , is one of the hardest undertakings to propose to , rather than to impose on , the Member States .
The offer of an exchange premium for reducing cultivation of apples and pears by 10 , 000 hectares , with a further 10 , 000 hectares for peaches and nectarines seems balanced .
This is also because , particularly in these last two categories of fruit , there has been a type of boost on the basis of fashion : the old peach has been abandoned and we have started to produce just as many nectarines , with the inevitable result of blocking the market and confusing the consumer as well .
Very precise controls should be made . Consequently , the areas destroyed should not be repopulated with the same type of fruit .
The minimum area of half a hectare seems to us to be adequate .
Age is important as well , to avoid speculative transactions spanning this intervention .
A minimum and maximum age helps us to avoid ad hoc plantations from being planted so as to be able to collect the premium .
Our rapporteur affirms that , thanks to this new programme , we can reduce withdrawals by 80 % .
We hope that will happen .
He also says that , in less than four annual seasons , the foreseeable costs will be balanced by savings .
This is what we all hope for , with one small regret : why did we not think of it before ?
Madame President , the rule proposed by the council seems to return once more to a policy of grubbing up fruit trees , on the basic argument of reducing budget expenditure associated with the financing of withdrawal and destruction of fruit .
This grubbing up premium will be accepted by fruit growers even if it involves a reduction in their potential production .
Some of them will in fact see in this a means of reducing the financial difficulties they are encountering .
But is that the sign of an ambitious and effective policy in the sphere of fruit production ?
I do not think so .
The main reason for the slump in the sales of fruit products even in the Union is not associated with a real imbalance between supply and demand in the Community context .
It is due essentially to new practices in international negotiations and wholesale distribution , which uses imports from third countries to impose an artificial imbalance between supply and demand and thus to provoke the fall of prices at producer level , a slump in sales , and destruction .
Should the Commission and the Council not be considering measures to adhere to Community preference , about measures to bring about a rapid and effective operation of the safeguard clauses and about the necessary agreements and cooperation which we shall have to develop within the Union to forestall situations of internal competition ?
Should the Council and the Commission not also be considering measures to propose and implement morality in the relationship between producers and consumers on the one hand , and international negotiation and large-scale distribution on the other , for example by fixing a maximum multiplication factor between the production price and the sales price , in the interests of both producers and consumers ?
Instead of talking about overproduction should we not see the reality of under consumption ?
The Council and the Commission should ask themselves if the demand for fruit on the Union market would not be much greater if we really did reduce unemployment and poverty , which prevent tens of millions of families from having a normal consumption of fruit , which is moreover indispensable for good health .
In this respect should we not listen to the appeals of charity organizations which emphasize the poverty and malnutrition in the Union and the reduction of food aid in the Union , an aid which should , in their eyes amount to ECU 230 million to meet the needs of deprived people .
Finally , it is not true , in the sphere of fruit and vegetable production , overall in deficit in the Union , that we should guarantee fair wages for agricultural work and provide finance for diversification , product development and reconversion where necessary , thus enabling tens of thousands of young farmers to get started , in particular in southern areas ?
This would make priority of employment a reality and not a slogan .
The report by Mr Rehder relates to a rule which is basically conjunctural and cyclical .
It must not conceal from us the basic reforms which remain to be carried out and to which I have just referred .
Madam President .
Mr Rehder , we support your report , because we think it will bring a number of improvements , but we oppose on principle the policy of grubbing up .
As you know , this is not new ; we have had it for decades .
It contributed to the fact that self-seeding land was destroyed , and plantations laid out because there was simultaneous encouragement for them .
These measures gave rise to the very fact that we now have overproduction , that businesses have not been market-oriented , that production was for quantity not quality , and now we have the problem of destruction .
It is exactly the same , by the way , with wine .
In the 70s and 80s there was a reorganization of vineyards so that quality vines were removed and replaced by quantity producers .
That went so far that in the Eifel foothills vines were planted on sugarbeet fields .
There too , we have to face overproduction .
That is , all in all , the wrong way to go , and we want these enabling instruments to be deleted .
We want the market to decide the rules .
We support your report , though , because we feel that a few things have been included here which will prevent the worst from happening .
I do feel , however , that we must discuss this again , and that we must approach this market issue in a fundamental way .
Madam President , the Commission tells us to grub up . So let us grub up , if we must .
Let us grub up in the name of the law of the market place , let us not forget that we have also planted and harvested in the name of the law of the market place .
Let us allow an accountable mechanism to direct the evolution and the life of our soil .
Let us grub up because grubbing up today represents the politically correct alternative to massive destruction of surpluses .
Is that what it all comes down to ?
I do not think so , because in the case in point , this is already the third proposal seeking to deal with the permanent surplus of apples , pears , peaches and nectarines .
I am worried about the harmful effects of such a system , which seems to have allowed some people to plant more so that they would have more to grub up , let alone turn themselves into veritable premium hunters - planting premiums , then grubbing up premiums , via premiums for the destruction of surpluses .
Do we have them to blame for all that ?
Certainly not .
How can we reproach producers for utilizing the resources of a system , however worthy of criticism it may be ?
All that is shocking , not to say immoral , but we are obliged today to endorse this type of stop-gap measure .
Well then , in doing so let us make the stop-gap efficient .
We are in favour of Mr Rehder 's report but if it is necessary to grub up then let us not create any distortion of competition nor any inequity .
It is therefore useless to associate the payment of the premium to the age of the trees , whereas we fix a limit of 300 trees minimum per hectare .
We therefore reject Amendment No 6 .
That said , I think we would all wish , in our chosen work , to do something other than to consolidate , here and there , the harmful effects of an unnatural system of production .
One day we will have to find the political courage to break this vicious circle and demonstrate true creativity .
To produce less in order to produce better : when will that message be really heard and understood ?
Madam President , it seems from the European Commission 's figures that there is considerable overproduction of apples , pears , nectarines and peaches in the horticultural sector .
Between 1991 and 1996 an average of 800 , 000 tonnes of apples per year were withdrawn from the market and destroyed .
As the rapporteur rightly says , an explanation is needed for this waste of good food , which presents ethical but not practical problems , A European improvement regulation can make a valuable contribution to reducing overproduction .
The grubbing up regulation now proposed is considerably better than previous regulations .
The ban on replanting on the same land will encourage efficiency .
I can support the proposed breakdown of the maximum area between Member States .
The Commission has based its proposal on objective and relevant criteria .
It nevertheless seems possible that certain Member States will not make full use of their allocation .
This will impair the effectiveness of the grubbing up regulation .
The situation will not be completely clear until the growers have had the opportunity to register for the improvement regulation .
I therefore think that it is better to wait until after the registration period to consider whether it is desirable to redistribute the allocated areas between the Member States , rather than tinkering around with the distribution at this stage .
I agree with most of the rapporteur 's amendments , but certainly not Amendment No 6 .
I cannot see why young trees should not be covered by the regulation .
After all they still have a long productive life ahead of them .
The grubbing up of these orchards , together with the ban on replanting , will certainly help reduce overproduction in the longer term .
Besides that the age requirements for trees are difficult to check .
Finally , I regret that it has taken so long to consider this report in Parliament .
The Commission 's proposal is already 8 months old .
Because Parliament had not given its opinion the Council decision was delayed .
Time is still needed for implementation in the national legislation and for instructions to be issued to growers .
This regulation might not come into effect until mid-January , when much of the winter , the period which is particularly suitable for grubbing up , will already be over .
Madam President , allow me to first say that this is a most excellent report , but our group still cannot vote in favour of it .
The reason is that we can in no way approve the underlying directive .
This is yet another example of the absurd results which the common agricultural policy leads to .
Thus first we have subsidies for the production of apples , pears and nectarines , subsidies which lead to overproduction .
We then go and buy up that overproduction and in a hungry world we then destroy the fruit .
The public is indignant , but instead of then lowering the subsidies , we introduce a new subsidy , this time for chopping down trees .
Let me assure you , Madam President , that this will lead to the same indignation among our citizens when they see how subsidies are given for chopping down living fruit trees .
Furthermore , this will not lead to any large reduction in the Union 's intervention buying .
The 80 % being discussed is only in relation to the average production of this 2 % of fields which we are now going to chop down .
Furthermore , there is nothing to prevent a grower from replanting the field , but this time with a different type of fruit , or from selling it to his brother who in turn plants it with the same type of trees as has just been chopped down .
This time again with subsidies from the Union .
Nor is there anything to prevent the grower from chopping down the least productive trees , or , once he has chopped down these trees , from using the income he then gets from the EU to manage the other trees more intensively .
Let me say that this is going to fail .
It will not lead to any savings .
The only sensible way of getting away from this incredible waste is to reduce the subsidy directly .
Madam President , I should like first to thank Mr Rehder for the way he has presented his whole concept .
We are dealing here with a matter that is a real patchwork of all possible temporary measures that can be taken ; just as aspirin certainly helps ease a pain , but basically alters nothing about the problem .
This is the third time since 1990 that we have considered this problem .
Each time we were told that it was the last time , and when I read in the report that this is absolutely the last time , I have to say : Mr Rehder , you will find out that there is another absolutely last time , you can be quite sure of that !
This shows once again the weakness of our general agricultural policy , which has no comprehensive concept .
For that reason I am thankful to Mr Rehder for pointing out quite clearly that we shall not repair the agricultural policy if we do not put it into perspective with the future , that is , the perspective of renewable raw materials .
I have already spoken about this during the excellent report by Mr Hallam , when I said that it was absolutely essential to alter our way of thinking .
Our great error is that we utilize our research and development capability for non-renewable raw materials .
The correct policy would be to use the same effort for renewable ones .
Meanwhile we know that in the future we shall need an agriculture that is based on farming basics and that is the way of the future .
I must thank Mr Rehder .
We shall of course support the report this time , because it is necessary to maintain the existence of a few people , but we must also say that a comprehensive solution should at long last be found .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it seems there is a production surplus of pears , apples , peaches and nectarines in the European Union .
In that respect , we have not yet forgotten the pictures of the recent destruction of tonnes of pears in Portugal , which thus seems to suggest that the possibility of production surpluses is confirmed .
To prevent any more pictures of this kind from being seen , and from continuing to repel all those who see them , particularly the millions in this Union and this world who continue to live in hunger or continue to live in the doorways of poverty , the Council has given instructions and the Commission is obediently proposing a reward for uprooting trees , resulting in the definitive abandonment of production .
This means that around ECU 100 million are once again being used to encourage the definitive abandonment of production .
That investment , it is suggested , will be recovered in under four years , since provision is made for the abolition of the present outlay of ECU 28 million per year allocated to the payment of guaranteed prices for the removal of surpluses .
The Commission still establishes the maximum global ceiling for the area to be abandoned , distributes the money among the Member States , fixes the minimum surface area unit to be abandoned at half a hectare provided that the trees are planted with a density of 300 or more per hectare .
Nevertheless , in proposing these guidelines and figures the Commission omits from its analysis consideration of certain points which we think are essential .
It does not determine the imbalances between national consumption and national production , which might clarify who actually contributes to an overall production surplus and who produces at levels below those of actual consumption ; it does not take into consideration the commercial effects of current Community imports of those products , in circumstances which often betray an increasing degree of unfair competition ; it does not reflect the fact that the present price guarantee system at least guarantees yields and might possibly cease to represent a cost if we really invested in improving trading conditions and encouraged exports and consumption in order to achieve a more stable balance between production and demand .
Finally , it reveals and renews a total insensitivity and indifference to the consequences which support for the total abandonment of production has always had and will continue to have in terns of increased unemployment , widening desertification and growing abandonment of rural areas .
So long as there is no such global analysis , and we do not even think there is any political will for it , we shall go on fighting to prevent the general acceptance and implementation of the payment of rewards for the definitive abandonment of production .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , to start with , the Commission would like to thank Mr Rehder most sincerely for his report .
As you know , this proposal is directly concerned with the reform of the common organization of the market for fruit and vegetables passed last year .
The Commission has presented this proposal at the request of the Council . It is intended to limit the measures for each of the two categories , on the one hand apples and pears - which we do not want to confuse with each other - and peaches and nectarines on the other , to 10 , 000 hectares .
Bearing in mind previous experience with similar measures - and it has been said here that not all of them met with the desired success - this proposal aims principally to make the criteria for guaranteeing the grubbing up premium as flexible as possible . This is in the interests of maximum efficiency , but also in order to give Member States an opportunity to improve the economic and ecological situation in the various regions .
I should like to emphasize at this point that of course controls will be carried out , and they will concentrate on the ownership of the land , not on the present producer .
The Commission hopes that these grubbing up measures will facilitate the cleaning up of the sector in the long term , so that it can make full use of the reforms to the common organization of the market .
Let me say the following about the amendments . The Commission cannot agree with the arguments in the first amendment , which creates a direct connection between market withdrawal and structurally governed overproduction .
Because of the perishable nature of the products concerned , and because of the annual changes in harvest , market withdrawals , although not ideal , are an instrument for short term stabilization of the sector .
The Commission agrees in principle with Amendment No 2 , and will bear it in mind for the implementation of the measures .
It does , however , consider its own wording , referring to the situation and not just the measures , as more suitable .
It is of the opinion , however , that the trees to be grubbed up and the measures for preventing replanting should be defined as in the previous Council Regulation or its comprehensive implementation regulations , and it therefore rejects Amendment No 3 .
Amendments Nos 4 and 5 concern merely the aim and purpose of some regulations in the proposal .
Ideas of this kind , although the Commission welcomes them , should not be considered in a legislative text .
Amendment No 6 , like all other previous measures of this kind , will be included in the detailed implementation regulations .
Amendment No 7 is concerned with the sensitive problem of distributing the maximum area to be grubbed up between Member States , and this has already been referred to .
The Commission welcomes the introduction of the amendment , which places production and withdrawal from the market in close relationship when determining the distribution .
Without committing itself finally at this stage , the Commission will introduce it into the final discussion .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 8 .
For our decision to modify the original distribution we shall need information from the Member States .
For this reason the Commission cannot make any promises regarding a deadline .
I would expressly like to assure Parliament , however , that everything will be done to reach a rapid decision .
Last but not least , Amendment No 9 : I am pleased to tell you that it will be accepted by the Commission .
Let me say something about just three points in this discussion .
First , about the economic position of those employed in this field , the grubbing up measures are just a part of the common organization of the market , and I should like to emphasize that . The common organization of the market is also expressly aimed at giving the producer in the Community a fair market share , for which new items such as the business fund and the operational programmes are a very important beginning .
I should like to point out , therefore , that this one measure cannot offer a solution for the whole proble