Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 4 October 2001 .
Announcement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , as you will recall , on 8 October , 104 passengers and four employees of Linate airport were killed in a tragic accident involving a small private aircraft and an SAS aeroplane , which was due to fly from Milan to Copenhagen .
Immediately after the disaster , I sent a message expressing my condolences to the President of the Italian Council and to the Danish Prime Minister .
Since I was on an official visit to Denmark the day after the accident occurred , I also gave the same message in person to the various authorities that I met during my visit .
I would , however , like to publicly demonstrate , once again , our solidarity and deep sympathy for the families of the victims .
Agenda
Madam President , I am rapporteur for the subject of Macedonia which is on tomorrow ' s agenda .
However , the Commission has just informed us that this subject should be withdrawn .
As rapporteur , and also on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I propose that , in accordance with Article 144 of the Rules of Procedure , we delete this subject from tomorrow ' s agenda .
The reason for this is that we have obtained information to the effect that the Commission wishes firstly to contribute more money by way of aid to Macedonia and secondly to extend the period of aid .
I therefore propose that we withdraw the subject from this part-session and instead address it in the November part-session .
We therefore refer the subject back to the Committee on Budgets and to the committees which are to issue opinions on this subject , that is to say the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
Madam President , there is an urgent matter missing from the agenda to which I would briefly like to draw the attention of the Presidency and the Members .
The German foundation ' Memory , Responsibility and Future ' , established by the German government and national enterprises , has taken the surprising , disturbing decision not to count Italian prisoners of war or even a large percentage of Italian civilian forced labourers among the former forced labourers in Germany , providing compensation only for civilians who were interned in actual concentration camps .
This exclusion is unjustified from a legal point of view and would hinder the deep reconciliation between the European peoples who were divided by the tragic experiences of the Second World War .
I feel that action needs to be taken to prevent this great discrimination in the German compensation against Italian prisoners of war and Italian civilian forced labourers .
Thank you , Mr Borghezio .
We shall of course take note of what you have said .
Madam President , this morning , when I got up , I found that I had lost my voice .
I have lost my voice and so I do not know whether I will be able to deliver my usual explanations of vote tomorrow .
That aside , I am here beside my friend , Mr Borghezio , not because I have changed group but because I support his proposal regarding the failure to provide compensation for Italian former prisoners of war and Italian civilian forced labourers .
These are all people who are over 75 years of age , and therefore pensioners , who have been left by the Italian government without a pension .
Therefore , the damages suffered by these Italian citizens , who , like many of us , have suffered the outrages of war , are even greater because , in addition to not receiving this compensation , they are pensioners who do not receive a pension .
Madam President , given the degree to which the media has had access to an unpublished report commissioned by the EU 's Scientific and Technological Option Assessment Committee , STOA , entitled " The Possible Toxic Effects from Nuclear Reprocessing Plants at Sellafield and Cap de la Hague " , could you immediately organise for the publication of this report to ensure a balanced and informed comment by all , especially by us in this Parliament of democratically elected representatives ?
I am strongly of the view that all reports by committees of this House , whatever their status , should at least be available to Members of this House before they are available to those outside .
Please arrange for that report 's immediate publication .
Mrs Doyle , I shall give your request my full consideration .
Madam President , as president of STOA , may I point out that the study to which the honourable Mr Doyle refers has not yet been officially adopted by STOA 's plenary .
It is on the agenda for the next meeting here in Strasbourg .
As you know , this study examined numerous aspects and independent experts were also asked for their opinion , because we want to ensure that the study is reliable and that STOA is reliable .
Once STOA 's plenary has reached a decision , we shall pass it on so that we can take what I imagine will be the right decision on such an important matter .
Madam President , in the absence of our chairman , as vice-chairman of the Committee on Petitions I would point out that our committee requested the report from STOA on the possible toxic effects of Sellafield in the Irish Sea and Cap de la Hague in the English Channel .
The Petitions Committee is as anxious as anybody that this report should be published as soon as possible .
It is important that the report , when adopted by STOA , is seen to be absolutely objective and scientifically independent .
That is why it has been subjected to independent assessment .
When we have considered that assessment I believe all Members of this House would want the report to be published .
But that should not be done whilst doubts remain - and unfortunately there are doubts - about the objectivity of the report as currently presented to the STOA panel .
Madam President , I was astonished to read in the press the outcome of the negotiations by the Conference of Presidents to decide the winner of the Sakharov Prize .
What I am asking myself is where and when will MEPs be given an opportunity to begin to understand how the presidents , or the majority of presidents , or whoever , came to a decision which patently contradicts the MEPs who voted in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
I find this scandalous to say the least , and I believe that there is a genuine problem with the way things work in our Parliament , which is that , in actual fact , we serve no purpose .



We spend hours having debates and casting votes in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , and then afterwards , Mr Poettering calls Mr Barón Crespo or Mr Barón Crespo calls Mr Poettering and what we think counts for nothing .
I would simply like to say that we are Members who were elected with the same votes as Mr Poettering and Mr Barón Crespo , and that I cannot accept that it is they who call the shots in the European Parliament , therefore I want us to discuss , in plenary , the way that decisions are taken , just as the Sakharov Prize was discussed last week .
( Applause from the Greens / ALE Group )
Madam President , as Mr Cohn-Bendit has referred to me , I will gladly respond in this House to what he has said .
The Conference of Presidents confirmed the majority vote of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and also proposed the runner-up , who had also received a large number of votes , so that there are three nominations .
I would also like to tell you , Mr Cohn-Bendit , that you can not only reach me at any time by telephone , but I am also available for private discussions whenever you wish .
Madam President , I spoke to Mr Wurtz on the telephone and to Mrs Hautala and Mr Lannoye in person .


First of all , I do not consider the fact that Members of this Parliament should talk to one another as a crime and secondly , the Conference of Presidents has respected the proposal tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy .
The proof of this is that the prize was awarded to the joint Israeli-Palestinian proposal and to the proposal from the bishop of Angola by a very large majority .
Furthermore , on your own initiative , Madam President , a special mention will be given to Mrs Sedrine , the Tunisian journalist .
I would ask my fellow Members , especially Mr Cohn-Bendit , to be a bit more careful about what they say because , apart from the fact that the decision of the Committee on Foreign Affairs has been respected , the last thing we need at such a sensitive political moment is to create a religious war between a Christian , a Muslim and a Jew .
This is completely unacceptable .
Madam President , I had the opportunity to express my views on this matter before the Conference of Presidents meeting .
I do not feel that now is the time to argue about this , or to have a dispute over procedure .
In my view , I am extremely pleased that the Conference of Presidents had virtually unanimously agreed to award the Sakharov Prize to Mr Ghazzawi and to Mrs Peled-Elhanan , who , to my mind , symbolise what many of us aspire to , in other words , to give hope to those who wish to find the path of dialogue and peace in the Middle East , a region that has been so afflicted .
From this point of view , Madam President , I think that , and the European Council also gave this message , in other words , that we request Ariel Sharon ' s government to respect international law and withdraw his tanks and troops as a matter of urgency from the autonomous Palestinian territories , I think that it would certainly be in the spirit of the Sakharov Prize for you , Madam President , if you agree , to give this message to the Israeli government on our behalf .
Thank you , Madam President .
Mr Wurtz , I think that , given the applause that I have just heard , I am certainly able to do this .

I have one comment to make , Mr Barón Crespo : when the prize is given to two people - one a Muslim , the other Jewish - this means that a war of religions does not exist . If you are brave , you are not obliged to add that we need a Catholic as well , as there is still no war of religions .
You say , therefore , that the decision was not to award the prize to two Muslims , but to a Jew and a Muslim .
That is all you need to say and that is why I maintain that a lack of courage and historical insight are what led to the proposal by the Committee on Foreign Affairs being watered down .
Madam President , Africa also exists .
We attended the Durban Conference and we must also send a message of hope for the ongoing conflicts in Africa .
Furthermore , I am delighted with the unanimity that this prize has inspired and I give it my support , which is no less than you deserve .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a few days ago , another five workers lost their lives as the result of an explosion on the tanker which they were repairing in Salamina .
This is the umpteenth time that workers in my country have paid with their blood for the lack of rudimentary safety measures as the result of the unaccountability of shipowners and the privatisation of control services , which issue certificates based on the shipowners ' interests rather than on respect for the workers ' lives .
The Greek government is also to blame for failing to take any action whatsoever , despite the large number of accidents .
I should like to use this tribune to express our condolences to the victims ' families and to roundly condemn the unaccountability of their employers and the policy of the Greek government .
Be it in Toulouse or Salamina , the working classes are being sacrificed for the sake of a competitive economy and more and more profit .
Madam President , I do not know if you remember , but , a couple of months ago , I severely criticised the fact that we Danes were being treated unfairly .
We did not have the opportunity to watch Danish television .
I asked you and Mrs Banotti to look into the matter , and I should like to say that Mrs Banotti has again shown that she is good at these matters .
The Danes among us have now got Danish television again .
We are over the moon and , as Mrs Banotti can see , I am celebrating the fact in my national colours - a red jacket and a splendid white shirt from the Håndværker Bank in Næstved .
So you can see that we are really happy to have got Danish television .
Madam President , I would like to put on record my disappointment that we will not be able this week to discuss the money-laundering directive .
Thanks to the hard work of the Conciliation Committee and those in this House who have been working on this directive , we are on the point of an agreement with the European Council , and it is a pity that we were not able to get it on the agenda for this week .
This directive is as important in the fight against terrorism as the bombs which are being dropped on Afghanistan or the efforts of those who are risking their lives there .
It is something that we should deal with as promptly as possible , because starving the terrorist of his funds is just as important as subjecting him to military attack .
I hope this House will act swiftly when this matter comes before it at the next plenary session .
I am sorry that it was not possible to get it on the agenda for this month .
Madam President , I was not aware that this was going to arise and I apologise therefore to Mrs Villiers for not being able to talk to her about it earlier .
She is quite right to say that agreement has been reached with the Council and it is now up to Parliament to have the third reading .
We pressed extremely hard - and you , Madam President , were involved in this - to try and get to a position where we could be flexible and act very rapidly as a parliament .
Unfortunately , we have to await the documentation that comes from the Council in all 11 languages of the Community before we actually have Council 's position formally adopted so that we can come to a conclusion with a third reading .
It is therefore , unfortunately , a matter of timing , due to the scheduling of documents and translation etc. that we do not have that flexibility .
I did press very hard indeed but unfortunately it was not achievable .
Madam President , my group would also have liked to see the money laundering directive approved sooner .
We would , indeed , have liked to have seen it wrapped up before the summer holidays .
But it was Mrs Villiers ' own group which held out against an obligation on lawyers to report suspicious transactions and therefore held up the final resolution of this matter for six months after our plenary vote in April .
I am glad to say that the results of conciliation do not reflect that refusal and lawyers will have to contact the authorities when they have reason to believe their clients may be seeking advice in order to engage in money laundering .
I am glad that is the final result .
I deeply regret that it took so long . I am afraid it is Mrs Villiers 's own group - indeed her own delegation within that group - which contributed to that lengthened and regrettable delay .
Madam President , I would like to raise briefly a matter of serious concern to me , and perhaps to others in this House , relating to the question of discrimination .
This House rightly rejects discrimination in all its forms and we receive opinions on this subject from many quarters , including the Economic and Social Committee .
It now appears that this committee itself practises discrimination on the grounds of age , in that it is impossible to apply for a job there unless you are younger than 45 .
Madam President , may I suggest that you write to them as a matter of urgency to see whether this is true and , if it is , perhaps to threaten that we will stop receiving their opinions until they abandon such discrimination .
Surely it should be possible for people to work for any institution at any age , even if they are as old as I am !
Thank you .
We shall look into this , as you have asked .
Madam President , I should like to raise an issue which I raised at the previous part-session , that is , the predicament of national airlines in Europe which are currently facing effective annihilation .
It is reckoned that approximately EUR 2.5 billion will be lost by the European aviation industry between now and the end of the year , and that some 20 000 jobs will be lost .
The Commission response to this , however , has been stony-faced and ideological .
It has sought to use the crisis arising from the atrocities of 11 September to shake out the industry to ensure that companies that may or may not have survived in the normal course of economic operations are forced to close down .
I would appeal to the Commission to use some political sagacity in its approach to this situation .
If the European project does not have the support of the people of Europe it will not succeed , and the Commission is failing to recognise this .
Every single job lost in the European aviation industry as a result of the Commission 's decision , will create an ever-widening pool of resentment towards Europe , not towards national governments which may be pursuing their own agendas .
The Commission must urgently review its approach to the aviation industry .
Madam President , this is the second session that we are holding in October .
As you will recall , at our first October session , we made a last minute change to the agenda in order to debate and vote on the dreadful accident that occurred at the AZF factory in Toulouse .
Yet , two days ago , this very factory released several tonnes of ammonia into the Garonne river , which flows through the city of Toulouse .
I am therefore asking you , Madam President , to ensure that the resolution we adopted is followed up by the Commission , to prevent it becoming lost in a mass of administrative red tape .
I believe that the impunity and the arrogance of the polluters must be met with the determination of our Parliament .
I shall gladly do so , Mr Onesta .
Madam President , I would like to present a communiqué concerning our colleague Patricia McKenna .
She took part today in a peaceful demonstration at the nuclear weapons base at Faslane , Scotland , and was arrested at eight in the morning along with twelve Irish students .
She asks you to give your attention to the fact that a Member of the European Parliament may not be arrested when he or she is on the way to or from meetings of the European Parliament .
She also hopes that this request will bring about a debate concerning the unlawfulness of nuclear weapons .
Quite recently , the International Court of Justice has stated that the possession of weapons of mass destruction contravenes international law .
Madam President , I am aware that some here will find themselves thinking that it is not possible to travel to Strasbourg via Scotland ; but I would merely like to say - in Patricia McKenna 's native language - that " what goes up , must come down " .
Mrs Hautala , I have just received some information regarding Mrs McKenna , and I shall of course see what we can do to help her .
Madam President , I would like to thank you for mentioning at the start of the sitting the tragedy which took place at Milan Linate airport , which claimed 118 lives .
Investigations are currently being carried out into who is responsible .
Of course , it became clear very early on that , while , regrettably , human error is always possible , it was made possible in this case largely by the severe lack of security in that airport , which we all believed to be safe .
From the human point of view , I feel that it is becoming imperative that these errors are not repeated and that such a tragic incident should compel all those responsible to undertake solemnly to ensure that such tragedies are avoided in the future .
As regards responsibility , I feel that we , as the European Union , should call upon the Commission and the Council to be more rigorous in enforcing the imperative need for airport security , to ensure that such tragedies are avoided in future .
Mrs Ghilardotti , I believe that what you have said somewhat pre-empts the debate that will take place in a few moments , following the points of order .
Madam President , unfortunately the fears which I expressed the very day after the terrorist attack in the USA have come true and the death of the thousands of innocent American victims is being used as an excuse for a barbaric attack on Afghanistan , giving rise to new hordes of innocent victims and causing tremendous damage .
Today , 15 days after the attacks started , it is clear - witness the announcements by the US administration - that the aim is not to stamp out terrorism , it is - or at least one of the aims is - to control central Asia and its huge natural resources and highly important geo-strategic position .
My fear , especially after Mrs Gandhi , that this attack will be used to further strengthen capitalist mechanisms and curtail our workers ' and our nations ' democratic freedoms and rights , has also come true .
The EU , led by the three , has aligned with the USA in what is a disastrous policy for our nations and our planet .
I believe that the European Parliament , as a democratically elected house , has a duty , if it wants to serve the peaceful , democratic visions and wishes of our people , to oppose these developments , to push for the EU to disassociate itself from them , to stop the war and to revert to resolving differences by peaceful means .
However , in the final analysis , it is up to the people .
Madam President , we are a small delegation of MEPs who have just come back from the Clinique Sainte Barbe here in Strasbourg , to which a former Chechen minister , Mr Ibragimov , had been admitted after having been on hunger strike for 27 days .
We went there to talk with Mr Ibragimov and to alert the world to the fact that this hunger strike took place here in Strasbourg .
Mr Ibragimov naturally drew attention to the fact that he wanted international organisations and politicians to try to convince President Putin to put an end to the war in Chechnya and to adhere to the agreements entered into between Chechnya and Russia , and I should like to convey this message of his .
Mr Ibragimov has begun to eat again .
He is still very weak , but human rights campaigners have encouraged him to abandon his hunger strike .
He will begin it again later , together with other human rights campaigners , if there is still no progress on Chechnya in the future .
However , I think it was important to visit him .
My point is that we must not forget that human rights are being violated .
Now that we are combating terrorism , we must not forget human rights , and I should like to call upon you to tell Mr Ibragimov that you are willing to meet him - if that is possible - during the next part-session in Strasbourg .
Consequences of recent events for the safety of air transport and industrial installations including nuclear power plants
The next item is the Commission statement on the consequences of recent events for the safety of air transport and industrial installations , including nuclear power plants .
I shall now give the floor to Commissioner Vitorino .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at the previous plenary session of the European Parliament , a debate was held on the steps to take in the fight against terrorism in the wake of the attacks of 11 September .
On behalf of my colleague , Mrs De Palacio , I would today like to discuss the consequences of these events for the safety of air transport , and also the implications that such events could have for some industrial installations , particularly nuclear power plants .
I shall therefore begin with the issue of air transport safety .
As I am sure you know , the European Council of 21 September 2001 requested that measures be taken in order to strengthen air transport security .
The Commission showed a dynamic approach and immediately reacted by formulating an appropriate Community response to the attacks carried out in the United States of America .
Without further delay - following a request made by the European Council - the Commission proposed that Member States put in place a ' dual review ' mutual inspection system .
This reciprocal monitoring system will enable experts of one Member State to be sent to inspect security measures in airports of another Member State .
We must point out , however , that Member States are reluctant to give inspectors this task .
So far , only two Member States have submitted to the Commission proposals on the representatives that they wish to appoint .
On 10 October , the Commission proposed a draft regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council to approximate air transport security and safety standards within the European Union , and also to give the Commission the power of execution and inspection in order to ensure that the standards are being applied .
This text specifically mentions access control to sensitive areas of airports and aircraft , control of passengers and their hand luggage , control and monitoring of hold luggage , control of cargo and mail and , lastly , the training of ground staff .
Mrs De Palacio presented this proposal to the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism the same day that it was adopted , and we hope that Parliament will be able to examine it as a matter of urgency in order to enable an agreement to be reached at the Council in December , with the hope that the co-decision procedure can take place at first reading .
In addition , an ad-hoc multidisciplinary group , made up of experts in air safety and combating terrorism , was set up immediately .
Unfortunately , the work of the group of experts has been inconclusive and the preliminary report submitted to the Transport Council on 16 October merely stresses , firstly , that much remains to be done in order to ensure that safety measures are being applied effectively in all airports and , secondly , identifies the need for new measures to prevent the dangerous behaviour of some individuals in aircraft , such as banning access to cockpits or enhancing cooperation between civil monitoring of air traffic and the use of military air defence methods .
We are convinced that we must make headway on the proposals that we have submitted to you .
Not only because of a lack of specific recommendations from the above mentioned group , but also because international bodies appear to be having difficulties in reacting swiftly .
Therefore , the International Civil Aviation Organisation , which held its assembly meeting in September , has limited itself to the single principle of organising a conference , the date of which has not yet been arranged .
We hope that , at the European Union ' s initiative , the ICAO will take on the responsibility of ensuring the adoption of the recommendations that it received with a view to strengthening international safety standards that apply to airports and air transport .
Nevertheless , given the situation , the United States naturally decided to move forward themselves on this issue .
The Commission believes that we must enhance cooperation so that preventative measures are implemented in a coordinated manner on both sides of the Atlantic .
In this spirit , we organised a meeting with our American counterparts , which is to be held on 6 and 7 November 2001 , to set up a working group that brings together the American authorities and the Commission with a view to coordinating efforts so that the highest possible level of security is ensured , whilst avoiding a situation where airline companies are subjected to excessive measures .
I shall now move on to the possible consequences of terrorist activities , such as those committed on 11 September 2001 , had they been carried out on an industrial or power installation .
The nuclear industry is one of the sectors of industry that has the most stringent security and safety standards , particularly because of the requirements of non-proliferation and radiation protection .
We should also mention , however , that other installations , that are less well protected , may be vulnerable , and a fatal accident of considerable proportions could happen at one of these plants , whether they belong to the chemical industry , which was the case at Bhopal , Seveso and recently at Toulouse - or at other power installations , such as natural gas infrastructures , which are not without risks .
Some of us still recall the time when hydroelectric dams burst .
Since 11 September , Member States ' authorities have strengthened existing protective systems and physical protection measures that were already in force for at-risk installations and more specifically for nuclear installations .
These physical protection measures are particularly for access control to the installations and include a ban on flying over the installations .
As far as the design of existing installations is concerned , it must be noted that the risks are taken into consideration , either wholly or according to the probability of an accident taking place .
Therefore , the risk of a primary cooling system bursting , to which terrorists could have access , is taken wholly into account and a security system is put in place to avoid this risk .
Comparative assessments are carried out on other risks .
This is what happens for seismic risks , which are taken into consideration in a number of ways , according to the geographical location of the installation itself .
In this respect , the Commission would like to reiterate that the design and construction of electro-nuclear power stations fall within the sole competence of Member States .
In addition to conventional nuclear installations , however , we must also take into account the risks related to transporting nuclear materials .
In reality , the transportation of highly radioactive materials is only a very small part of activities involving nuclear materials and is carried out in accordance with the most stringent provisions of international and national regulations .
As a general rule , to use nuclear materials for the purposes of terrorism , perpetrators require , beyond simply holding the nuclear materials , the technical capability to store , process and launch the materials , which would be very difficult to achieve without alerting the authorities .
Everything has been implemented at Community level , by applying Chapter VII of the Euratom Treaty , which requires a strict registration of nuclear materials in order to prevent them being used for non-peaceful purposes .
Nonetheless , the events in New York show that we must assess the vulnerability of nuclear installations .
The Commission services are carrying out an evaluation , in collaboration with the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna , particularly in terms of security at nuclear installations .
Our assessment should show how worthwhile it would be to publish the recommendations and to supplement existing legislation at Community and / or international level .
In particular , we must assess the conventions established under the International Atomic Energy Agency , such as the convention on physical protection , which mainly covers the transportation of nuclear materials .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for your attention .
We on this side whole-heartedly support the response of the United States , the European Union and its Member States and other countries to the attacks of 11 September 2001 and the development of a comprehensive multilateral strategy against terrorism .
In recognising the determination of the European Union and its Member States to safeguard its citizens from acts of terrorism , we stress the need to reassure the public by striking the right balance between vigilance and enabling everyday life to continue .
We consider that each Member State must carry out a complete reassessment of its approach to the security of infrastructure and installations , particularly the most risk-sensitive such as nuclear installations .
We recognise there is genuine public concern about these issues but would like to emphasise the need to keep these matters in perspective .
I would like to emphasise that the safety of nuclear plants and other such industrial installations is primarily a national competence and responsibility .
In that context we look , for example , to the United Kingdom government to take all necessary short-term protective measures as well as to face up to the necessary longer-term decisions with regard to the disposal of radioactive waste .
Clearly , the events of 11 September 2001 in the United States call for a reassessment of the risk of attack on installations that we have previously regarded as secure and I welcome the statement from the Commissioner .
I only regret that it was not possible for Commissioner Loyola de Palacio to be able to speak to us - it had been our wish to hold this debate at the next part-session .
President , the basic premise of terrorism is that the unexpected , the unconsidered , the unbelievable will terrify the population into accepting political claims , whether they are rational or not .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your statement .
I welcome the cooperation you have outlined and the special attention which will be given to nuclear installations .
I hope that Member States will cooperate with the Commission in this work .
Our reaction must be to do all that we can to prevent the sort of widespread slaughter , injury and chaos we saw in the United States .
Air travel , nuclear power stations , chemical works and oil depots , are all obvious targets for terrorists .
They are designed , built and protected accordingly at very considerable cost to the public .
The French government now protects the reprocessing centre at La Hague with fighter planes and missiles . No doubt the United Kingdom does likewise in Sellafield .
We cannot inhabit the weird minds of terrorists , but we can pay the high cost of protection .
We can work together and we can be very careful when we consider building , or indeed retaining , a potential target .
Things will not be the same after 11 September , as many others have said .
No one had conceived of using a fully loaded , large passenger plane as a weapon .
We have to factor that into our calculations .
Please keep reporting to Parliament .
We want the citizens of Europe to know that everything possible has been done to keep them safe .
Madam President , Commissioner , we have reached a serious point , a very serious point .
The worst-case scenario of terrorist air attacks on nuclear power stations , long condemned by the Greens and anti-nuclear citizens , is becoming , through force of circumstance , a valid hypothesis .
The fact that France has called on its armed forces in an attempt to protect its reactors is evidence that air attacks on nuclear plants are plausible .
The French authorities , which have always dismissed the possibility of terrorist attacks , are now forced to admit that their nuclear temples are indeed vulnerable .
And will the ground-to-air missiles deployed around the re-processing plant in The Hague be effective against a suicide attack ?
The German authorities and the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna recognise that even the sturdiest nuclear power station would not survive a crash .
Throughout Europe and elsewhere in the world , the danger is certainly present , and it is made all the more acute because of the overwhelming number of nuclear reactors .
We cannot currently guarantee the safety of our citizens .
They are concerned and quite rightly so .
Has the Commission taken these disaster scenarios seriously ?
How will it ensure the safety of our citizens ?
And does the Commission intend to launch a study into the safety of nuclear power stations , as Germany has ?
Lastly , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I regret the fact that my fellow Members from other groups did not deem it necessary to follow this debate with a resolution .
Madam President , Commissioner , the question regarding the safety of Europe ' s skies is being considered in terms of immediate and urgent measures .
It is also being considered in terms of longer-term measures regarding security standards in aircraft and at boarding .
We have duly noted the Commission statements , particularly on the various measures taken regarding checks on passengers , on hand luggage , as well as on flights from third countries . In my view , these are wise comments .
We must also accelerate the completion of security programmes relating to checks on hold luggage and ensure that our decisions have been implemented .
I shall not go back over what was said earlier regarding the scandalous situation involving the AZF factory , only a few weeks after we held debates in this Chamber .
As far as safety on aircraft and at boarding are concerned , the events of 11 September show that two measures must be taken in aircraft design : cockpits must be sealed off and video monitors must be installed to enable the pilot to see anyone nearing the cockpit .
Secondly , there is the issue of transponders .
Transponders transmit the aircraft ' s code and position to the air traffic control tower .
Transponders must be secure and it must no longer be possible to disconnect them during flights , as was the case during the attacks on the United States .
I would also like to draw Parliament ' s attention to the issue of aid to the European airline industry .
To be honest , I think that it is extremely tactless , even provocative , for the Commission to open the debate on concentration within the airline industry at this point in time .
In addition to the economic battering that companies are taking , to confirm that Europe only has enough room for four or five airlines amounts to inviting mergers , restructuring and therefore redundancy plans .
On the other hand , several sources are predicting a 15 to 30 % decrease in air traffic and the European Association of Air Carriers states that overall traffic levels will have decreased by more than 7 % by 2002 , incurring losses estimated to be over three billion euro .
In my view , the regulations on state aid to airlines must be extended in order to take into full consideration all the consequences of 11 September .
Lastly , I would like to say one final word to point out that these public funds are intended to help companies to continue to be viable .
I believe , therefore , that it is our duty to ensure that they are used and to avoid any redundancies in the sector .
Mr President , the goalposts have now changed , given the sheer level of inhumanity shown by terrorists pursuing their so-called political objectives .
Terrorists are now willing to engage in suicide missions .
This simply means that the international community must now fully re-evaluate how best it can put in place security measures to defeat these acts of blatant and premeditated terrorism .
From an Irish perspective , we are deeply concerned about the safety and security arrangements at the Sellafield nuclear plant in Cumbria .
At a time when one would expect a scaling-down of nuclear enterprises in Britain , the British government has announced that the MOX nuclear facility can go ahead at Sellafield .
Instead of closing the Sellafield nuclear plant on safety , environmental and economic grounds , the British governments has agreed to the expansion of operations there .
This is not only a problem for the Irish people : it is also a problem for the British people and for the wider European Union .
For instance , how do the British people like the idea of trains carrying nuclear materials continuing to run through London and other cities in Britain ?
While the American government has halted the movement of potentially dangerous nuclear materials , BNFL is insisting that it will run its nuclear trains from reactors to its controversial Sellafield reprocessing plant .
In this growing atmosphere of international terrorism , surely it is grossly irresponsible to continue this transportation .
Equally , the transportation of nuclear materials via the Irish Sea sends shivers down the spine of many people living in Ireland .
As a representative of the East coast of Ireland , I have always resented the Irish Sea being used as a rubbish tip for the activities of British Nuclear Fuels .
The decision of the British government to expand the operations of the Sellafield nuclear plant is a contentious one by any stretch of the imagination .
The timing of this decision , however , is a highly cynical one , considering that it was made as a smokescreen at the same time as war was declared on terrorism .
This is a clear case of the British government using the war on terrorism to distract attention from awkward and contentious decisions .
In this climate this is simply not good enough .
The safety and security at the Sellafield plant is as much a matter of concern for the European Union as it is for the Irish and British governments .
The British government should make the honourable decision to close this nuclear white elephant once and for all .
But over the next few weeks the Commission should and must carry out a full and independent evaluation of all the environmental public health risks of all operations of BNFL at the Sellafield nuclear plant .
The people of Ireland are fed up with pious assurances from BNFL and the British government about safety standards at Sellafield .
We were all horrified recently when BNFL had to bring back nuclear materials from Japan , because it had falsified documents .
After this incident alone , how can any reasonable person believe for one moment anything that is written in a press release by BNFL ?
I can assure all Members of this House that we in Ireland will vigorously pursue every political , legal and diplomatic option open to us to force the British government to close the Sellafield nuclear plant .
This Sellafield nuclear plant has achieved nothing , except to heap environmental misery on us all .
Mr President , Commissioner , the crisis in air transport unfolding before our very eyes following the terrorist attack on 11 September is , of course , exacerbated by factors such as structural problems in airline companies , the absence , so far , at least , of a single European airspace , which we hope will soon become a reality , and public concern about the safety of air transport .
We need to act as quickly as possible .
When we attended the ICAO assembly in Montreal recently with the European Parliament delegation , we clearly stated the European position that international measures should be taken at ministerial level by the end of the year .
And , of course , if , our hopes notwithstanding , there are delays , I think that the European Union should proceed unilaterally in order to establish a climate of safety in air transport .
As you all know , the Commission recently proposed an initial package of measures , referred to as ECAC document 30 .
The parliamentary Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism has promised to examine it as quickly as possible so that these measures can be turned into Community law by the end of the year , which is also in keeping with the Council 's wishes .
For the same reason , the other three legislative proposals relating to safety will also be examined as quickly as possible .
There is also another package of measures relating to safety in the cockpit , video cameras , ground / air communications etc . , that is , the measures to which the Commissioner referred .
As far as this matter is concerned , my point is that we are worried about the delay and about how the Member States ' experts have worked up to now .
We trust that they will take the hint and improve their working methods from now on .
We are witnessing serious economic losses not just in air transport but in trade , tourism and other sectors of the economy .
We would be failing in our duty if we did not do our utmost to deal with this crisis .
Mr President , there is no doubt that nuclear power installations are not wholly safe from terrorist attacks .
No reactor could withstand the impact of a Boeing 747 .
It would simply be wrong to assert anything else .
What is true of nuclear installations , though , is also true of other technological systems .
Mr Vitorino rightly pointed out that even a dam can be destroyed , and the Second World War shows that the consequences can be devastating .
An attack on a gasometer , such as can be found in the heart of our towns , could be positively appalling .
I might mention that some pressurised gasometers already operate at a lower pressure for safety reasons .
If methane were to escape from a high-pressure holder - a heavy machine-gun would suffice to bring that about - and spread over the town , then once it mixed to a certain degree with the surrounding air , the town would simply burn to the ground .
Accidents of this sort have occurred in the past ; thank God we have managed to avoid them in the past ten years .
The same applies to the water supply .
It is relatively straightforward to poison water .
We can all imagine how immense the consequences of that would be .
Now , I accept that many in our countries are opposed to nuclear energy , and that , in some countries , they may well be in the majority .
Although it is not an opinion that I share , it is one that I respect .
This argument , based on the risk of terrorist attacks , could lead us to get rid of the gas industry or stop drinking water , and I find that absurd .
My conclusion simply follows the line taken by the Commission .
I admit it is not likely to make very good press copy , but it does have the advantage of being sensible .
We should identify the dangerous sites and improve the protection of targets .
Perhaps we should also take other security measures , but these must be implemented without delay .
Studies are something we do not need .
Mr President , please allow me a final word . We should not give the impression of total security .
That can be had only at the price of total surveillance , which cannot be reconciled with a free state under the rule of law .
Mr President , Commissioner Vitorino , I should like to make a few observations .
Our group has already talked about the consequences of recent events for nuclear power plants and mentioned , inter alia , a package of measures which is already being discussed in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
We endorse the quest for common security regulations , such as those formulated in document 30 of the E.C.A.C. What we are mainly concerned with here , in addition to issues of supervision , is adopting a special approach to vulnerable areas .
We , of course , are of the opinion that such a debate must in any case be genuine , certainly when it comes to protecting privacy .
I should like to bring one aspect to your attention , for we are concerned here with an extension of the threat to include not only additional targets but also additional modes of transport .
I would like to draw your attention to the use of other means of transport - something which we have already noted - such as tankers containing chemicals , and ask the Commissioner for his thoughts on the matter .
In shipping too , it is relatively simple to force a ship in a port such as Rotterdam to take a different course and to direct it towards very explosive installations .
In other words , not only aviation but also other means of transport should be discussed .
Mr President , installations at risk , such as nuclear power plants , flood-control dams , ports , oil depots , extremely tall buildings and research centres for biological warfare and for genetic manipulation will never lose their appeal for terrorists .
That is why we must ensure that the number of installations which can threaten the life of human communities and of our environment is reduced to a minimum .
Instead of subsidising airline companies with tax money , enabling them to continue pulling off stunts involving low prices , it would be preferable to completely close vulnerable regions to air traffic .
Moreover , vulnerable airports near cities or with insufficient security provisions in place , as in the recent case of Linate near Milan - an airport that should have been closed down years ago - should not have a future .
The unbalanced pursuit of economic growth , freedom for airline companies and the rolling back of government has , in connection with the sad events of 11 September , led to too little attention being paid , on the one hand , to the risk of industrial buildings collapsing and , on the other hand , to government supervision of access to airports by people with malicious intentions .
It is not the first time that I am bringing these two matters to the attention of the Commission .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 11 September will go down as a crucial date in the history of the modern era in general and for the aviation sector in particular , for which we can talk about a before and an after .
I wish , first of all , to express my solidarity with the victims of these cowardly and barbaric attacks and with the government of the United States and also to unreservedly , roundly and unambiguously condemn terrorism .
Improving the security of transport users and transported goods was and must continue to be one of the Union ' s priorities for action in coming years .
I am delighted that this is the view adopted in the White Paper on transport policy presented by the Commission only a few months ago .
We must not forget that a safe journey is the most important right of any passenger .
The ongoing safety and competitiveness of this sector require the rapid adoption of the latest Commission proposals on air safety and the ' single sky ' package .
We must also take account of other measures that were already on the table , such as the JAR-OPS Regulation , the draft directive on occurrence reporting in civil aviation and the proposal on the professional competence of cabin crew .
All of these texts , Commissioner , must be approved as soon as possible .
To conclude , I would say that the disastrous action taken on the air transport sector in recent weeks has shown the extent to which the European Union has a pivotal role in responding to the need for regulation at both Community and world-wide level .
Only a European vision will enable us to confront new challenges such as international terrorism , for which international intergovernmental forums can no longer provide a sufficiently rapid or effective response .
Parliament has a duty to support the Commission on these proposals to restore the public confidence and safety that have been lost .
It is at times like this that we must make Europe ' s presence felt .
Lastly , I also wish to address the Council , which must now find the ability and the courage to support and take decisions that ensure that civil aviation will continue to be safe , reliable and sustainable from every point of view .
I wish to deal briefly with two issues : one I have already addressed , that is the state of the airline industry in Europe .
I welcome the fact that the Commissioner has announced that the European Union is going to meet with the US authorities to discuss unfair competition , but that is a grossly inadequate response to the current crisis in the aviation industry .
I would like some clarity about what precisely the Commission is doing .
There is a report in Irish newspapers today that the Commission is insisting that the rescue and aid package the Irish government will provide for Aer Lingus must be privately funded .
Now , that is a gross distortion of the treaties which are neutral as regards where aid or money should come from to assist the aviation industry .
I want clarity on this .
Is that what the Commission is demanding or is the Irish government playing its own privatisation game under cover of the present crisis ?
The second point I wish to make is in relation to the nuclear and chemical industries in Europe .
The report which is coming before STOA this week makes for worrying reading .
It will hopefully be made public very soon , but the reality is that Sellafield and Cap de la Hague were a risk even before 11 September 2001 ; the chemical plants in our midst were a risk even before Toulouse .
It seems to me that we need commitments from the Commission that we are going to have an independent European inspectorate .
Madam President , after the 11 September atrocity we are in a new situation .
Acts of malice and not just accidents are the focus of our concern .
No-fly zones should be established immediately around the two reprocessing plants in the EU : Sellafield and Cap de la Hague .
Power plants generally are a ticking time-bomb in our midst .
The only logical response is to close them all down and end this terrible threat .
The French government has already moved to strengthen anti-terrorist precautions at Cap de la Hague . These include ground-to-air missiles .
The German government has concluded that nuclear reactors could not withstand a collision with a targeted passenger jet .
It has undertaken an emergency risk assessment .
Government ministers oppose anti-aircraft defences and have made it clear that plants that lie in the flight paths of large airports can be shut down if they are rated as serious risk .
The US government has halted the transport of nuclear materials , and the EU government should also immediately halt the transport of nuclear materials , including MOX fuels .
I do not believe that the response we have had so far from the Commission is at all adequate .
The IAEA has confirmed that 75 % of the notifications of incidents involving nuclear material in the last year were illegal activities .
Nuclear materials are currently clearly not secure and not safe .
Neither Sellafield nor la Hague was designed to withstand the impact of a commercial jet .
They contain tens of thousands of tonnes of spent nuclear fuel and over 100 tonnes of separated plutonium between them .
A new report , which is both timely and in terms of content deeply worrying , has been prepared for the European Parliament .
I understand it will be circulated tomorrow by the STOA committee .
I expect it to be circulated .
I wonder why it has not already been circulated to Members , as I believe it has already been circulated to the industry ?
The report states that an act of malice - and this was presented to us before September - could initiate a sequence of events that release radioactive material in the liquid high-level waste tanks , in Sellafield in particular , with effects much greater and more devastating than Chernobyl .
This is very serious .
I need an adequate response from the Commission , and so far we have not had it .
Mr President , I made my point about the STOA report when we were discussing the order of business .
Successive Irish governments have voiced their concern about the operation of the Sellafield plant , formerly known as Windscale , and in particular the innumerable security breaches by the BNFL and the arrogance of the British authorities towards the legitimate concerns of a sovereign and friendly neighbour .
The commissioning of the MOX plant when the eyes of the international media were firmly focused elsewhere in the wake of the tragedy of September 11 , 2001 is but the latest example , and is particularly serious , given the heightened concerns now of terrorist attacks .
Could the Commission confirm that the same security standards that are now deemed necessary in Cap de la Hague - that is protection with fighter planes and ground-to-air missiles and a no-fly zone - are in place in Sellafield ?
Does the Commission agree that there is an urgent need for common security standards for all nuclear installations , not just in the EU-15 , but in accession countries as well ?
Could the Commission also comment on the lack of effectiveness of the present inspectorate in this regard ?
Mr President , I am very grateful to the Commission for using today 's statement to take up a theme that currently causes a great deal of concern to the people of Europe .
I also welcome the way the Commission deals explicitly with all the areas at especial risk , and , in particular , its inclusion of industrial plant and nuclear power stations , which was demanded on Austria 's initiative in Parliament 's resolution on the events of 11 September .
We know that precautions were taken at several nuclear power stations in Europe to enable them to survive the impact of smaller aircraft at least .
Does the Commission have an overview showing which nuclear power stations did not do this , and what is planned at a European level to reinforce protection measures overall , at least at these stations but also at all others ?
We know that no nuclear power station is completely safe , and that some are not technically up to date in other respects of relevance to safety .
It would be all the more surprising if there really were a letter from Commissioner Verheugen , confirming that the Temelin plant is completely safe .
As such a statement would contradict everything international experts have found out about Temelin , I cannot believe that this statement about its safety was actually made by Mr Verheugen .
I therefore ask the Commission to show this document , addressed to the Czech and Austrian governments , to Parliament .
We have been very committed to this issue , and I think Parliament deserves , even if the Commission takes an opposing view ....
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , much as I love Senator Doyle and her Irish friends , she is quite wrong about Sellafield in my constituency .
I told her so , and the Irish government so when I was the Northern Ireland Minister responsible for Energy and I reiterate that view now .
I applaud the British government 's decision on the MOX plant , a long overdue decision which is going to ensure the economic and employment future of my constituents .
So my message on that is to keep your hands off Sellafield .
Briefly , about aviation .
I congratulate Commissioner Palacio on the actions that she has already taken but there are three things we need to emphasise : firstly we must protect the aircraft on the ground ; once someone is on the aircraft they can do more damage .
Secondly we must renew and reinvigorate security screening at airports and thirdly we must assist with the costs of security and war-risk insurance .
We must restore public confidence in aviation and the sooner the better .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , personally speaking , I believe that I can welcome the fact that the approach adopted by the Commission with regard to both air safety and security and the safety of industrial and nuclear installations has received wide support from Members here .
To sum up , I will add that we have drawn up an intervention programme , which strictly observes competences - not simply Community competences , but Member States ' competences as well .
That is why I can assure you that , as regards matters for which the Commission has direct responsibility under the Treaties , we have taken all the necessary measures to deal with the new situation created by the terrorist attacks on the United States .
We shall continue to put pressure on the Member States so that they also shoulder their responsibilities and adopt the necessary measures that are part of their competences .
This applies to the examples given regarding the security of the Sellafield and Cap de La Hague re-processing plants .
I would like to stress that this is part of national competences and that it is the national authorities that inform us that the necessary measures have been taken .
The Commission recognises the need to begin an assessment of nuclear security and the security of transporting nuclear materials .
I mentioned this in my presentation and I hope that the assessment that the Commission is currently preparing will soon be completed .
As far as air safety and security are concerned , I am pleased that several Members of Parliament have welcomed our legislative initiative with open arms and I hope that the regulation that we have proposed can be examined by Parliament as a matter of urgency .
I would also like to stress that we must improve how we follow up on measures taken at national level , just as the ad hoc group is doing , which is responsible for assessing specific administrative measures that need to be taken to improve air security .
Mr President , I would like to make a final comment .
I referred to the conditions relating to competition and to the strategy implemented by the Commission to avoid distorting competition within the context of the Euro-American dialogue on security .
This was the context in which I dealt with the issue of competition .
We believe that the solutions we are seeking must be international and must take into consideration the need to avoid imposing measures that are excessive and which may distort competition globally .
This was the background to what I said .
I did not mention other measures concerning competition policy related to the effects of the terrorist attacks on the commercial strategy of airlines .
I did not deal with specific questions , such as those that some Members of Parliament wanted to bring up during the debate .
All I can do is refer Members to the conclusions of the meeting that my colleague , Mrs Loyola De Palacio , held with the representatives of the airline companies ' association .
I have taken careful note of the fact that some of you thought that the Commission proposals were insufficient or too ideological .
I have taken careful note of your comments .
I shall pass them on to Mrs De Palacio , but I repeat that , for the time being , this is the official position of the Commission .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Mr Fitzsimons has the floor on a point of order .
It is not the first time I have heard Commissioners come into this House and say they have no obligations in relation to nuclear power plants and that this is a matter for the Member States .
But clearly the European Commission should and must carry out an independent evaluation of all the environmental and public health risks , not just for Ireland and for all the UK but for all the people of Europe .
This has been side-stepped down the years but it is high time that the Commission bites the bullet .
For this type of question , you can contact the Commissioner directly .
I just want to agree with what my colleague Mr Fitzsimons says .
I have a report here by Parliament , from the STOA committee .
Mrs Ahern , I will say the same to you that I said to Mr Fitzsimons : this is not a point of order .
European judicial area / SIS II
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today sees the fulfilment of a small dream .
I have ten minutes ' speaking time , as much as only a Group chairman can normally expect .
This , however , comes about through the grouping together of two reports , which do not actually belong together .
So I would prefer to speak on them separately .
Let me begin with the area of civil law .
When the Maastricht Treaty came into force in 1993 , judicial cooperation in civil matters became a matter of common concern for the Member States .
Then the Treaty of Amsterdam , by means of Article 65 of the Treaty Establishing the European Community , transferred this cooperation from the third pillar to the first .
Its entry into force brought about active European lawmaking .
Regulations on conflicts of law or of jurisdiction were adjusted , the Council directive on insolvency procedures and on the service of legal documents in civil and commercial cases was adopted , and draft directives on the gathering of evidence and on rights of access in matrimonial cases were submitted to the Council .
The entry into force of the present Treaty of Nice means that future decisions on judicial cooperation in civil matters will finally be reached by codecision procedure with qualified majority in the Council .
You can see that things in this field are developing at breakneck speed .
Member States will continue to have sole responsibility for the framework and content of professional training in civil law , but it will be the Community 's responsibility to support them whether in the removal of obstacles to the application of Community law or in the cooperation of the judicial authorities .
In no area of European law is continuing professional education so imperative as in civil law , in which harmonisation has already made progress .
Criminal and administrative law , on the other hand , are still only at the beginning of their European development .
This continuing education was formerly supported by two EU programmes .
GROTIUS , the joint incentive and exchange programme for the legal profession , came to an end in 2000 .
This promotion was maintained only by a successor programme , GROTIUS Programme Civil , which was limited to one year .
The same year saw the expiry of the Robert Schuman Project , which had been limited to three years and served to make lawyers more aware of Community law .
The Commission proposal before us today now represents the legal basis for further financial support for activities in the field of legal cooperation in civil matters .
It promotes judicial cooperation and improved mutual understanding of legal systems , as well as measures to transpose and implement Community legislation in this area and better information for the public .
For the first time , alongside finance for specific projects , there is the prospect of financial help with the running costs of European NGOs .
I can only emphatically support that .
The facilitation of involvement by the acceding countries is also especially to be welcomed .
Apart from the essential rejoicing at the direction of this draft , which is made all the greater by the generous financial framework amounting to EUR 14.5 million up to 2006 , there remain a few critical points .
The stipulation that NGOs can only apply for support if two-thirds of the Member States participate in them can hardly be complied with even today .
The prospect of enlargement therefore makes it a matter of urgency to reduce this hurdle to one-third , or else this directive 's good beginnings will be nipped in the bud .
I also wonder why the Commission , contrary to its former practice - for example in the context of the GROTIUS programmes - has omitted to define precisely who is entitled to apply , members of the legal profession in this case .
The debate on the money-laundering directive showed us how vital it is in this area to define terms .
Member States must not have discretion to define terms when support with European funds is at issue .
I have therefore proposed the adoption of the old definition from the GROTIUS civil law programme .
I would also like to say , on this point , that I would have been glad if the EU had continued to bear up to 80 % of project costs , rather than reducing this share to 50 % .
This was , however , not what the relevant committee wanted .
I think , though , that the EU continues to bear a great responsibility for the further development of judicial cooperation .
This responsibility is likely to increase rather than decrease in the future . Here , too , we must continue to be a motive force .
So much for the first part concerning the area of civil law ; I now come to the debate on the Schengen Information System .
The Schengen Information System was established in 1995 on the basis of the Convention of 1990 which implemented the Schengen Agreement .
Today , as a police investigation system overlapping states and supported by computers , it facilitates online access to over 8 million items of data produced by investigations and is thus the most comprehensive database in Europe .
It is used by Iceland and Norway as well as thirteen EU Member States .
All this makes SIS a successful component of a new European internal security policy , made necessary by the dismantling of internal borders and the resulting loss of surveillance .
Two problems concern us today , the first being advances in technology .
The Schengen Information System as we know it today was originally conceived for eighteen Member States .
The fact that all the present acceding countries will join in SIS on their accession makes it urgently necessary to give thought today to what will be its successor .
Technology has moved on in the meantime as well .
The initiative taken by the kingdoms of Sweden and Belgium to develop SIS II are therefore much to be welcomed .
As the development of SIS II will require over three years ' preparatory work , these initiatives lay the necessary legal foundations for its budget .
The originators have , however , overshot their mark a bit .
In order to ensure the maximum influence on technical development , the Member States are to take part in the comitological process through a combination of administrative and regulatory committees .
This will therefore involve a maximum of additional bureaucratic effort .
It is not clear to me why , at a development stage where only technical aspects are to be discussed , the Member States are to join in discussing and deciding on every detail .
The suggestion that a regulatory committee should be in place to deal with all matters concerning the system 's architecture and with data protection issues , also goes against Council decision 468 / 99 .
This stated that recourse should be had to the regulatory procedure only for measures of general scope intended to apply essential provisions of basic legal instruments .
Such is quite evidently not the case here .
At this stage , I would like to point out to the representatives of the Council that , for example , when Eurodac was set up , there was deliberately no official participatory procedure , and the Member States exerted their influence only through an informal network of technical experts .
This saved us all a great deal of time and money and still produced an effective result .
At the same time , I have confidence in the technical know-how in this field possessed by the Commission , which is entrusted with guiding this development .
I therefore suggest to Member States that they replace the superfluous bureaucratic combination of administrative and regulatory procedure by a combination of administrative and consultative procedure .
Less is sometimes more .
The second problem is the development of law .
The Member States did admittedly decide as early as the Amsterdam Inter-Governmental Conference to integrate the Schengen Agreement into the European legal area , but lack of agreement meant that the Schengen Information System was assigned to the third pillar .
There is no doubt , however , that collection of data on persons who have been barred from entering a Member State is within the scope of the first pillar .
This is another reason why we have two initiatives today , one by the Belgian Presidency and another by Sweden .
As Europe 's Parliament , we strive to integrate Schengen and the Schengen Information System into the first pillar , and as a whole if at all possible .
It is only in that way that appropriate parliamentary control can be guaranteed .
So I will go on the record as welcoming , as a step in this direction , the financing of Schengen II out of Community funds with effect from 2002 .
The initiative unfortunately forgets to submit to Parliament the Commission 's half-yearly interim reports on the stage the development has reached .
It is scarcely comprehensible that the budget procedure of the European Community should be applied to finance Schengen II without the body legislating for that budget - namely Parliament - being informed about these developments at the time .
However much the direction taken by the report 's contents may be worthy of approval , in this respect there must be clear improvement .
Apart from that , I can only give my full and wholehearted support to the proposals as a whole .
I crave your indulgence for having to leave in about a quarter of an hour - as indeed must other ladies and gentlemen - but we have a meeting of the Committee on Citizen ' s Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
We have some votes to take part in there as well .
So there is no disrespect for this House .
Thank you , Mr von Boetticher .
We are aware of this problem of meetings being scheduled to take place at the same time , especially with the aforementioned Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to congratulate Mr von Boetticher on his work on the two reports that he has just presented to us .
I should like to focus on the second report that deals with the Schengen system , which has come before Parliament not for reasons of clear political will , but because the Council has not been able to achieve unanimity on maintaining the system of intergovernmental funding , whilst a source of Community funding is also necessary .
These are the peculiarities of our work in the European institutions : many things happen for strange reasons and as a result of stopgap solutions .
I should like to say that this proposal to develop a new generation Schengen Information System , SIS II , can only be accepted as the first , preparatory , stage in the system ' s development .
Community funding will not solve the problems that divide us in our analyses of the functioning of the SIS .
It is crucial , as I argued here last September , when I presented my report on Schengen , that in addition to Community funding , the Schengen Information System cannot continue to be managed in secret and on a purely intergovernmental basis . It must instead be managed at European Union level by a separate agency .
At the same time , a single Community information system must be set up consisting of a computer network system that contains data received under the three conventions , Schengen , Europol and Customs , bearing in mind the need to keep the data held under these conventions separate .
This is the only way in which we will be able to guarantee an adequate level of protection for personal data , which is fair and identical for all citizens , complying with the level of protection stipulated by the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Lastly , we know that the SIS is reaching saturation point with eighteen States participating , which means that it will not be able to survive beyond the forthcoming enlargement of the European Union , which also means that we must rapidly adapt the system .
I hope that the five years we have ahead of us will be long enough to present a proposal that is balanced and which meets the demands of the European Parliament .
Mr President , the initiative by Belgium and Sweden on the development of a second generation SIS system is underpinned by two legal bases : the decision laid down in the Treaty on European Union and the regulation laid down in the EC Treaty . This initiative addresses the objectives of the system , which serves both judicial and police cooperation in criminal matters under the third pillar and the fields of visas , asylum and immigration and others concerning the free movement of people under the first pillar .
These initiatives are the real premises of the preliminary work that must be undertaken in order to create the new SIS II system . They have come into being , as has already been stated , as a result of the rejection of intergovernmental funding by some Member States and are based on the Commission ' s willingness to take the risk and the political responsibility for going ahead with the development of this new information system in the years to come .
The SIS , which , as we know , has only been a Community instrument since 1999 , has matured very quickly .
Although it was designed for twelve Member States , it now serves thirteen plus Iceland and Norway and we now have the United Kingdom and Ireland knocking on the door .
As we know , in the current historical circumstances , it provides a vital European source of information on citizens of third countries and assets that have disappeared or been stolen , given the immensity of the task of controlling our external borders or movement within any part of Community territory .
With the imminence of the new round of enlargement and given the challenges of adapting the new technologies and the new requirements , of which we are all aware , it is crucial that we develop the current system by providing Community funding for its modernisation .
The requirement for its development towards the so-called second generation SIS is , today , crucial to detecting threats arising from the situation of third-country nationals , in order to provisionally arrest criminals who qualify for extradition , to help to locate people who have disappeared or been kidnapped , to monitor dangerous individuals and to retrieve stolen goods and assets .
I am delighted to have the support of Mr von Boetticher , who has done an excellent job . I also believe that tomorrow ' s final vote on this report will produce a text on which it will be much easier for Parliament to agree on an opinion .
Mr President , only budgetary funding can give coherence to the new Community nature of the Schengen acquis , of which the current and future information systems are a part .
Furthermore , the new requirements for online and in tempo judicial information and cooperation should be able to guarantee the security of Europe ' s citizens .
I therefore feel , Mr President , that we must not get bogged down in the minutiae of accounting procedures or of the law .
The important thing is that the SIS moves ahead , to the benefit of the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur for this .
The rapporteur has produced two excellent reports . He makes a first-class contribution to the work of the committee which I have the honour to chair .
I would like to talk very briefly about the first of these reports to do with the freedom of movement of people .
It is essential that we have a European legal space and that we pursue its development with judicial cooperation in civil matters .
The rapporteur quite rightly identifies the problems here and recognises that just as the single market required a massive benchmarking exercise , a massive exercise in approximation and mutual recognition , so too will the development of a European legal space require this .
In the second report the rapporteur looks at the problems that have emerged with the Schengen Information System and the opportunity to move forward to the second version of it , which clearly will be needed with enlargement .
We have here , in Strasbourg , with the central Schengen computer system , the most comprehensive databank in Europe .
It must be financed from our budget . Sadly , the Belgian and Swedish initiatives , which propose a regulation for the First Pillar and a decision for the Third Pillar , show how ridiculous it is still to be operating with these two pillars .
In particular , Article 96 , which is the article governing the data on those refused entry , must be in the First Pillar .
It contains the personal details of 1.3 million people and will contain substantially more with enlargement of the Union .
In conclusion I would draw the House 's attention to the report from Justice last year that found significant defects in data protection , poor quality of data and obstacles placed in the way of individuals seeking to correct mistakes .
We must take account of this .
Mr President , instead of talking here today about the approval of a new generation of the Schengen Information System SIS II , we ought much rather to be discussing the disastrous consequences of the information system we already have .
I find it scandalous that the overwhelming majority of the persons listed in the SIS have not been charged with any criminal offence .
Only 11 000 people have their names stored in these computers because of an arrest warrant for the purpose of deporting them , but there are 780 000 listed as barred from entering any of the EU 's Member States .
Article 99 of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement states that the SIS can also be used to - as it is termed - obtain information in order to repel a significant danger originating from a specified person , or other significant dangers .
This provision means that the names of quite blameless citizens are to be found in the SIS computers .
This data was , for example , used in issuing demonstrators with unjustified bans on entry when the summit was held in Genoa .
As long as this continues , we cannot give any support to the further development of this Schengen Information System .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mr von Boetticher for his work and also the Members who spoke after him .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for what has been gained through Parliament ' s work , although we do feel that an essential element , democratic control , is missing .
Once again , we are being forced to agree to providing Community funding , as Mr Marinho said , in order to be able to have a say as well .
However , we feel that the European Council is continuing to do an appalling job , which , moreover , consists both of greatly increasing the number of databanks , and of greatly increasing the amount of data .
We know that , in addition to SIS , there are the - albeit revised - Europol and Eurodac databanks etc . , and the latest addition will be the databank containing the index of criminal records used by Eurojust .
Hitherto , SIS has been a huge collection of information and notes on people and objects : it contains data entered by each Member State according to different laws and criteria which has been accessible to users at different levels of responsibility .
Among the errors which may have already been made , consider the case of the US citizen arrested in Belgium because he had lost his passport whom SIS recorded as a passport thief .
Reference has been made to the events in Genoa : thousands of people had been recorded in SIS after the incidents in Gothenburg , but this was of no benefit to the Italian police .
Basically , our view is that there will not only be more States entering data in this bank but also , essentially , more data .
Lastly , we do not believe that total control is compatible with the rule of law , as has been maintained .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr von Boetticher .
I am speaking on the European judicial area in civil matters .
When the Treaty of Amsterdam entered into force , judicial cooperation in civil matters was transferred from the third pillar to the first , since when the European Community has elaborated an ambitious work programme in that area .
A detailed examination of the GROTIUS programme led to the conclusion that a new , more general , framework for activities in this field was needed .
The new framework regulation makes it possible to continue the projects already financed by the GROTIUS programme .
I thoroughly welcome this draft regulation by the Commission , which is intended to create a legal basis for the financing of judicial cooperation in civil matters by the EU Budget .
For the first time , the framework regulation also makes possible financial support for European non-governmental organisations , provided that these function on a non-profit basis and that their objectives serve to promote judicial cooperation .
It is greatly to be welcomed that acceding countries and third countries are able to participate in all these activities .
The limitation , proposed by the rapporteur and adopted by the Committee , to one-third of the involved Member States , is realistic and far-sighted , especially against the backdrop of the imminent enlargement up to 2006 .
This regulation does not apply in Denmark , Ireland or the United Kingdom .
Legal practitioners in these countries can , however , participate in the projects alongside their counterparts from the acceding countries and elsewhere .
The concept of ' legal advisers ' in this regulation has a quite different background from that in the directive on money laundering .
For that reason definition by means of a concluding list , as proposed by the rapporteur , would in this case inhibit the flexible use of this regulation in the future and limit its scope .
This is true , in particular , because it is difficult to translate correctly into all the Community languages without giving the terms for the relevant legal profession a different meaning , especially since individual Member States might in the future add other types of legal practitioner , who would then be barred from participation .
I would therefore prefer it if there were no list of these occupations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what is the Schengen Information System meant to achieve ?
It aims to improve police cooperation in criminal law matters , to harmonise immigration and visa policy and to monitor the free movement of persons .
This monitoring , though , is targeted not least at migrants , who find it impossible or virtually impossible to travel to the EU legally , and the great majority of whom are fleeing situations that the EU may well not have created on its own but has substantially helped to bring about .
As many people have already mentioned today , the system is directed against those of the EU 's citizens who incur its displeasure by wanting , for example , at a summit meeting , to express their disapproval of an EU policy which is characterised by lockouts and the capitalisation of essential areas of life .
It is becoming clear what this update of the Schengen Information System amounts to .
On the one hand , it is about the efficient use of the surveillance which technology and geography make possible .
At the same time , the EU wants the mere existence of these possibilities to mean that use is actually made of them .
Even the apparently technical changes in these proposals are also about improving the existing surveillance structure , and so this improvement needs to be financed .
And here I must disagree with Mr Turco and say that , in my judgment , nothing whatever in this project would be changed even by democratic control .
Seeing this from the Left , I believe this proposal cannot be supported .
Basic freedoms perform quite different functions in capitalism .
From a quite pragmatic point of view , though , they do guarantee the citizen a minimum of protection from the State .
It so happens , in the present situation , that most restrictions on basic rights ....
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , as we all know , the current Schengen Information System has been in operation since 1995 but did not become a Community resource until 1999 when the Schengen acquis was adopted by the European Union in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Its Community identity , therefore , implies that any proposal to replace it must be bound by the same legal considerations governing how it was set up and operates and that any extension to its purpose must be subject to full democratic scrutiny by the relevant bodies , as previous speakers have stated .
The current climate , with the need for additional measures to safeguard our citizens and the inability of the current information system to meet that need , should not provide fertile ground for arbitrary derogations from and extensions to its powers .
The proposed legal framework needs to clarify certain crucial issues .
If natural persons are to be protected against personal data processing , the joint supervisory body set up in the Schengen Agreement needs to be involved .
This authority has been commissioned to draft an annual report on how the current system functions , including a systematic review and analysis of the new data which the new system will create .
At the same time , the European Parliament needs to step up efforts to ensure that the new system functions are monitored efficiently by calling for regular progress reports .
The point here is that , as far as the continuing application of the Schengen Agreement is concerned , the Council has only updated the European Parliament once , meaning that Parliament is unaware of issues which impinge directly on the free and unimpeded movement of citizens or how the Union 's borders are controlled .
Finally , we also need to mention the need to adopt a Community information system consisting of a single electronic network in order to facilitate transparent data storage , management and evaluation .
Mr President , since it started operating in 1995 , the Schengen Information System has been used and is used , together with Europol , as a tool to facilitate repression at European level , to manufacture and monitor suspects , to combat resistance movements and disobedience policies and to devastate immigrants arriving in Europe looking for a place in the sun .
It has been used with particular enthusiasm every time grass roots resistance movements have been organised against the interests chosen by the European Union , in Nice , in Gothenburg and in Genoa .
A month ago , the European Parliament requested a progress report in which the rapporteur revealed the arbitrary nature and unreliability of the personal data recorded .
A few days later , the European Union rushed to make this information available to the American services to help them stifle any voice of resistance anywhere in the world and spread a new imperialist war on the pretext of fighting terrorism .
And , as if that were not enough , the recent extraordinary European Council of the European Union of the 15 gave the Americans unaccountable access to all European sources and files .
The Schengen system , be it the first generation or the second generation which we are debating today , is a constituent element in the mechanism of repression , which is why the grass roots movement is fighting to abolish it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin with the first report by Mr von Boetticher on judicial cooperation in civil matters .
Since the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , we have , in fact , had a particularly ambitious agenda in the field of civil judicial cooperation .
By way of example , I would say that over the last two years , five regulations in this field have already been adopted by the Council , and two other proposals are under discussion .
Two new legislative proposals are currently being prepared by the Commission .
The aim of this proposal is to contribute to the establishment of a European judicial area in civil matters .
The intention is not to propose a new action programme , but to contribute to the successful implementation of the existing action plans in this field , in particular , the Tampere conclusions .
This is why the support we suggest in these proposals is aimed not only at co-funding projects carried out by public and non-public institutions and organisations in the Member States , but also at funding Commission actions , such as actions aimed at ensuring the correct application of Community law in the civil field , which I am convinced will be of benefit to citizens .
I am very pleased to note that Mr von Boetticher has received our proposal with approval , and I would like to congratulate him on his excellent report .
With regard to the amendments proposed , the Commission accepts four out of the six of them .
I am talking about the amendments on the two new recitals proposed by the Committee on Budgets , the new recital proposed by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , and the amendments on the introduction of a definition of the term ' legal practitioner ' .
With regard to the amendment on the specific objectives of the framework programme , I prefer to preserve the Commission ' s initial proposal , because it very closely pursues the objectives set in the conclusions of the Tampere European Council .
With regard to Amendment No 5 , I well understand the rapporteur ' s argument , but I believe that setting a strict threshold in relation to non-governmental organisations is also a way to promote the existence of genuine European organisations in this field .
And I believe that the threshold we are proposing will remain practical , even in the context of the enlargement of the European Union .
Furthermore , several non-governmental organisations in this field already play a significant role , including in a very significant number of the candidate countries .
Mr President , in relation to the second report on the Schengen Information System , I believe that this is a key element in the operation of the area without frontiers .
The need for a second-generation SIS was recognised some years ago .
This need is due , above all , to the limitations of the current SIS system .
The system only allows for the integration of 18 countries .
This is why the enlargement of the Union requires the development of a second-generation SIS that will permit the full integration of new Member States .
Without the SIS II we will not have the conditions appropriate for the lifting of internal border controls in the countries which are currently candidates for accession to the European Union .
The two initiatives you are debating today confirm that the European Parliament and the Commission will henceforth have an increased role in relation to the development of the SIS II , both in this initial phase in the field of funding , and in the definition of the future architecture of the system and its specific operation .
These two initiatives are in line with the conclusions of the Justice and Home Affairs Council at the end of May that favoured funding the development of SIS II by means of the Community budget from 2002 .
In accordance with the two initiatives aimed at creating a committee to assist the Commission in the development of the SIS II , the European Parliament will be kept systematically informed of work in progress , by means of the institutional mechanisms for informing Parliament within the framework of commitology .
I must stress that , at the request of the Commission , a sum has been included in the 2001 draft budget for preparatory action in relation to the development of the SIS II .
Given that this is for preparatory action , and in accordance with the rules on the execution of the budget , the Commission really does not require a legal basis for these preliminary expenses , but it is nevertheless aware that it cannot develop the SIS II without calling on the experience of Member States in relation to the current SIS and its operation .
This experience is absolutely essential and the implementation of commitology offers a well-established structural solution with a view to assisting the Commission in its new responsibilities relating to the development of the SIS II .
If the principle of creating a committee to assist the Commission is acceptable , however , we would like to express our preference for a system of commitology based on the creation of an advisory committee and a management committee .
The Commission is pleased with the amendments proposed by Mr von Boetticher in this regard , and I hope that they will be approved in plenary session .
The Commission is also prepared to accept the European Parliament ' s amendment on the delivery of a six-monthly report prepared by the Commission on the work on the development of the SIS II , not only to the Council but also to the European Parliament .
This is not only important with regard to the principle of transparency , but also with regard to the role the European Parliament will have to play within the framework of the legislative measures necessary for the development of the SIS II , which require that the European Parliament is kept fully informed of all work in this area .
Because , in fact , the two initiatives we are discussing today relate , above all , to the technical work involved in the implementation of the SIS II .
This implementation also requires the adoption , when the time comes , of legislative measures based on the appropriate bases in the Treaties , which the European Parliament will be consulted on .
These legislative measures will have to define all the essential elements of the SIS II , in particular , the purposes of the system , the categories of information to be included , the protection of information , control by a common control authority , the management of the future operational SIS II and the issue raised by Mr Coelho of whether or not to create an agency .
The points I have just highlighted will be the subject of a later debate , when the time comes , on the basis of the results of the feasibility study to be launched by the Commission at the beginning of 2002 .
The reason that the Commission cannot support the amendments on these points today is not that we disagree with their content , but simply that to me it seems premature to deal with them within the framework of the two initiatives which are aimed solely at the funding of the development of the SIS II .
We will have the opportunity to discuss these issues again and to make decisions , when the time comes , on the basis of legislative proposals .
Please allow me to conclude with the following positive statement : the development of the SIS II is a task which will concern us in the years to come and which must be achieved within a reasonable timescale that will allow the new Member States to be integrated into it and to thereby create the conditions for them to participate in our common area without frontiers .
The adoption of your opinion today , within the three months which have followed the delivery of the two initiatives , demonstrates the will and capacity of the European Parliament , of its Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and its rapporteur , to contribute to the creation of the SIS II as soon as possible .
This gives me great pleasure .
Public participation in drawing up environmental plans and programmes
The next item is the debate on the following report ( A5-0321 / 2001 ) by Mrs Korhola , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on providing for public participation in respect of the drawing up of certain plans and programmes relating to the environment and amending Council Directives 85 / 337 / EEC and 96 / 61 / EC ( COM ( 2000 ) 839 - C5-0027 / 2001 - 2000 / 0331 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , we are currently debating a directive which concerns participation by the public in decisions which affect the environment .
It is the second pillar in the legislative work whose purpose is to ratify , within the Community , the Aarhus Convention which was concluded in 1998 .
I wish to express my thanks for the fact that my draft report has received copious and unanimous support in many of the points which I have put forward .
The report has , however , also stirred up some political passions .
It must be possible to find a balance between , on the one hand , guaranteeing broad opportunities for participation by citizens , and , on the other hand , avoiding deliberate and vexatious delaying tactics .
This task is not easy , especially as the structure of the Commission 's basic proposal is very complicated .
The vote taken the week before last in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy led to an unfortunate and illogical conclusion , which must now be rectified in plenary session so that we can correct a situation which is embarrassing from the point of view of the Parliament 's reputation .
At the moment , the report version approved in Committee contains some mutually contradictory ingredients .
I personally feel that not enough time was available to discuss and to understand the basic starting point which I put forward , and its practical consequences .
I stated that information gathering and public hearing concern the entire public at large , but I limited the legal safeguards following the decision to a more restricted public , in other words those whose rights are infringed by the decision .
It was only in this point that I failed to receive the support which I had hoped for from the major groups .
I wished to open the consultation stage to the public at large , since there is a very peculiar logic in a situation whereby an authority ends up determining in advance which part of the public a matter concerns .
How could the authority know who will be affected by it , and in what way , before the public has been heard on the issue ?
And if this is already known , then hearing the public is a pointless exercise .
Such restriction is odd from the point of view of public participation , and also squanders the time and energy of the authority itself .
Since colleagues have feared that my approach means that anyone may take an authority to court , I wish to stress that just the opposite is the case .
It is precisely the Commission 's version which - in setting demanding obligations for the authority - would achieve this result .
In my proposal , the right of appeal is restricted solely to those whose rights are infringed by a decision , so that appeal is not used with deliberately vexatious intent .
The opportunity to express an opinion will not automatically imply the right of appeal .
In the Commission 's proposal , the public 's right of participation was restricted at all stages to that public which the matter concerns .
I continue to hold that the Commission 's proposal is misguided in this respect ; its practical consequences will create needless difficulties in the work of the authorities .
Authorities will face uncommon difficulties in establishing whom a matter concerns ; this includes all civic organisations , which according to the Commission 's proposal are always interested parties .
Failure or negligence at this stage will always form grounds for taking the matter to court .
Without a doubt , in the form proposed by the Commission these provisions are indeed open to abuse - and this abuse can also take the form of slowing down projects .
My proposal was unusual in that it would have simultaneously benefited citizens who genuinely wish to participate , and also the authorities dealing with the matter and those players whose project was in question .
Perhaps the matter may still be rectified when the Member States have to ponder the practical application of the matter in more detail .
The explanation which I have given here is , in my opinion , important from the point of view of all parties who have anything to do with the directive .
Fortunately many other matters which are important from the point of view of the Aarhus convention have been received positively .
I have , first and foremost , wished to streamline practice by standardising the regulations concerning processing with regard to the various directives .
In this way , it will be easier for citizens to know how to proceed , and the obligation of authorities to advise citizens will be more straightforward .
In the Commission 's proposal the modes of procedure vary slightly , and as a result it is difficult to know what one should do in any particular case .
In addition , I have incorporated into the report some objectives which are pursuant to the Aarhus convention , which the Commission had either omitted from its proposal or simply forgotten .
In this way the report complies better with the spirit and objectives of the convention .
In particular , this applies to Item 5 of Article 6 , and Article 8 , of the Aarhus Convention .
I would also like to thank the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Petitions for their opinions , which gave encouragement and support to my work in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Also , cooperation with the Commission and ( in particular ) the Council has been constructive , and bodes well for the second stage of processing of the report .
Mr President , we would like to thank Mrs Korhola for her work on this complex document .
In the Committee on Petitions we have a large number of petitions which relate to the particular directives concerned in this important report .
It is very clear to us that the public want to be involved , they want to be informed and they want information in good time about particular proposals .
We often hear complaints from the public about the lack of information , that it comes late , it is incomplete , it is difficult to understand .
We have often found through those petitions that there are a number of Member States that have very poorly applied the directives which are mentioned here and we have seen court cases resulting from that .
Our committee was extremely clear .
We want the widest possible definition of " public " .
We have found in the issues raised with us that it is not just environmental NGOs , or people living in an area that is directly affected .
We have come across small businesses , fishermen and others who have felt that particular schemes affect them and therefore they are interested parties .
We also thought it was important that the area of policy should be looked at as well , because one of the questions we often get is " what is the context of a particular development going ahead ? " , particularly where that is linked at times to European Union policy , such as CAP spending and spending on the Structural Funds .
We also find that people want access to resources in order to be able to understand the information they are given .
Sometimes we find complaints come to our committee effectively to have those environmental impact assessments assessed , because those organisations lack the resources to fully participate within the planning process and it is vital that we look at that , certainly at Member State level .
Mr President , full , effective participation by the public in the decision-making process in environmental matters is necessary and we support it .
It allows the citizens to express opinions and fears that may have a bearing on the decisions to be taken and allows those responsible for taking the decisions to take them into account .
This , in turn , increases accountability in the decision-making process and makes it more transparent , and helps to raise public awareness of environmental matters .
As has already been said , the importance of providing greater incentives for public participation has already been recognised at international level , with the Aarhus Convention .
The directive upon which we are going to vote tomorrow seeks to bring Community law into line with the provisions of this Convention and to smooth the way for its ratification by the Community .
The citizens will be able to participate fully right from the initial stages of the decision-making process , especially as regards the development of plans and programmes , the environmental impact assessment process and the prevention and overall reduction of pollution .
In this regard , I welcome the introduction by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy of fresh provisions , which refer clearly to the dissemination of information through the Internet as well .
A crucial element is that only the public concerned , citizens or groups , including NGOs , are entitled to express comments and opinions or even to appeal before a judicial body .
While I welcome other amendments made to the text by the rapporteur , I cannot support her proposal to extend this right to the participation of all citizens , without restriction .
A wider , less clear definition of citizens could lead to ambiguous interpretations and inappropriately hamper a project ' s implementation .
However , I support the definitions included in the Commission ' s proposal , which clearly define the concept of the public concerned , which alone is entitled to express comments and opinions to the competent authority before a decision is taken within the areas covered by the directive and , where appropriate , to appeal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as far back as a few months ago , we debated an absolutely excellent report by Mrs Korhola concerning access by the general public to environmental information .
This time , we are debating public participation in drawing up environmental plans and programmes .
What these reports have in common is that the Commission ' s proposals are based on what is known as the Aarhus Convention .
According to Article 8 of this Convention , every country must endeavour to promote a situation in which , at a time when it is still possible to influence the decisions , the general public is given an effective opportunity to participate in the public authorities ' work on such rules .
According to Article 9 of the same Convention - and this is something I want to emphasise - each country undertakes , within the framework of its own national legislation , to give the public concerned the opportunity , through the courts , to have the validity of the authorities ' decisions tested .
For me as a liberal , it is obvious that the decisions made and the proposals drafted by the public authorities must , as far as possible , be made accessible to anyone interested and affected .
Anything else would be unthinkable in a democracy .
May I congratulate the rapporteur on this important report - a crucial element of which is the definition of participation , ensuring that people can influence plans and programmes at different stages of the process and receive proper feedback so that they know that the issues they have raised have been dealt with seriously .
It is essential that consultation is not restricted in a way that in practice would make it meaningless - in other words , that authorities themselves could define the people who would be affected and they would be the only ones consulted .
I have a case in Swansea in my own constituency where a local authority is building an incinerator on the border of two counties and has consulted its own constituents , but not the people of the other county who live closer to it and who will be more affected and are now protesting vigorously against the plans .
This legislation could prevent that kind of situation arising .
Just as important it gives the public access to a review procedure , and so I ask for support for the amendments of my group which seek to strengthen the report in line with the Aarhus Convention .
Mr President , to advocate transparency and public participation in drawing up environmental plans and programmes is a laudable objective , which we fully agree with . However , the report gives rise to some fundamental problems .
First of all , the possible overlapping of texts prescribing public participation and , in particular , the directives on environmental impact studies and on the prevention or reduction of pollution . Secondly , the ratification of the Aarhus Convention .
This convention has been signed by the Community and by all the Member States , but has only been ratified by Italy or Denmark : it is therefore not in force .
This report must not be an opportunity for the Union to replace , by means of a directive , the desire of the Member States to be bound by an international convention .
Furthermore , to add environmental policies to the plans and programmes seems to me premature at this stage , given that the Aarhus Convention is yet to be ratified .
There is also the concept of ' public affected ' , which we are in favour of so as not to widen the scope of the text in an unrestricted fashion .
Nevertheless , the two concepts of ' public ' and ' public affected ' should be able to coexist , and it should be for the Member States to decide on the most appropriate level of consultation .
In the case of cross-border projects , for example , it would be sensible to broaden the consultation to the public as a whole .
We will support Amendments Nos 30 , 31 and 32 .
Finally , like the Commission , we believe that we should lay down the minimum conditions required in order to guarantee effective participation by the public and leave it to the Member States to regulate the practical details in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
( PPE-DE ) . ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the complaints most frequently voiced by the public concerns the very limited role they are given to play in representative democracy .
Our citizens complain that they are given the right to vote every now and then , but that they do not enjoy full rights of participation in the day-to-day activities of the institutions for which they vote : at European level , at national level , and at regional and local level .
It is precisely in the area of the environment that the dissatisfaction of communities has been most keenly felt . When they disagree , often rightly so , with a particular project , their only option is to express their anger on the streets or in the courts .
This indignation increases exponentially when many of these projects with unacceptable environmental impacts are funded under the common agricultural policy and the Structural Funds .
It is , therefore very important that , as a follow-up to the Aarhus Convention , the Commission has produced legislation on public access to environmental information , on public participation in certain plans , programmes and policies and on public access to justice .
Greater public participation not only gives greater legitimacy to the decisions taken by our institutions ; it can also improve their quality .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur for the work she has done on this proposal for a directive on public participation in drafting environmental plans and programmes , especially for having sought , by means of various amendments , to extend citizens ' rights and to eliminate some ambiguities .
There is nevertheless one subject on which I disagree with Mrs Korhola . Public consultation will only be feasible if the definition of ' the public ' is not too vague .
I therefore prefer the Commission ' s approach , which defines the public affected by a given project as the target of consultation and not the rapporteur ' s choice of a broader and , therefore , vaguer definition of the public .
Mr President , I share the European Commission ' s opinion that actual public participation in environmental decision-making is beneficial .
After all , the public is given the opportunity of expressing its opinion , along with any concerns it may have .
The decision-makers are given the chance to take these into account when taking decisions .
In short , public participation will contribute to the transparency of the decision-making process and the acceptance of the outcome , namely the plans and programmes .
However , broadening participation to include policy-making , as proposed by the rapporteur , is taking matters a step too far , since policy-making is not specific enough for public participation .
Also , ' policy-making ' is not a category that falls within the scope of the present ' environmental impact assessment ' directive .
The objective of the present directive is to render basic procedures concerning public participation consistent in all Member States and to ensure that they are carried out in the same way within the Community .
However , it is also a minimum obligation .
It will thus become apparent upon implementation that discrepancies between the Member States exist after all .
Mr President , as many speakers have already said , the intentions behind this report are extremely commendable , particularly the aim of making it possible for the citizens to have a say in the process of establishing environmental rules .
This point was discussed during the March plenary and it was already clear then that attitudes towards the methodologies and towards the influence of this participation too vary from North to South , so to speak .
Indeed , the northern countries have a different attitude towards this type of involvement , towards the idea of this type of participation from the countries of central and southern Europe .
The rapporteur , clearly inspired by the way things work in her country , which is possibly democratically more developed , more advanced than others - proposes participation that is too peremptory , too authoritarian , participation that could ultimately slow down , if not block or paralyse certain decision-making processes , upon which there will never be total convergence between the direct democratic base and what is known as the authority , that is the administration appointed to deal with these issues .
There you are : this authority must also take into clear consideration all the demands and comments of those who have to build , sell and create tourist , sporting and cultural concerns - in short , daily activities - in the environment .
Considering that this second debate contains points and issues which involve legality and access to levels of justice , including in the event of appeals , the roles and responsibilities must be quite clearly , fairly and unambiguously defined in terms of who the actors should be and how much influence they should have .
The Aarhus Convention has been cited : that is all very well - we support it - but it must not be taken as Gospel .
It too must allow for a healthy subsidiarity , for customs , for habits , and for the level of directly democratic involvement possible in the various countries .
In any case , I congratulate the rapporteur , who has put in an enormous amount of work , but I feel that there should be some adaptation , as I said at the beginning , to the different attitudes .
Mr President , may I begin by saying that this proposal deals with the second pillar of this convention involving public participation in environmental decision-taking .
In addition to this proposal on access to environmental information , there are other pieces of Community legislation which already incorporate the principle of the Aarhus Convention .
The Commission will ensure that the Aarhus elements are built into all future proposals .
Public participation has to become a fully integrated part of environmental decision-taking .
To reach that objective , our proposals have to be easy to put into practice , so that they may be smoothly implemented in the different administrative systems of the Member States .
The question whether participation in decision-taking should aim at the public at large or the " public concerned " is a key point , and it has been addressed by a number of Members who have just spoken .
In accordance with the Aarhus Convention , the Commission proposes to ensure that the public at large is fully informed about planned developments which might affect them , whilst giving the right to participate in the decision-taking process to those having an interest in or likely to be affected by the developments , that is , the " public concerned . "
Some of the proposed amendments , and indeed what has been said by some Members just now , seems to imply that by using the definition , " the public concerned " , both the convention and the Commission are deliberately restricting the rights of citizens , but may I be permitted to point out that is certainly not the case .
It is not correct .
This proposal is aimed at extending the rights of citizens .
There is no question of restricting those rights .
By defining the " public concerned " , we are focusing the attention of the competent authorities on the need to take account of those citizens most directly affected .
The definition will confirm both the right to express a view and the right to be heard .
The definition of " public concerned " is sufficiently detailed to ensure that there is no doubt who should be involved .
Therefore members of the public could argue that they had been unjustifiably excluded .
That would be difficult with a more general definition of the public .
The inclusion of NGOs within the definition of the " public concerned " will ensure that a more general public view may be taken into account .
On a more practical level , the definition of " public concerned " has been used without major problems in existing legislation - for example the environmental impact assessment directive - for a number years .
There have been no problems raised as a result of people having been excluded by the use of the definition - at least no major problems .
In short , this approach will give those affected by new developments the right to influence decisions which will not just affect their environment but which may also affect their economic and social conditions .
For those reasons , the Commission , regrettably , cannot support the amendments seeking to replace the concept of the " public concerned " .
Amendment No 26 seeks to extend considerably the scope of Article 1 , so as to cover plans and programmes not only in the environmental field but also in other sectors .
The Commission 's view is that this would make the scope of the proposal less well-defined and also that the measures proposed would lead to legal confusion .
There would in effect be a duplication of measures in different pieces of legislation each seeking to do the same thing , but in an inconsistent manner .
In particular , for plans and programmes in other sectors that may have significant environmental effects , Directive 2001 / 42 on strategic environmental assessment already incorporates measures of particular relevance .
The directive provides for environmental assessment of relevant plans and programmes in many integration sectors and envisages public participation fully in line with the Aarhus requirements .
Amendments Nos 6 and 12 aim to give effect to a best endeavour clause under the Aarhus Convention and are formulated in a non-binding way .
Amendment No 9 introduces public participation concerning policies in its heading , but the text does not contain operational provisions in this respect .
In formulating the proposal , the Commission 's objective has been to incorporate the binding provisions of the Aarhus Convention .
The Commission 's view is that there would be no added value in taking up its soft-law provisions .
Not only the Community but all Member States have signed the Aarhus Convention and so already have to take into account the soft-law provisions .
The Commission , regrettably , cannot accept Amendments Nos 7 and 11 which provide for access to justice concerning public participation in plans and programmes .
The Aarhus Convention does not explicitly require this , neither does the directive on strategic environmental assessment of plans and programmes provide for access to justice .
The Commission is however considering possible further legislative proposals in relation to the third Aarhus pillar on access to justice .
In conclusion , may I now confirm the Commission 's position on the amendments .
The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 15 , 18 , 25 , 28 and 29 .
In addition , Amendments Nos 9 , 13 , 14 , 23 and 27 can be accepted in part and Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , 10 and 17 in principle .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , 16 , 20 , 21 and 22 .
By way of conclusion , I should like to emphasise that it is in our common interest , which is the interest of the European citizen after all , to have this proposal enter into force swiftly .
Only once the frameworks are established can public participation in decision-making become a fully integrated administrative practice .
The English interpretation was not able to follow my speech and thus all the other languages based on that interpretation were incomplete .
I regret this .
It has happened many times so I urge you to see that the quality of interpretation is improved as soon as possible .
Thank you , Mrs Korhola , we have taken note .
We know that our relay interpreting system causes problems now and again .
We have taken very good note and this should not happen again .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities ( UCITS )
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0324 / 2001 ) by Mr Schmidt , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending :
I. Directive 85 / 611 / EEC on the coordination of laws , regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investments in transferable securities ( UCITS ) with a view to regulating management companies and simplified prospectuses [ 7551 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0296 / 2001 - 1998 / 0243 ( COD ) ]
II .
Directive 85 / 611 / EEC on the coordination of laws , regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investments in transferable securities ( UCITS ) [ 7550 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0295 / 2001 - 1998 / 0242 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , let this be the end of twelve years ' debate of the ' UCITS Directive ' !
In February of last year , we had the first reading .
One and a half years ' later , in July , the common position was finally adopted , and now it is our turn .
As you know , the first proposal concerns the UCITS itself and what investments it may engage in .
The second updates and extends the rules relating to the actual management of the funds .
Both proposals were broadly supported by Parliament at first reading .
A total of 37 amendments were adopted for the two proposals .
Of these , 30 have been accepted in full or in part by the Council .
As for UCITS-1 , the Council wholly or partially approved 20 of Parliament ' s 24 amendments .
Moreover , it has made a number of changes of its own .
The most important concerns OTC derivatives , the use of which the Commission opposed from the start .
However , Parliament considered that OTC derivatives could be employed more broadly , but according to stringent criteria .
The Council adopted the same policy .
In several cases , the Council adopted a still more prudent approach than Parliament on the issue of OTC derivatives and considered that investments in these had to fulfil more stringent qualitative criteria .
Where comitology is concerned , the common position does include comitology provisions in the field of financial services . I nonetheless want to stress that there is no obvious link to the subsequent proposals made by the group chaired by Mr Lamfalussy .
The 1985 directive created the so-called UCITS Contact Committee which was set up to advise the Commission .
The extension of the Contact Committee ' s powers to include new powers was foreseen in the original proposal .
Parliament accepts parts of the proposal , but not the part concerning the adjustment of limit values , as adopted by the Council .
In the same way , both the Commission and the Council accepted Parliament ' s request to limit the scope of the delegation to the Committee .
In my view , Parliament has thus agreed to the use of comitology and , moreover , successfully amended the scope of its powers .
I do not therefore see any reason to re-open this issue at this juncture .
There is nonetheless an amendment from Mr Goebbels , Mr Jonckheer and Mr Herzog .
Should it be adopted , I am afraid that we should be facing conciliation and not knowing where it might end .
The Lamfalussy agreement is in danger of being delayed and the UCITS directive of being halted in its tracks .
That is something that no one can want to see happen .
I hope that Mr Goebbels is able to share my view .
Turning to UCITS-2 , the Council has , for the most part , accepted the concerns expressed by Parliament at first reading .
Ten out of Parliament ' s 13 amendments have been incorporated in part or in full .
The most contentious issue was that of the capital requirement for management companies .
The compromise finally reached by the Council is , broadly speaking , in line with Parliament ' s stance .
Given how complicated these two directives are and how quickly the market is developing , the committee proposes a review of the rules within the next three years .
There are two reasons for this .
First of all , the compromise reached in Council is a very fragile one , and it would not serve anybody ' s interests to open the Pandora ' s box of detailed , technical or politically sensitive amendments .
A conciliation would delay this review , for which there is already a need , and it might also stop the legislation from ever seeing the light of day .
Secondly , the two common positions strike a good balance between investor protection and investment freedom .
As I say , the majority of those changes we proposed last time have been introduced .
There are nonetheless certain unresolved issues .
In my opinion , these are better tackled in a wider context .
The committee was kind enough to follow my recommendations .
There is therefore only one amendment to UCITS-1 , setting out some guidelines for a future review process .
A ' grandfather ' clause is also proposed , whereby existing funds should not have to comply with the new legislation for a transitional period .
There is also an amendment to UCITS-2 , seeking to align the review period for the capital requirement with the general review .
Following the committee ' s reading , I have been in contact with the Council , as recently as a few hours ago , and also with the Commission .
Together with Mr Goebbels , I am therefore tabling a new amendment to reduce the transitional period .
In this way , it will be possible to introduce the UCITS directive into the Member States by 2005 , that is to say the year in which the financial action plan is to be implemented .
The purpose of this is to avoid conciliation .
The work on renewing the regulations governing UCITS has been going on for as long as twelve years and is a clear example of why decision-making within this area needs to be reformed .
If Europe is to have a chance of competing with , for example , the American economy , it will have to be possible for changes of a more technical nature to take place significantly more simply and quickly .
There is now a good balance between a well-functioning market and reasonably secure protection for consumers .
Parliament has been proactive and shown an ability to act quickly and to compromise when it really counts .
May we continue along that route !
Well thought-out , prompt and effective legislation - that is what Europe needs .
I want to end by thanking everyone involved : the Commissioner , his efficient and friendly colleagues and my fellow MEPs who have all really shown willing during this difficult period .
I hope that , tomorrow , we can thus draw a line under twelve years ' work for the benefit of Europe ' s consumers and investors .
Mr President , to tie in with the rapporteur ' s closing words , I wish to thank everyone who has taken part and especially the Commission staff for their help .
The issue of concern to us , however technical it is , is of extraordinary political and social importance because it is widely known that undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities ( UCITS ) , including pension funds , are currently the preferred form of saving for the majority of European citizens .
The first problem we came up against was that there were two directives : one called a ' product ' directive , which allowed these bodies to invest in products from which they were hitherto denied access , and another , which proposed substantially increasing capital requirements .
Both the Commission and Parliament were tempted to immediately adopt the so-called ' product ' directive and delay the adoption of the so-called ' management ' directive .
This Parliament warned that it was dangerous to allow these undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities - which , I repeat monopolise the market in public savings - to move into deeper waters without any guarantee that their ships were prepared for what would be a more daring day ' s sailing than they had hitherto embarked on .
As the rapporteur indicated , the purpose of the first discussion - and I am limiting myself here to the product directive - was to decide what they could invest in .
He referred to non-standardised derivatives , index funds , the cascade effect , etc . , which are technical issues that I will not go into now .
What I do want to say is that , in my group ' s opinion , a balance has been achieved between giving greater opportunities to management bodies and , therefore , greater opportunities to investors and the protection , the caution , that must be present in any discussion of such delicate matters .
Parliament wanted to send a message to the Commission .
As on previous occasions , Parliament wants to be flexible on the adoption of the directives of the financial services action plan .
We want this directive to be adopted rapidly and we do not , therefore , want to have to go to conciliation .
We have therefore , limited our amendments to one - which I personally am not in favour of , although I will be voting for it - which consists of creating a ' grandfather ' clause , in other words , creating a transitional period so that currently existing bodies have additional time in which to raise their capital .
Mention has been made of another amendment by Mr Goebbels , which he is going to withdraw , but I think it is extraordinarily intelligent and is the second message that Parliament is sending to the Commission .
The first , I repeat , is not tabling amendments that cannot be accepted by the Council and the Commission .
The second , even though we are not involved in a Lamfalussy procedure , is to warn that we will always have to be flexible . We will always show willingness to be flexible on the legislative procedure , but we are not prepared to concede the codecision powers that Parliament has taken such a long time to gain .
Mr President , I will try to make up for the time which Mr García-Margallo has used .
I would simply like , on behalf of my group , to express our support for the proposals of Mr Olle Schmidt , and I congratulate him on his arduous work as rapporteur for the European Parliament .
We support the two amendments he has tabled .
I have personally , along with some other fellow Members , tabled another amendment .
We are , in all likelihood , going to withdraw that agreement , depending on the replies which Commissioner Bolkestein is soon to give us .
We believe - and there are many of us ; I believe I can speak for Mr García-Margallo and others - that the balance between the Council and the European Parliament as co-legislators was upset at Stockholm .
The Commission must re-establish that balance .
We await concrete proposals from the Commissioner .
I just wish to say on behalf of the Liberal Group that I very much hope Mr Goebbels and his colleagues will withdraw their amendment .
We do not believe that the amendment insisting on call-back is appropriate to this particular piece of legislation , which my colleague Olle Schmidt has described as being very carefully balanced after the common position of the Council .
Nor is it appropriate in the context of the ongoing discussions over Lamfalussy .
Indeed , I would go as far to say that by insisting on call-back , which was not a phrase which appeared in Parliament 's second resolution on this subject after the Stockholm Council , we risk calling into question our bona fides in the lengthy negotiations which some of us have undertaken with Mr Bolkestein .
I very much hope , therefore , that the people who have put forward this amendment will withdraw it , and that discussions will take place in an appropriate place .
We should not try to call into question this piece of legislation .
I believe it should be put through as is .
I too very much hope that Mr Goebbels is going to withdraw Amendment No 4 .
You want call-back , Mr Goebbels , I want call-back and so does Mr Bolkestein .
The fact remains that it is not feasible to have a legal call-back within the terms of the Treaty .
Therefore , it is up to us to find a political agreement and a form of words which will do until 2004 when we can review this whole issue .
Indeed I believe the Commission is committed to such a review .
It is vitally important that we come to this agreement .
On Mr Schmidt 's report , it is excellent to see the modernisation of the framework for UCITS by the inclusion of derivatives and OTC derivatives .
Parliament is leading the way on this , and Mr Schmidt has played a particularly successful role in updating the directives in this way and very much led the way on the derivatives issue .
I am sorry to see the capital requirements in the form that they are .
I believe that UCITS managers should be subject to capital requirements , but I do not believe those contained in the directive are sufficiently risk-sensitive .
I do not believe that they are consistent with the general framework that we hope to implement .
I do not think that assessing capital according to risk under management actually reflects the risk undertaken .
I am also concerned that this formulation of the directive will produce an uneven market opening , leaving the market closed in one Member State and open in the other 14 .
But I have been persuaded by the rapporteur and our esteemed shadow rapporteur not to table amendments on these defects because we are very keen to get these two directives on the statute book to modernise the framework for a unit trust and UCITS in the European Union .
I commend the directive to the House .
Mr President , I refer to the common position on Directive 1998 / 242 and the capital requirements that it will impose on investment management firms .
In Scotland , there is a long tradition of investment management going back to the opening of the American west in the 19th century .
These investment managers were usually law firms , private partnerships , which managed the assets of their clients very successfully .
To this day , there are investment firms of this type , private partnerships , sole proprietorships and other structures with limited capital .
The interests of clients are fully safeguarded as their assets are held by independent and fully capitalised and regulated depositories .
It is largely irrelevant to set capital requirements on the investment management firms themselves .
I am relieved that the Council has reduced slightly the capital requirements set by this Parliament at first reading and has set a top limit of EUR 10 million .
But this is still substantial for private partnerships and sole proprietorships .
Incidentally , the largest and most successful firms in America and in the world - Fidelity is a good example - are exactly of this type .
The requirements of this type will be a hurdle for new enterprising entrants into an industry which requires a regular injection of new blood .
At the very least , it should provide for this capital to be available by means of guarantees from banks or by insurance policies to cover professional and operational risk .
But the common position , for some not very apparent reason , restricts such cover to only 50 % of the requirement .
Why ?
The common position provides for the Commission to report on this matter within five years of entry into force of the directive .
I should like to put on record now the request that such a report should specifically consider whether any capital requirement at all is necessary for investment management companies , and certainly that it should be greatly reduced .
Mr President , while , in many areas , the European legislation which we produce here is often openly criticised - quite rightly - we should recognise that the 1985 directive on undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities was , for once , a masterpiece .
The success it has had in the investment fund sector and with the clients of these funds bears witness to this .
It has also become an example for legislation on a world scale .
Since it entered into force in 1989 , not only have the assets of the UCITSs increased dramatically , but also cross-border trade has developed very strongly .
It has therefore achieved the objectives it was intended for .
However , if , after ten years , this directive needs a ' facelift ' in order to adapt to the evolution of the markets , to the increasingly sophisticated financial products available , I remain concerned about the fate of the older funds , which do not meet the new demands .
That is why I had advocated a clause for these funds , a so-called ' grandfather ' clause , which would be unrestricted .
Also in this field there are acquired rights , which it would be unfair to modify in a backdated fashion .
If there is no such clause , there will be a significant risk of market insecurity , which would have disastrous effects on the performance of the funds , prejudicing not only the industry but also the investors .
And above all , the weaker consumers , who do not keep so up-to-date with financial matters and who therefore react more slowly to them , will be the most affected .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has finally expressed its preference for a clause which is restricted in time .
This is the lesser evil , even if this clause may have negative effects , in terms of competition , for the older UCITSs , all of which will probably not be able to adapt to the new provisions of the directive in the best operational and financial conditions .
Mr President , I therefore hope that the House will vote in favour of this restricted clause .
Please allow me to point out that I am also opposed to the amendment by Mr Goebbels , which would have the effect of delaying , indeed sacrificing , the modified directive , which we are able to live with , despite its shortcomings - but it would appear to be a lost cause from the outset .
Mr Goebbels would do well , I believe , to withdraw his amendment .
He can put it in cold storage until there is a better occasion to table it once again .
I should like to begin by saying that the Commission would firstly like to thank very much the rapporteur , Mr Schmidt .
On behalf of my staff - about whom Mr Schmidt had some extremely kind words to say - I thank the rapporteur , and the Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for their extremely constructive approach on these important files .
The common positions are crucial elements for delivering the FSAP - the financial services action plan - on time , in other words , by the year 2003 for an integrated European Union for securities markets and 2005 overall .
These proposals , taken as a whole , represent a highly delicate and complex compromise which the Commission fully supports , as does European industry .
That is an important fact to bear in mind .
Given the capitalisation of the UCITS market - nearly EUR 4 trillion - the expected benefits to be had are large .
Firstly , the proposals will widen the set of financial instruments eligible to be used in UCITS portfolios while enhancing risk management requirements .
Thus they will provide greater financial diversity while keeping the original concept , namely risk diversification with the highest standards of investor protection .
Secondly , the management companies which generally run these savings schemes will enjoy a European passport and will be allowed to provide additional services to customers who request , for example , individual management of their assets .
But they will have to comply with a comprehensive set of requirements and rules .
Thirdly , investor information will be strongly improved by detailed disclosure of risk profiles , along with a fully harmonised , simplified prospectus to play the role of a single , investor-friendly pan-European marketing tool .
Now I come to the amendments tabled .
I should like to stress that the provisions contained in the first three amendments , namely the twin review clauses and the grandfathering clause , pose some difficulties for us - not because of the substance , but with the timetables proposed in each case .
We would much prefer a single deadline for both , that is , 2005 - the date of the conclusion of the financial services action plan , which we think would be more logical .
However , in a spirit of compromise and because we must now lay this matter to rest after twelve years of discussion , and in recognition of the efforts this Parliament has undertaken , also considering the last amendment of the rapporteur with would shorten the grandfathering period foreseen in Amendment No 1 , the Commission will , in the end , support Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 3 .
I now turn to Amendment No 4 , which would introduce a so-called " call-back " clause regarding the UCITS Contact Committee .
I should like to be clear that this is not acceptable to the Commission . We believe that it would not be acceptable for the Council either .
It is not acceptable to the Commission because firstly , the clause which has been tabled is not compatible with Article 202 of the Treaty , as Mr Goebbels knows full well .
It is also in contradiction with existing comitology rules .
Of that , Mr Goebbels is also aware .
( Interruption from Mr Goebbels ) Not before 2004 , Mr Goebbels , as I have explained on behalf of the Commission many , many times .
The second reason why this amendment is not acceptable to the Commission is that the UCITS Contact Committee 's mandate was discussed by Parliament at first reading .
Parliament then gave its full support to the mandate of the UCITS Contact Committee .
Indeed , the first common position fully incorporated what this Parliament wanted .
So I suggest that Mr Goebbels does not back-track on what Parliament has previously agreed .
The third reason why that amendment is unacceptable to the Commission is that accepting it would lead to an institutional dispute in conciliation and seriously put at risk the adoption of both directives .
That is the last thing the Commission and - I assume - this Parliament would want .
So let us agree on Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 3 .
In particular , I would address the following words to Mr Purvis , who referred to the United States ' system , which is different from the European system .
Depositing is fundamental for the European system . We are going to consider updating , following the Ecofin Council of December that the European form of UCITS need capital because they cannot assume debts in order to provide themselves with working capital .
That is possible in the United States .
Therefore the need to provide such undertakings in the United States with capital is less than in Europe .
Once again , the European undertakings cannot use debts for their working capital and therefore must provide themselves with capital .
I believe the vote will be taken tomorrow and I hope we can now agree to Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 3 and to the proposals as such .
This would allow us to move ahead constructively for the sake of European investors , European industry and the European economy .
I hope that after twelve years of discussions these proposals can now find their way to the statute book .
Thank you , Commissioner Bolkestein .
The debate is closed
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
International monetary system
The next item on the agenda is the report ( A5-0302 / 2001 ) by Mr Goebbels on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the international monetary system .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , according to the International Monetary Fund , the world experienced 120 monetary crises between 1975 and 2000 .
A monetary crisis is defined as the depreciation of a currency by more than 25 % in one year .
It was always the real economy that paid the price for this financial instability .
Less growth , less employment and more misery accompany financial crises .
We should therefore view the need for financial stability as being in the public good .
Public authorities are called upon to prevent , or otherwise to manage as best they can , any crisis .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has commissioned me to produce this own-initiative report .
I have experienced some difficulties with the rules laid down by the Bureau of our Parliament .
My report was too long , as if it was possible to deal with the complexity of international monetary relations in five pages .
The Meltzer report , in the American Congress , was some one hundred pages long .
The Meltzer committee , made up of congressmen , scientists , bankers and trade unionists inspired a lively international debate .
My humble report , and the motion for a resolution , will certainly not inspire a similar debate .
In order to carry more weight , our Parliament should have followed a procedure similar to that of the American Congress , that is , by means of a collective report , with detailed proposals .
The motion for a resolution is restricted to certain essential issues .
My report hinges on the notions of transparency and accountability , regulation and solidarity .
In 2000 , the private sector transferred about twenty times more resources to the developing countries than the World Bank and the other multilateral banks .
Open financial markets will lead to significant increases in efficiency for world exchanges so long as they are provided with a better framework .
The international financial institutions must become truly universal .
The monetary fund must become more democratic .
The super majority of 95 % must be abolished for all important decisions .
It gives a right of veto to the United States and to the Union , if it is also able to unite within the International Monetary Fund .
A regular rise in quotas and the issuing of special drawing rights is needed , in accordance with the growth of the world economy .
Common rules and standards should be applied on an international level .
We need a legal and judicial framework allowing for the rapid resolution of insolvency crises .
The private sector should be involved in the management of crises , in particular by means of the general application of collective action clauses .
This involvement should extend to the freezing of debt service payments .
This will allow a reduction in moral uncertainties and in the cost of restructuring programmes .
Better prevention of crises requires increased supervision of off-balance sheet operations .
In particular , we must toughen the prudential requirements imposed on banks when they serve to offset hedge funds .
Europe must become more active in international bodies .
In this respect , the ECB must be more involved .
The European system of central banks must be designed as a body for coordinating the Union ' s supervision and control authorities .
One of the conclusions of my report is that the Tobin tax will not work .
In fact it would have terrible economic consequences .
Why penalise transactions between strong currencies , which make up more than 95 % of international currency transactions , on the basis of a desire to prevent speculation against the currencies of developing countries .
The Chilean encaja would achieve better results .
Nevertheless , I welcome the decision of the ECOFIN Council to invite the Commission to prepare a report on this issue which I hope will make the decision much more objective .
My report puts great stress on the need to settle the problem of third-world debt as soon as possible .
This debt should be partly cancelled and partly rescheduled , so as to allow the developing countries to repay the amounts up to a limit of 5 % of their annual exports .
The London Agreement of 1953 laid down such provisions in favour of Germany .
This was the basis of the German post-war economic miracle .
This could also be the basis for a new economic partnership between all nations , the beginning of a true globalisation .
Settling the problem of third-world debt would allow the internal development of these countries and would cement the victory against poverty and ignorance and therefore against intolerance and terrorism .
Mr President , one could , with reference to Mr Goebbels ' report , say that it was worth it in the end .
It is an own-initiative report dating back as far as 1999 , when it was prompted by the crises in Asia , Russia and Brazil .
In the meantime , there has been a succession of further small crises , and we have got on with our work .
In the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , our group wholeheartedly agreed with the basic line taken by the rapporteur , not least because you , Mr Goebbels , took up a clear position on the Tobin tax .
The international monetary system is undergoing transformation , as is clear from your report .
We want to bring proposals into this process of transformation , but we can also see that the euro has firmly established itself since 1999 and has fully proved itself as an anchor giving stability to the global economy .
That in itself is an important contribution by Europe to stabilising the international monetary system .
Mr Goebbels has done a sound job of work , something I want to emphasise here today .
For that reason , we are in substantial agreement with his proposals : the improved supervision of banking , surveillance of international financial activities , greater powers for international bodies such as the IMF and the World Bank to really get to grips with crisis situations .
As you have just said , the IMF must become more democratic .
Above all else , it must fit into the overall scheme of things so that it does not become the bogeyman of crisis management .
Of course , the states must work together in this , for financial means alone will not overcome crises .
We agree with closer collaboration at international level between national supervisory and regulatory authorities , a stronger coordinating role for the European Central Bank , something that has still not been resolved , and which we would remind you is overdue - the establishment of an observatory for systemic risks at the Bank for International Cooperation , and continued efforts at reform of the international monetary system .
We share Mr Goebbels ' view - contested in their proposals by our Green colleagues - that the Tobin tax does not belong in this report .
Looking through the proposals , I noted that the Group of the Party of European Socialists also , according to Amendment No 10 , wants this to be checked up on , even though it does refer to an ECOFIN Council resolution .
On that point we take a completely different view .
We agree with your basic approach and we will be asking for a separate vote on this subject .
Introducing such a tax , whose technical problems cannot in any case be resolved , would imperil the transfer of capital and thus also put at risk the advantages of global division of labour , investment and employment .
That is why we are opposed to it , but will vote for your report without a Tobin tax , and against it with one .
Mr President , thank you for your willingness to allow us this pleasure late in the evening .
On behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
We support this report because it gives the right solutions to the issues of the new financial architecture which must be created , of reform as a whole and of crisis management - solutions which also deal practically with the needs of regions hit by crises , the requirements of international financial markets and the very important need of all societies for stability in financial markets .
I would like to emphasise again that I believe stability in financial markets to be a public good to which all citizens are entitled .
Taking a look at the situation we are in , I cannot resist making an observation .
International financial activity on the currency markets has , in fact , decreased to around USD 1 200 billion a day , and that is due to the creation of the monetary union , which is of course one of the levers of the flows of capital that are quantitatively scarcely manageable .
At the same time , though , we must note that during the course of the nineties we were dealing with a twenty-five-fold turnover increase in derivative trading such as swaps , options and so on .
We know that , now , not even 3 % of the transactions have to do with the real market in goods and services .
I believe it to be important that we should look at the flow of capital under the influence of globalisation in terms both , on the one hand , of the yield accruing to institutional investors and of the economic and social situation , and on the other , from the point of view of the capital-importing countries .
In this connection , we have to bear in mind that 75 % of the capital invested flows into only twelve states , and that only 1 % of the capital invested flows to black Africa .
The rapporteur is right to demand that we now move to a consolidation , and that can only be done if we write off debt more comprehensively than we have done before .
Functioning globalised financial markets are no doubt advantageous .
Presupposing stable development , they contribute to growth and employment .
Despite that , there are still economic and social deficits and a lack of regulation and supervision .
The report points that out .
Concern about speculative commitments to the detriment of the real economy and the excessive volatility of the market brought about by an enormous increase in transaction volume for certain financial products are factors which make a reform of the international financial architecture more necessary than ever .
We have lived through 120 currency crises , and they cannot be abolished .
We have not yet succeeded in developing a working system of early warning indicators , in making information transparent and in drawing up a code of conduct that works for everyone , and we have not yet solved the problem of moral hazard .
So I consider it very important that this report 's demands should influence the EU 's negotiations , and the EU , too , must speak with one voice at the international level .
It is not just about us having a monetary zone , but we must also speak with one voice internationally on financial market policy and on issues of the world 's financial architecture .
The introduction of the euro is a contribution to financial stability , and our financial system is better protected against external shocks , but we must move on , for the monetary union is only one contribution to stability in Europe and the world .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report .
We , in the Liberal Group , welcome the thrust of the report , because it grapples with the real issues and it avoids the sort of populist solutions which , I am afraid , are on offer in many of the amendments before this House .
I am particularly thinking of the Tobin tax .
It is , of course , the case that nobody , particularly liberals in favour of free inquiry , could object to the Commission 's study on this subject .
But I frankly believe that this is a false promise which really offers very little practical benefit to the countries that we are all , I hope , trying to help .
Instead , the report quite correctly identifies as a potential model , the Chilean deposit system , which introduces an incentive for investors to invest long-term in an emerging market rather than going for short term paper because that involves a longer-term investment for depositors .
That is the right way to go , and therefore I very much congratulate the rapporteur and hope that we will not support the amendments to an excellent report .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I would like to thank Mr Goebbels for all the energy and intellect he has invested in his report .
We regret that the motion for a resolution presented to us does not in the end meet the expectations of the explanatory statement which he had drawn up , and that is why we have thought it appropriate to introduce certain amendments aimed at reinforcing the political message of the report .
The first category of amendments relates to the ' organisational ' aspect of the International Monetary Fund , which we believe to be currently in an unacceptable situation .
That is why we are taking up an idea put forward by Jacques Delors , in this case that of an economic and social security council within the United Nations .
We would like the Commission and the Council to express their views on this issue at the Council to be held next spring in Barcelona .
Furthermore , we believe that the decision-making procedures and the composition of the governing body of the International Monetary Fund should be substantially reviewed .
The second great area on which we would like to express our view is the need to combat terrorism , which has an extremely important financial dimension .
This is why we feel there is an additional reason to make the recommendations of the FATF binding and to increase its mandate , as also requested by the European Council in Ghent .
I believe that this would supplement the report .
Finally , with regard to capital flows - in particular exchange operations - I will say no more , personally , about the Tobin tax , but I will nevertheless continue to demand an in-depth debate on taxes which could discourage speculative assaults on the currencies of a number of countries .
In this respect , I believe there are some interesting proposals that deserve to be supported .
Mr President , despite the flashy title of this report - ' How the international monetary system can be made to work better ' - these insipid formulae are certainly not going to prevent future crises .
The only purpose of this report is to justify an economic system which is irrational , anarchic and socially unjust .
You , the defenders of capitalism , are totally incapable of regulating this economy which is based on the quest for profit and competition .
Because it cannot be regulated .
The only imaginable regulation is that which the most powerful impose on others , but they do so to their own benefit .
The desire to democratise the IMF , which is controlled by the United States , is also ridiculous .
The rapporteur recognises that the risk of financial instability is inherent to the operation of the economy .
This is undoubtedly the case for your capitalist economy , but the seizure of social wealth and the means of production by a limited number of financial and industrial groups , their rivalry and their speculation , will come to an end .
For future generations , the immense wastage and patent stupidity of your economy will serve as a demonstration that , in relation to the control of its collective life , humanity had not yet moved beyond barbarism .
Mr President , the rapporteur deserves support in his endeavours to achieve greater financial stability .
He is right to call for tighter supervision , although that does not rule out a crisis .
Interestingly , the strategy of the International Monetary Fund has shifted towards more focused support .
This role of catalyst in stages of growth can preclude negative effects of the policy , such as an increase in the burden of debt for up-and-coming countries .
The rapporteur ' s request to coordinate a number of matters at European level is understandable .
If these do not follow naturally on from global policies , Europe ' s own policy would undermine the strength of the system as a whole .
Finally , I cannot see a role for the European Central Bank in global crisis prevention .
Only a few months ago , the ECB was asked to absorb the slow-down in growth , although there was no reason to reduce interest rates within Europe .
Striking a compromise between European policy and global requirements does not seem to be benefiting international stability .
Mr President , the large number of monetary crises and the negative consequences they have for the global economy as a whole require joint action .
There are many who believe that the introduction of a tax on global financial transactions could prevent future financial crises .
Personally , I am glad that this opinion is not held by many in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I do not believe that introduction of the Tobin tax could prevent financial crises .
Let capital make its way to where it is of the greatest use , in other words , let it be invested in new markets , developing countries and so on .
By that means , growth can be produced .
If we now make the transfer of capital expensive and limit and regulate it , the effect would only be counter-productive .
Introducing it would also make sense only if it could be done internationally and without loopholes .
This seems impossible , so that this tax will result only in additional burdens , bureaucracy and so forth , without the actual objective - the limitation of financial crises - being able to be achieved .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , congratulations to the rapporteur .
That has already been said .
There are four areas I would like to touch on briefly .
First , we want to make the international monetary system more stable , because financial stability is , among other things , a public good and a basic economic precondition for growth , employment and social justice - that is to say , a moral duty .
Second , we demand not simply a reform of the IMF , we require of the public authorities the moral obligation to create optimum balance between the free play of markets and the need for them to be regulated in accordance with the fundamental principle of the eco-social market economy , and to guarantee a balance between the public and private sectors in public rescue measures in times of crisis .
We demand of the Member States economic policies geared to growth and employment , and we demand the cancellation of debt , subject to appropriate economic and political conditions .
Third , we begin at home .
The euro is a stability currency even in the eyes of the world .
The response of the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank after 11 September was one of stability in the face of the crisis .
The Stability and Growth Pact is a European response .
The Commission and the European Parliament have , by a majority , expressed their opposition to the Tobin tax , and the Liège resolutions include measures as correctives to globalisation .
Fourth , we oppose measures to slow down economic development and ideologically motivated attempts to undo the Stability and Growth Pact or introduce the Tobin tax on its own , which create insecurity among those who work in the market .
So I also regret that the Social Democrats ' Amendment No 10 reinterprets the actual Liège resolution by inserting the Tobin tax .
Remove this reinterpretation ; in Liège we find ourselves .
Mr President , I was astonished to read the briefing by Parliament ' s Information Office , which presented the Goebbels report as follows : ' In a resolution on the operation of the International Monetary System , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is critical of the introduction of a Tobin tax on financial speculations ' .
This appears to be the headline which is supposed to attract the press , and this still appears to be the subject around which the debates here revolve .
In my opinion , this does not at all do justice to the balanced and excellent report by Mr Goebbels .
To start with , the resolution does not in any way speak in favour of , or against , the Tobin tax .
The extensive explanatory statement does contain a few observations , but what is more important is that it also contains many other alternatives in order to achieve the two objectives pursued by those in favour of the Tobin tax .
Capital movements and foreign exchange markets must be founded more on actual economic reality and must be directed towards long-term investments and financial stability by taking a number of measures , but also by adopting a more flexible stance with regard to developing countries .
Their debts should be cancelled and they must be granted an appropriate way of refinancing in order to be given a new lease of life .
Actually , one could say that , in fact , this report fits in perfectly with the Tobin tax action points .
It would be unfortunate if the report were seen as an opposing force , for I believe that it complements the Tobin tax well .
In an amendment tabled by my group , a proposal has been formulated in an entirely neutral way that was also formulated in the ECOFIN Council .
This amendment warmly welcomes the proposal by the ECOFIN Council to carry out such a study and further analysis .
That seems to be far more fruitful than another instance of polarisation concerning the method : yes or no to the Tobin tax .
In this way , those in favour of the Tobin tax can again endorse the objectives which are now actually on the agenda , and those against can be pleased about the fact that research can be carried out in a neutral way and that the objectives , namely , better management of capital movements and more opportunities for developing countries , can be achieved .
Mr President , first of all , I wish to congratulate Mr Goebbels on his report .
This is an interesting report that goes into considerable depth in an attempt to explore the various issues it raises and its resolution is informed and balanced .
In our opinion , the report makes a constructive contribution to a debate of fundamental political importance and , furthermore , is very timely .
The debate on how to create a better-working international monetary and financial system lies at the heart of our task of responding to globalisation .
Private capital flows - and the report also takes this view - are the main source of growth , prosperity and productivity .
If our objective is to ensure that countries , both developed and developing , are able to take full advantage of the benefits of globalisation , the best option that I can picture is for financial markets and their operations to merge .
Broad-based , deep-rooted and fluid financial markets will make funding investment easier , which will , in turn , enable economic operators to spread their risks more effectively .
This situation will prove beneficial for those operations that would otherwise be too risky for international investors , which will be of benefit not only to developing countries , but also to small and medium-sized businesses in our own countries .
The economic benefits generated by the globalisation of finance are the result of the links between markets and operators having become stronger .
Because of the nature of these links , the upsets passed on within a modern economy as a consequence of this process of globalisation are more rapid , for the very reason that borders that existed twenty years ago have disappeared .
It is true that amongst the risks we will have to face , there will be financial markets with excessively volatile exchange rates and share prices .
A ' contagious ' effect can occur between one country and others and it is possible that capital flows will fluctuate .
Within the Economic and Monetary Union we have stimulated stability and growth by means of macroeconomic policies and structural reforms , which are fundamental factors for strengthening our economy and for preventing - or rather , fighting against - these financial upsets .
Economic and Monetary Union , therefore , contributes to improving the stability of the international situation in our region .
It is also true , however , that various alternatives have been put forward across the world .
I agree with the thesis of Mr Goebbels ' s report .
There are no panaceas that will help us confront the challenge of consolidating the global financial system .
The report makes this point very clear and I hope that its resolution will be read not only by those for whom this document is officially intended and who have a professional interest in these matters . I hope that it is also read by the people who are - legitimately - concerned at the direction in which the process of international economic and financial integration is heading .
The problems and challenges inherent in the integration of financial markets must be addressed in a broader context , which is what Mr Goebbels has sought to achieve in his report and what we in the Commission are seeking to achieve in the study that the Liège Ecofin meeting asked us to produce on how we can respond to the challenges of globalisation , which we are intending to present next February .
What has been happening in recent years ?
I would say that since the crises in Asia , we have made substantial progress .
Efforts have been made to improve macroeconomic conditions , economies are today more resistant to external shocks and the number of countries choosing to abide by internationally agreed codes and standards in order to make their economies more transparent is continually increasing .
The G7 ministers and the Monetary Fund have made progress in a few key areas , such as , for example , the international financial institutions , which clearly act with greater transparency these days .
There is also the International Monetary Fund itself , which has increased its capacity and is fine-tuning its instruments so that they will enable it to analyse , assess and oversee the stability of the financial system more efficiently .
I would also say that coordination between the various national supervisory authorities has improved substantially .
Of course , we cannot rest on our laurels as a result of these improvements .
Much still remains to be done and , in its report , Parliament shows the correct way forward .
The Commission is quite happy to accept your view that we must ensure full participation by the private sector in solving and managing financial crises .
Not only in order to ensure that responsibilities in times of crisis are shared in an equitable way , but also that the private sector is appropriately and systematically involved , which is crucial to effective crisis prevention , thereby preventing dangerous and , ultimately , unsustainable , risk situations from arising .
I do , therefore , take note of the call for the Commission to consider the viability of introducing clauses for collective action on financial instruments such as securities .
You all know as well as I do that the Member States do not fully agree with this position but it is a point of view that the Commission takes seriously , as we do all references to the fight against the funding of terrorism .
The 11 September attacks have brought to the fore the abuses of the financial system by terrorists and the Commission has already adopted certain measures in this field .
You have also made an effective contribution by finalising the codecision procedure on the second directive on money laundering .
Nevertheless , we must keep making progress in this area .
We are now in the early days of a process which will be long and we must continue working in this direction over the coming months .
It is important that we make rapid progress on each of the proposals that provide valuable instruments for combating the funding of terrorism .
I wish to make a brief comment on one point that is still a source of some frustration to us , and that is the external representation of the European Union .
The explanatory statement of the motion for a resolution refers to Europe ' s conspicuous absence from the debate on a new financial architecture .
You criticise the fact that the isolated initiatives of some Member States do not form a European policy .
The Commission can only agree with this analysis .
So how do we respond ?
What can we do ?
How can we improve the situation ?
I would say that it is not simply a matter of improving coordination and of speaking with one voice .
Economic and Monetary Union has undoubtedly transformed the blueprint of worldwide financial and monetary relations , but the way in which we continue to address these issues in the main organisations and forums , including the Monetary Fund and the G7 , is still based , to a large extent , on a purely national concept .
I can , therefore , only agree on the need to make progress .
I think we will find it very difficult to formulate a meaningful policy in this area unless we clearly state our European positions as such at world level .
This will require a more appropriate and clearly defined external representation of our interests .
I am aware , however , that it will be very difficult to make progress in this direction unless we first make progress on the substance .
Focusing the battle solely on our representation abroad is not as important as defining our own positions and producing coordinated policies on external matters .
These two steps must be made in the same direction and at the same time .
And on these points , Parliament can be sure that the Commission will continue to make progress .
Thank you , Commissioner Solbes .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.47 p.m. )
Mr President , colleagues will have read in some of this morning 's newspapers about the refusal of the Republic of France to recognise the extraterritorial status of the European Parliament .
Apparently , the French government has refused to issue a visa to the President of the Republic of China to allow him to come to Parliament for a meeting .
This is a denial of our status as a supranational Parliament , and I hope that you will be protesting to the French government about the fact that Mr Chen has not been allowed a visa . . .
- . . . and insisting that we , in the European Union , should be recognising a country which has existed as a flourishing parliamentary democracy for some 14 years and the status it must have in a world in which democracies must work together .
( Applause )
I have taken note of what you have said .
The President will , of course , be duly informed .
Decision on urgent procedure
Mr President , the same argument in favour of urgent procedure applies in this case as applied to the previous matter , namely , that Taiwan too should be able to take part in the meeting in Doha .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Community incentive measures in the field of employment
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0319 / 2001 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council decision on Community incentive measures in the field of employment [ 8432 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0294 / 2001 - 2000 / 0195 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mrs Jensen ) .
Madam Commissioner , the EU ' s employment policy is one of open cooperation in which the Member States set common goals , exchange experiences and evaluate each other ' s results and employment policies .
It is an open process in which the individual country itself chooses which funds it will use in order to achieve the common goals . We , in Parliament , should also like to see the process become more open by involving and engaging the general public more .
The report we are debating today is about the implementation of Article 129 of the Treaty of Amsterdam concerning employment policy incentives .
It is about appropriations to the work on employment policy over the next five years and about money for analyses , statistics , conferences and reports etc .
Employment policy is to be evaluated in 2003 . It will be the first open coordination to be evaluated , and the money for employment policy is also to be used for this evaluation .
At Parliament ' s first reading , we adopted 17 amendments to the Commission ' s proposal , covering the following themes . We should like to see the social partners and local and regional authorities more involved in the process , and we should like to see greater focus placed upon the ways in which information and employment policy affects a broader public .
We should like to see more focus on the equal treatment of women in employment policy ; we should like to receive some further proposals concerning Parliament ' s involvement ; and we should like to look at the connection with other Community activities .
Last but not least , we should like to see pilot projects to increase information about employment policy at local and regional levels and help develop relevant strategies . As a result , Parliament proposed an increase in the budget .
The Council thereupon accepted a number of Parliament ' s amendments , including those aimed at involving the local and regional levels and at involving the social partners more .
Some of the proposals concerning greater focus on equality have also been accepted , but the Council did not want to accept some very central proposals from Parliament .
Against that background , there was a great deal of support in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for Parliament ' s re-tabling those proposals from the first reading that the Council did not accept .
A majority of Parliament has campaigned for a long time for local and regional efforts to be incorporated into employment policy , and we have pointed out that the exchange of experiences and methods with those operating at local level and working in a voluntary capacity could be financed via Article 129 .
That is because it is clearly characteristic of unemployment in the EU to be focused in regions and local areas and in pockets of poverty where there are islands of unemployment . Local efforts are central when it comes to getting people into work .
That is why it makes good sense to talk about local action plans and about the exchange of experiences and information from this work .
I am quite convinced that greater focus on local efforts will make all of us much wiser about the new avenues that might be explored in employment policy .
We have supported local employment initiatives by means of preparatory action , for which there has been a budget line called B5-503 , and it is Parliament ' s desire that this initiative should be followed up and continued via pilot projects under Article 129 .
Perhaps the expression ' projects ' is misleading , for we want , of course , to see a development of the methodical work carried out , that is to say analyses and studies and the development of statistics and methods .
We do not wish , under Article 129 , to finance projects with the project-oriented and experimental character of projects financed under Article 6 of the Social Fund .
There is therefore no question of our wanting to duplicate things that are already happening under the aegis of the Social Fund .
On the contrary . There are many of us who are happy about the open coordination method of employment policy , for it enables the Member States to improve their results in employment policy , learn from each other ' s experiences and actually compete to obtain better results .
There will not , however , be very much of that healthy competition as long as employment policy and the ' Luxembourg process ' are as unfamiliar to people as they are at present .
In many countries ' national parliaments , there is no debate on national employment plans . Nor are there any other activities that might make the process and the results better known and create more grassroots support .
Is political coordination based on analyses and statistics debated by the same politicians , officials and experts at conferences around the EU really binding enough ?
No , let us obtain a much greater awareness of results and objectives , so that governments encounter much greater commitment and a desire for everyone to achieve the results obtained in those countries which have most success in employment policy .
Mr President , after first congratulating and thanking Mrs Jensen for her good work , I would like to start my speech with reference to the fact that last Sunday , in Galicia - my country - a former Member of this European Parliament , Manuel Fraga Iribarne , founder of the Spanish Popular Party , obtained , for the fourth time running , an absolute majority in the elections to the Galician Parliament .
I mention this because , during its twelve years in power , the Fraga government has been constantly concerned about the issues and problems arising from the lack of employment in Galicia , and for this reason , during the latest election campaign , it made a commitment to providing jobs for the young unemployed under the age of 30 consisting of a one-year contract for those who have been out of work or unemployed for six consecutive years .
This concern about employment , as laid down in Article 3 of the Treaty and which takes the form of a European Community action for promoting the coordination of employment policies in Member States , confirmed by the special European Councils on employment in Luxembourg and Lisbon , which resolutely advocate a global employment strategy , implies and demands a systematic mobilisation of all Community employment policies , whether these be framework policies or support policies .
If we want to become a knowledge-based economy that is both competitive and dynamic , able to grow economically in a sustainable fashion , with more and better jobs and with greater social cohesion , so that we can once again meet the conditions necessary for full employment , we should encourage the coordination of employment policies between Member States , upholding , of course , the right to make decisions that correspond to the particular circumstances of each Member State , the exchange of good practices , including the aforementioned forms of participation for social partners and also local and regional authorities , without forgetting the need for the coordination of policies directed towards the creation of employment .
I therefore think that the commitment made by Mr Fraga Iribarne is good practice that could be exported or exchanged with others .
It will provide Galician youth with the chance to become integrated into the labour market , make it easier for them to gain the necessary training and experience , both in their quest for a first job as well as subsequently being able to keep that job or to move on to other jobs .
I think that this is good practice , in the same way that the practice for the conciliation of family life with professional life was also good , another initiative of the Galician government .
Mr President , I , too , should like to thank Mrs Jensen for a brilliant report .
It is a good day today , for today ' s vote should show that we are now all endorsing the fact that employment policy is not just something made behind desks at meetings of the Council of Ministers , but is something that must be rolled out among the people .
Information must be provided about it , and the local authorities that are to help set these things in motion must also be involved .
That is what we are voting on today .
There are many good things in Mrs Jensen ' s report .
I would emphasise what we have agreed concerning the local dimension of employment policy .
Gradually , we have got the Commission and the Council to realise that local and regional authorities , the social partners and non-profit organisations are important in the context of employment initiatives .
Practical work aimed at getting people into employment is done locally .
That is why room must be made for local players .
However , support for local initiatives is required , for example , in the form of better information about what the common European employment policy is and what the objectives are .
That is why it is important for us to put incentive measures in place and for us to appropriate some money to enable us to learn from each other ' s methods and experiences . That , moreover , is what we are trying to do here today .
That is why it is also disappointing that it has been difficult to get the Commission to agree to increasing the budget so that we might appropriate this money , and that is why we , in the Group of the Party of European Socialists , have naturally endorsed the need to increase the amount to EUR 55 million , and not EUR 50 million .
I hope that we obtain broad support today and that the Commission and the Council are alert to the signal from Parliament today .
Mr Pronk , after the Commissioner ' s speech , we will see whether your pessimism is justified .
Mr President , we support Mrs Jensen 's report because it is based on concepts and policies which we fully endorse .
To start with , we need to make sure the citizens of the Union know what the European Employment Strategy is .
That is the only way they can perceive our common objectives and add their ideas to the Luxembourg process and it is the only way to ensure the relevant national , regional and local authorities benefit from the best practices which have proven to be efficient in other areas of the Union , such as those which the honourable Mr Pérez Álvarez has just mentioned .

Mrs Jensen 's other proposal concerns the role of local society in both planning and implementing employment policies .
We must make ensure that all the Member States understand that it is crucial for the social partners and civil society to be involved if this effort to increase employment is to be effective .
And the Member States must change their structures and implement measures to create institutions and resources which will allow local employment pacts to be applied . On the other hand , the European Union also needs to back these structures with its policies , advice and resources .
We already have experience of numerous countries , including Greece , in which local employment pacts have failed to work .
In some cases , they were policies applied by the central administration to encourage a few additional measures in areas with problems ; they did not mobilise local society and they did not have the required results .
I am sure other areas in the Union have had similar bad experiences , which is why we believe that the measures proposed by the honourable Member and other policies in this sector of the European Union should be coordinated and dealt with at European and national level in order to give new impetus to employment planning and implementation at local level .
Mr President , I will try , as you request , to transform Mr Pronk 's pessimism to optimism !
This programme gives effect to Article 129 of the Treaty which provides that incentive measures may be adopted in order to encourage cooperation between Member States and support their action in the field of employment .
Here I very much agree with what Mrs Thorning-Schmidt has already said : it is not a matter of employment or a matter of Council meetings , it is a matter of real cooperation between the Member States .
The programme underpins the European Employment Strategy and provides for activities to ensure its continuing effectiveness .
It is important that it is going to be adopted in the near future and I am hopeful that outstanding concerns expressed in the 14 amendments submitted can be resolved satisfactorily .
In its amended proposal the Commission , after the first reading , accepted in full or in part 12 of the 17 amendments tabled by Parliament .
The common position which you have been considering , while significantly different in format and presentation from the amended proposal , contains resonances of the ten amendments .
In relation to the amendments which are now under consideration , the Commission can accept nine of them in full or in part . Those are Amendments Nos 1-8 and 14 .
I should like to specify exactly what I accept .
Amendments Nos 1-3 I accept in full .
In Amendment No 4 , I very much welcome the reference to special attention to groups subject to multiple discrimination in their access to the labour market and I share your concerns that we should be able to understand , monitor and analyse developments in mainstreaming by establishing indicators .
I do not consider it appropriate , however , to enter into details on specific studies to be carried out and cannot accept this part of the amendment .
On Amendment No 5 , I am very pleased with the emphasis you introduce with regard to the importance of promoting public knowledge of the European Employment Strategy and further encouraging individuals and organisations at all levels to contribute to enhancing its impact and effectiveness .
This programme should and will assist in the realisation of those objectives .
However , assigning funding for the ' projects ' in this context is not appropriate , and I have to reject that part of Amendment No 5 .
Our diverging views on Amendment No 5 may lie more in the wording used than in any disagreement on its intent .
Local projects involving local actors are funded through Article 6 and the European Social Fund regulation , as well as through another budget line - B5-503 .
The latter is available exclusively for the funding of local development projects .
The analysis , research and evaluation work which it incorporates will include measures , informed by the outcomes of the projects delivered under other budget lines , to assess how knowledge of the European Employment Strategy , and local level involvement in its delivery , might be further improved .
I hope that this approach will meet your concerns .
With regard to Amendment No 8 , I again fully subscribe to the principle of consistency and accept this part but I cannot agree to specify each linked programme .
Amendments Nos 6 and 7 are taken on board in spirit by the inclusion of Amendment No 1 , and Amendment No 14 , I can fully support .
Unfortunately , I am not in a position to accept Amendments Nos 9-13 .
I will briefly explain why : Amendments Nos 9 and 10 concern the committee .
While I am grateful for your support for the Commission 's role and the re-institution of an advisory committee , this is a lost fight with the Council .
Looking at the legal framework and recent precedents , a mixed committee is a fair compromise .
We could look at the mandate in future discussions to see if this could be adopted to meet your concerns as part of a global compromise .
On the annual plans in Amendment No 11 , this is an internal Commission question which has no place in a Parliament and Council decision .
Amendment No 12 also has to be rejected on institutional grounds and more specifically with reference to the framework agreement on interinstitutional relationships .
Finally , regarding Amendment No 13 , we maintain the EUR 55 million initially proposed .
We have made a thorough analysis and this is an adequate figure for the activities envisaged .
To sum up , the Commission can accept in full or in spirit Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 6 , 7 and 14 ; it can accept in part Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 8 ; it rejects Amendments Nos 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 and 13 .
It is clear that some issues have to be resolved ; some of them are more sensitive than others .
I have , however , taken the most positive approach possible to the amendments which you have tabled .
Accordingly , I am hopeful that , with your cooperation and that of the Council , we can soon identify a compromise which is acceptable to all .
I once again reiterate the urgency of this matter and the Commission 's resolve to help find workable compromises .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Informing and consulting employees
Mr President , the information , consultation and participation of employees assumed primary importance in the European debate as far back as 1974 , when the first social action programme was adopted by the Council .
Since then , the issue has featured in many of our debates in this Chamber and the Commission has launched a large number of initiatives , which have met with resistance .
Almost all the Member States have a legislative or contractual legal framework in place intended to guarantee the information and consultation of employees .
This directive proposes the introduction of minimum information and consultation standards which would be implemented throughout Union territory : after the European Company Statute , the European Works Council Directive and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the directive before us today completes the existing Community and national frameworks , thus contributing to the ultimate purpose of the law in question which is to ensure that adequate preparations are made for the change , that restructuring takes place under acceptable conditions and that due importance is given to the employment objective in the current situation .
The Commission presented its proposal - a sound proposal - in November 1998 , and the European Parliament concluded its first reading in April 1999 , adopting a series of amendments to improve it .
Only in June 2001 did the Council adopt a common position .
In general terms , the common position reflects the position adopted by the Commission following Parliament ' s first reading but , if we compare the first reading of the European Parliament with the common position , we see that thirty or so of the amendments made by Parliament were not actually accepted .
As rapporteur , I called upon the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs not to repropose all the amendments adopted at first reading but concentrate on the most important points in order to improve the common position .
My colleagues - whom I would like to thank for their cooperation - put forward 15 amendments to my proposal , almost all of which serve to reinforce it .
After an in-depth debate , we came up with the text on which the House is to vote today .
There are 16 amendments and they concern : the procedures for consulting employees , and these are in line with the common position but more specific in identifying problems ; the definition of economic and financial information ; the exact definition of ' social partners ' , in order to avoid ambiguities ; the protection of employees ' representatives , which needs to be better defined in terms of protection against disadvantage with regard to career , wage and training ; suspension of decisions which could result in substantial negative consequences for employees , so that the taking of a final decision can be deferred for a suitable period at the request of employees ' representatives in order to allow time for further negotiation and for a solution acceptable to all parties to be found .
Transitional periods : this is an extremely sensitive point .
We do not feel that specific transitional periods are necessary . Precisely because this directive introduces minimum standard rights , it must be enforced for all European employees simultaneously .
The question of penalties is the most sensitive point . It has provoked a deluge of lobbies from all sides of the House .
We have decided not to include our initial suggestion of a European penalty with legal effect in our proposal , but we have reinforced the common position , stipulating that it should be the Member States that , whilst respecting the principle of subsidiarity , introduce more stringent penalties for serious violations which impact upon employees .
This is an interpretation of the common position , which states that the Member States must lay down effective , proportionate and dissuasive penalties .
It is my genuine hope that this House will confirm the wide majority reached in committee and will lose no time in providing the Union and the Member States with this major legislative instrument during the Belgian Presidency .

Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Ghilardotti , firstly because she showed a great deal of flexibility in meetings of the Committee , including taking on board a series of proposals by the European People 's Party , and secondly because this has meant that her very good report on the Common Position on the framework directive for minimum standards in national employee information and consultation points in the right direction .
As with the directive on European works councils , the issue is not codetermination , but information and consultation on important economic , financial and employment policy developments in business .
Restructuring cannot and should not be hindered , but it must no longer take place in the form of a commando raid , as so often happens - witness Renault 's shock at Vilvoorde - but only following prior notification of the employees concerned .
There are , though , many parallels with the works councils directive in other respects .
The regulations on European works councils apply only to mergers of businesses across national boundaries , but restructuring often takes place at a national level .
The European People 's Party favours flexibility .
For example , management and labour in a business can , through agreements , arrive at a special made-to-measure arrangement on information and consultation for that business .
That is subsidiarity .
The Common Position says rightly that agreements should be able to be more , or even less , favourable than the minimum standard .
Yet , the rights of local works councils may not be jeopardised under national law .
Article 1 prescribes that the procedure should be carried on in a spirit of cooperation .
This means partnership .
Partnership aims on the one hand at the clear representation of interests , and on the other hand at their conciliation in shared dialogue through information and consultation .
There is no doubt that this is economically advantageous .
Inadequate information results in insecurity , mistrust , and finally only fear , ending in blockade .
Timely information means transparency that creates trust and avoids businesses making friction losses .
Both workers and employers are winners , and in the same way .
Mr President , the rapporteur , Mrs Ghilardotti has already indicated how difficult it has been to present this issue for second reading .
My group ' s first priority , therefore , is to bring this issue to an end at long last and to have it published in the Official Journal .
We thus hope that agreement with the Council will be reached in the near future .
This is also evident from the stance adopted by our group , as Mrs Ghilardotti stated .
We dropped a huge number of amendments from first reading and concentrated in the committee on a number of compromise texts , on which it must be possible to reach agreement , in our view .
For example , we deleted the precious point on Tendenzschutz , which we would have liked to have seen scrapped .
Neither will we be backing the Group of the Greens and the GUE / NGL Group on this matter in the framework of reaching a compromise .
However , we hope that the PPE-DE will continue to support the compromise proposals we reached in committee .
The differences of opinion with the Council mainly revolve around two key points : the provisions on sanctions and the unnecessarily long transitional periods .
I should like to note that these are not points which we have added but , rather , points which the Council has added to the Commission position .
Parliament is not asking for points to be added .
In this case , it is the Council which is departing from the Commission proposal .
I will briefly comment on those two points .
With regard to the sanction provisions , Mr Menrad has also already communicated their importance in order for the directive to be taken really seriously .
In this connection , I would like to refer to the experience in my own country .
In the Netherlands , this kind of sanction exists in legislation pertaining to works councils .
Precisely those provisions have an extremely preventative effect .
It is not often that legal steps are required , but the very fact that it is possible to take these steps means that very intense consultations are often held .
With regard to closures and transfers which need to take place , a very broad support structure is created and sound consultations are held .
That is very important for industrial relations , in my opinion .
The second point concerns transitional periods .
I already stated last week , at a meeting which Mr Bushill-Matthews had organised with an English association of people who , in fact , propagate the idea of employee participation , that it strikes me as bizarre that they call for a much longer transitional period .
If one considers - as they did - that information and consultation are very important , not only to employees but also to employers and to the company ' s performance , then one must ensure that this measure is introduced very promptly .
One should not ask for longer transitional periods , for that gives British industry entirely the wrong signal .
I would therefore ask you to reconsider this and to support these conventional transitional periods , as proposed by the Commission , after all .
Come what may , based on the experience which we have gathered in the Netherlands with an act that has been in force for more than 50 years , it appears that industrial relations have improved as a result .
Mr President , I , too , wish to thank Mrs Ghilardotti for the sound and skilful work she has done on this report . I also wish , in particular , to thank her for her understanding of the minority views that may be adopted by a Danish MEP in this situation , for we have a special system of consultation and cooperation in the labour market which creates problems for us from time to time .
We all agree , of course , that information and consultation and a good social dialogue are important .
It has become a part of modern management to attach importance to these things , to involve employees and to talk about learning organisations , so enabling companies to develop better .
I believe it is important that , when we talk about these matters , we do not only view information and consultation as part and parcel of restructuring and the reduction of the labour force , but as also being a part of day-to-day work in which it takes a long time to build up mutual confidence and that reciprocal dialogue that can be of value both to employees and companies in a crisis situation and which may also perhaps play a part in preventing crises from breaking out within companies .
We have had a long period in which it was difficult getting everyone to understand the need for revising this directive , and revision has been blocked by a majority of the Council .
Denmark has been a part of that blocking majority , not because we are nervous about having rules on information and consultation - we have in actual fact had stringent rules on these matters from as far back as 1960 - but because we are afraid that common rules might create problems for the system we think works well in practice .
It would , of course , be an irony of fate if common rules were to be destructive in an area in which matters are operating well .
Flexibility is a key word when it comes to drawing up the common rules , but there must not of course be so much flexibility that the required information and consultation does not occur in those places in which these things have not been emphasised .
I must say , therefore , that , on the whole , my group is able to support Mrs Ghilardotti ' s proposals .
We have some problems where the sanctions are concerned , and I must say that the Council ' s solution is an extremely fine balance that it is very difficult not to upset .
There is therefore a single point in regard to which we cannot completely endorse the strict rules indicated in Mrs Ghilardotti ' s report but in regard to which we prefer to endorse the Council ' s solution .
On the other hand , I want to say , on the subject of interim arrangements , that it is a question of putting these in place .
Let us now get these matters implemented and not just continue to talk about them .
Information and consultation are not a punishment for business . On the contrary , they are things that promote good business and competitiveness .
Mr President , my group supports the recommendation for second reading , which , moreover , received the very broad approval of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
In addition , we would like the Council to follow suit and thus put a definitive end to the three long years that have passed since the Commission , perceiving the breakdown in social dialogue , made very timely use of its right of initiative .
This is three years too many , which have been punctuated by social catastrophes , with rapid liquidation of businesses and loss of jobs due to bankruptcy and genuine distortions in Community social law on information and consultation of workers .
While we must not expect miracles from this directive , because it will only apply , at best , to businesses with more than 50 employees and will not single-handedly resolve the fundamental problem , namely that competition law is dominant , this directive may represent a significant step towards harmonising the rights of European Union employees , subject , of course , to it not being stripped of its content and reduced to the smallest common denominator .
This is why it is so important that the Council take into consideration the recommendations proposed by Mrs Ghilardotti , particularly Amendment Nos 2 and 12 on sanctions for disregard of the directive .
Although the Council is opposed to European sanctions , the least it can do , in my view , is to accept this compromise position .
We also support amendments which clarify and widen the scope of the information that must be provided to employees ' representatives , and the amendment proposing the latter may request a decision ' s application be suspended , pending the outcome of new negotiations , where this decision has serious effects on jobs .
If our citizens are to find this directive credible , it will have to be applied simultaneously throughout the European Union .
That is why our group asks the Council to support the position submitted to us , and make it impossible for some Member States to evade having to enforce the application of the directive for several more years .
Our group proposes to supplement the draft recommendation by adopting amendments that rule out the possibility of withholding information that the company considers sensitive to its business from employees ' representatives , because we are convinced that there are no grounds , that it even constitutes discrimination to introduce an element of suspicion with regard to employees who , by definition , have no less company spirit than the management or shareholders .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , despite the fact that it has welcomed some of the positions adopted by the European Parliament , I find it deplorable that the Council persists in maintaining a proposal for a directive that fails to meet the expectations of workers in the European Union .
When you see the behaviour of the directors of many companies , especially the multinationals , who decide to restructure , relocate or even partially or totally close down their businesses , making hundreds or thousands of workers unemployed simply to cut costs and / or increase profits , it is all the more intolerable that the Council should not have accepted proposals that we have adopted in this House .
Examples of these are :
the reference to the planning stage in the definition of consultation , its extension to cover economic and financial developments in the company and the obligation to seek agreement on all issues subject to the information and consultation of workers .
extending consultation in particularly serious cases ; extending the concept of a serious breach of the obligations to inform and consult ; the implementation of the directive on public administration .
the abolition of the employer ' s right to retain particularly sensitive information and the obligation for Member States to promote social dialogue within SMEs .
These are our reasons for supporting Mrs Ghilardotti ' s proposals , which once again take up the positions adopted at first reading , with particular emphasis on the amendments that seek to step up sanctions and specific legal proceedings in cases where the directive is breached , on suspending decisions at the request of workers ' representatives when their implementation has serious consequences for workers , with a view to eliminating or minimising these harmful consequences , on eliminating the transitional periods for the directive ' s implementation in Member States that do not have a system of worker consultation and on reducing the period of transposition into national law to two years as well as its implementation in the public sector .
These are positive proposals which , as I said , we support .
I can only regret the fact , however , that the rapporteur has dropped her two proposals on eliminating the option the Council wishes to give employers to , in certain cases , neither inform nor consult their workers , although the rapporteur ' s proposals envisage sanctions against employers that fail to act promptly .
The Council ' s position , however , opens up loopholes that could prove dangerous for workers and it is , therefore , important to eliminate this possibility .
This is the basic justification for the two amendments that we have tabled in conjunction with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
We hope that a majority in Parliament votes in favour of these and that the Council takes account of the positions that have been put forward here in one of the most sensitive areas of the protection of workers ' rights .
Mr President , the subject addressed so well by Mrs Ghilardotti ' s report is , as we all know , not a new one , but on past occasions when it was discussed it has never been set out so clearly .
I refer , in particular , to the legislation on European works councils , which has not been transposed by all the Member States and , where it has been transposed , has not been incorporated into their legislation but is regulated by means of agreements between the social partners which are often then disregarded by one of the partners , as has been shown by recent events which , moreover , have been debated in this very House .
Yet Parliament , which has , in the past , been attentive to the issue of employment and openly involved in establishing and guaranteeing the dignity and even the quality of work , and which , moreover , has not hesitated to propose sanctions for the cases I have mentioned which even involved requirements governing the use of European funds for maintaining employment levels , has shown varying degrees of indecision in the debate on this report .

The different attitudes are certainly understandable , given the sensitive nature of some issues such as the enforcement of sanctions , for sanctions do have to be enforced if one wants a requirement to be respected , or the confidentiality granting exemption from the consultation procedure to be removed , even though it is no longer observed , or a transitional period to be granted for the transposal of the directive which is , moreover , unnecessary , given the time frame for its implementation .
The fact is that , both in terms of the continuous implementation of Community law , the continuing hope of ever-increasing cohesion and , lastly , the forthcoming practical introduction of a European Company which would provide greater protection of employees as regards participation than other forms of legal entity , the issue had to be closed , with the identification of major , related questions ranging from the contents of the information to the termination clause , from the time frame for initiating the procedure to the parties involved and to the sectors where it is to be applied , and all this in respect , on the one hand , for the fair trade requirement , which , also in this case , would be guaranteed by the different behaviour of the Member States , and , on the other hand , for the reasoning of the open coordination method , which has , at last , started to be applied practically in social policy .

Clearly , the issue in question lends itself to being addressed within the context of the principle of subsidiarity , even though that concept still remains to be clearly defined today , despite the fact that it is one of the founding principles of the Union itself .
However , it must be said that the definition and application of the principle does not and cannot serve the single purpose of calling for competence for certain subjects to be given to the Member States alone , for there is also a conflicting , appropriate need to provide the Union , in the face of great national differences and oversights , with a basic definition of these subjects wherever they have any significant implications for the Community as a whole .
Mr President , allow me to begin by stating that I think it very important that minimum standards be set for informing and consulting employees , but that it is just as important that it be done in a way that does not disrupt existing national arrangements that are operating well .
It has unfortunately proved that not all Member States have been in a position to draft national guidelines for informing and consulting employees .
That would otherwise have been the best solution when it comes to companies in the individual countries , for it is , of course , there , that the real problems arise .
Political unity has now been achieved in the Council concerning the revised proposal from the Swedish Presidency and the graduated transitional arrangement , as proposed by the Commission .
In Denmark , we have no direct laws about informing and consulting employees .
That does not , however , mean that employees are not consulted and informed in Denmark . This is specifically regulated via cooperation agreements between the social partners in accordance with the Danish tradition of greater freedom between the social partners .
Only when it is strictly necessary does the government get involved .
The Danish government has therefore stated in the Council that it assumes that the current cooperation agreements in the Danish labour market comply with the directive ' s requirements . The Danish government will also issue a statement in the Council to the effect that implementation of the directive will not affect existing agreements in this area in Denmark and that these will be fully respected when implementation takes place , but that it will of course be necessary to enact legislation for those companies not covered by the existing cooperation agreements .
I should like to ask the Commission whether it is of the same view as the Danish government .
In other words , is the Commission able to ensure that the social partners themselves are given the freedom to enter into , and maintain , the existing agreements and procedures about informing and consulting employees , just as Denmark was given a similar assurance in connection with the compromise reached by the Council in July ?
I should also like to thank Mrs Ghilardotti for having agreed that sanctions must be established nationally .
It is very important that the Member States themselves should devise appropriate sanctions , that this is done by means of agreements between the social partners and that we take account of the Member States ' different systems .
If Parliament had maintained its hard line , the proposal could have been rejected by the Council , and that would have been a major defeat for the unions which , for years , have been campaigning for the right of employees to be informed and consulted .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , the view that it is , in general , appropriate and also necessary to ensure an adequate flow of information between a company and all its stakeholders , especially the employees involved in the life of the company , is , I believe , widely held , including by myself .
However , I am not in favour of imposing on the States , the individual Member States , solutions which involve employees in management decisions , on the basis , in some cases , of joint management models which are foreign to the legal and economic traditions of many European countries , as has just been said .
I therefore feel that , in line with both the Commission ' s initial proposal and the Council ' s common position , the directive before us needs to leave the Member States sufficient room for manoeuvre to identify the best way of adhering to the principle of the need to keep employees informed .
However , many of the amendments adopted by the Commission and included in the common position which we are about to put to the vote conflict with this , particularly Amendments Nos 2 and 12 , which seek to grant employees ' representatives a sort of de facto - and I repeat , de facto - right of veto on decisions taken by companies .
I therefore call upon Parliament not to adopt the amendments and to stay with the Council ' s common position .
I would like to make one last point : Article 3 ( 2 ) lays down specific provisions applying to political associations , trade associations and religious organisations etc .
Does this mean that political parties , trade unions and churches can carry out restructuring without informing their employees , while normal companies are obliged to do so ?
This is my question .
Mr President , we are dealing with a long history and a relatively complex directive .
Fortunately , the Council ' s common position is very useful and provides a sound basis for our further debate .
In fact , a number of people , including a large number of socialist ministers , are of the opinion that we should not have anything other than the common position .
I am not certain whether they truly believe this or whether they think that they will then be able to put the whole thing behind them .
In any event , that is the state of play .
Although the stance adopted by our group has been expressed very eloquently by Mr Winfried Menrad , he very much takes the common position into account , as well as the amendments adopted at first reading , a number of which - I have to say - we were unable to support .
We voted against a number of amendments , but as they are not included in the present package , that is not such a big issue .
There is now a sound compromise proposal before us by Parliament , also accommodating the Council .
We make no bones about the fact that our group is struggling with a number of amendments .
There are also a number of amendments which some delegations in our group find it difficult to come to terms with .
But on the whole , I believe we can congratulate the rapporteur warmly on her work .
I also believe that if we have voted on this matter by lunchtime today , we will have made a significant contribution to informing and consulting employees in Europe .
We must not forget that an incredible number of problems have arisen .
Over the years , we have discussed many resolutions dealing with the lack of consultation .
If this is now rectified properly , we will have made huge progress , in my opinion .
Mr President , I do not speak for my Group on this matter , but I want to congratulate Mrs Ghilardotti for her hard work in making this directive a reality .
We hope this directive will develop into a new partnership between workers and management and strengthen dialogue .
That , in turn , will improve flexibility and productivity .
We have a directive which is essentially a two-way street .
It must make sense for workers in retail , service and manufacturing industries not to learn about their future through the media , but to work within a positive consultation mechanism making them aware of what will happen to them and their families .
The question is whether existing laws work well .
There is plenty of evidence that they do not .
Workers in my own country at Rover / BMW , Marks & Spencers , in Longbridge , at Corus and Vauxhall - the list is endless - would all benefit from this directive .
The directive is essentially about the future of work , not the past .
When closure is inevitable for companies with more than 50 workers , we want to see information and consultation , so that workers are informed , leading to a better level of trust within companies .
We need realistic thresholds to allow the directive to work well .
In discussions with trade unions and business , it is clear that companies need to be made aware of their responsibilities .
The responsibilities work both ways .
Colleagues , information and consultation has been a very difficult directive .
There have been a number of compromise amendments .
We are very happy with the way in which those discussions have progressed .
It is clear that some Member States will continue to have problems with certain aspects of this directive .
We must work together to ensure that in conciliation we reach the stage where information and consultation are embraced by both sides of business and industry .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her work on this report .
I am one of the Members who has spoken in this House previously regretting the fact that we did not have the kind of legislation that we are discussing today .
I know that myself , along with several other colleagues , have been in the very unfortunate position of representing constituents who have suffered the very worst examples of the lack of consultation and the lack of information .
Workers who have learned of job losses in the press and media when there has been speculation and uncertainty in the workplace .
I only have to mention what happened with Corus in Wales earlier this year for you to see why I attach such importance to this particular piece of legislation .
I am therefore particularly pleased to have the opportunity to welcome this proposal which will change things .
It will mean that employees will be involved in discussions when there really is still an opportunity to influence the debate and the outcome , not when the decision is more or less a fait accompli .
Employees would have to be given all the relevant facts .
While certain measures are needed to protect a company 's commercial interests , my group believes that these are adequately covered .
The ability to impose sanctions is one of the most important aspects of this report , including the suspension of decisions which lead to job losses if the consultation guidelines have not been followed .
Voluntary agreements are not enough .
We often hear about good examples of voluntary agreements .
I applaud those companies that follow good practice , but many do not .
We have seen that time and time again especially in Wales and Britain where we have had no legislation on information and consultation to date .
I am very pleased that there has at last been progress on this crucial matter .
I believe , as others have said , that we cannot wait too long for this to come into effect which is why I support the shorter transition period .
This proposal , of course , would not prevent job losses , but it would allow enough time to ensure that plans for rescaling and retraining of workforces could be well advanced before closures or redundancies take place .
This is an issue of the effectiveness of companies and businesses . It should be a part of the everyday work of companies and businesses .
It is also about dignity in the workplace .
Employees are an integral part of the partnership with management and must be kept informed on decisions which affect not only their lives , but those of their families and whole communities .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Ghilardotti ' s report on the directive on information and consultation of workers is very topical indeed .
Many Member States of the European Union have , unfortunately , been faced with a wave of mergers , restructurings and numerous redundancies , such as at Danone , Marks and Spencer and Moulinex , to name but a few .
Until now , the directive has not enabled employees to take any effective action and to have a real bearing on their future , and that of the business .
In many other cases , the directive has not been applied .
That is why I support the proposals made in the report by Mrs Ghilardotti , because the directive strengthens provisions and provides the means to apply these provisions .
The Council included Parliament ' s amendments in its common position ; the reference to the most favourable provisions for employees , the obligation to respect minimum requirements , and the non-regression clause .
Although this is a step forward , we must go further , as proposed in Mrs Ghilardotti ' s report .
Some important amendments have again been proposed , which improve the report .
For example , employees shall be consulted and informed at the planning stage , before decisions are taken .
For example , if the decision has an adverse effect on employees , such as collective redundancies or closure , the final decision must be postponed so that consultations can continue with a view to avoiding or mitigating the consequences .
This directive will enable us to begin to encourage an approach to economic and social issues , which includes improving working conditions and economic efficiency .
This efficiency requires the involvement of employees , naturally .
That is why we are proposing two amendments , which rule out the possibility of withholding information where there is a risk or prejudice to the business .
To demand discretion is one thing . To enable the company ' s management , once again , to take unilateral decisions on the nature of the information is quite another .
Obviously , we must be determined to ensure this directive is observed , and I hope that , this time , the Council will heed Parliament ' s will .
Mr President , the company is clearly an example of plurality .
According to Max Weber , a company is an organisation that , in controlling goods and services , aims to produce goods and services for a particular market .
It is also clear that those who lend their services to a company cannot always relate to their employer directly or on a personal level , above all when the number of employees in that company exceeds a certain level .
There therefore needs to be the implementation of some kind of permanent and flexible mechanism which would facilitate this relationship , functioning in a way that is simple yet effective and which can deal with the multitude of issues that arise in a company every day .
The everyday life of a company , in this day and age , takes place within a global world - globalisation is the key word - a globalisation which does not exclusively affect large or very large companies , but also those of a small or medium size , because they are also having to function within this environment .
So , what exactly is the problem ?
Well , we need to regulate rights to information and consultation with true content within the specific framework in which we operate , that is to say that it is not a simple case of paying lip service to these declarations , but neither do we want to go too far , depriving the management of its powers .
I think that this is what Mrs Ghilardotti set out to achieve in her arduous and efficient work : I think that she was seeking this point of equilibrium , and , yes , it is difficult - I would say practically impossible - for some delegations , such as the Spanish , to vote for the content of Amendment No 12 , and for the rest , we have to underline the work she has undertaken and congratulate her on her effort .
Evidently , a company ' s own capacity to adapt , more necessary today than ever before , is going to be strengthened if we are able to convey its needs , concerns and prospects to all its workers .
More than just an exhaustive regulation , we are talking about an advanced communication culture within the company .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we are all well aware , I believe that we are about to take a decisive step along the path to adopting a general framework on the information and consultation rights of workers .
We can only welcome this and we must congratulate Mrs Ghilardotti , the rapporteur , who has spared no effort in ensuring that today we have reached a position that we are defending .
It has been almost three years since the draft directive was published , and during this time , we in this House have had to condemn many situations .
There have been site closures , redundancies and relocations , without any prior information being given by the companies to the employees concerned .
Of course , this directive is far from ideal - it does not provide a ban on redundancies - but it illustrates the determination to make up for these shortcomings , firstly , in national legislation , but also to correct the occasionally fragmented aspects of Community law that we have already passed , which it also supplements .
These three years of debate have resulted in a text that is now balanced and realistic .
This report is not intransigent , nor is it extremist , and I believe that we should mention the efforts on the part of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the various groups , in negotiating with the Council , to iron out specific differences of opinion .
The European Parliament and the Council are co-legislators and we do not have to blindly support any directive , Mr Pronk .
We have to support positions , namely those of Parliament .
I have three points to make ; the first relates to confidentiality of specific information .
We have returned to the common position of the Council to acknowledge that there actually are objective situations and contradictions with stock market law , for example , which must be considered and that this confidentiality , in some well-defined cases , can be upheld .
My second point relates to sanctions .
There is no law without sanctions , and I believe that what is laid down - I am about to finish , Mr President - where there has been a serious breach is an absolute minimum .
As for transition periods , well , fundamental social rights must simply be applied .
Yet , we can no longer defer the enforcement of these rights .
( Applause from the Left )
Mr President , Commissioner , informing and consulting employees is a basic right .
It is inherent in our European social model and distinguishes us from other social models .
I should first of all like to thank the rapporteur for the sound work and also the Council which , in any case , managed to pull the debate back on track in Nice .
This was timely and also necessary .
If we examine such a framework directive and compare it with the take-over directive which was discussed in this House recently , and subsequently rejected , we can see that this did not fit into a framework directive .
The statute of the European company does fit in , which means that a framework directive is needed for that .
That framework directive is also needed - as has been indicated by various people - if we consider what happened to Renault-Vilvoorde , Michelin , Chorus and other companies .
For example , in the case of Chorus , there is a pronounced difference in the level of information and consultation provided in the Netherlands , for example , compared to England .
Consequently , this directive relies wholly on the quality of information and consultation .
In my opinion , these should be assessed in the fullness of time , but this is a first step .
It is absolutely vital to tackle it this way .
One of the things I am struggling with is the exemption from this directive when a company is said to be at risk .
We have positive experiences in countries where works councils exist , and that applies to the Netherlands , Germany and Austria .
Problems do not arise .
There is already a duty of confidentiality , and I should like to urge you to adopt the amendment which we tabled in this connection .
Mr President , the right of employees to be consulted and informed has been enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , but what use are frameworks set up at national or EU level , when employees are too often presented with faits accomplis , learning of restructuring processes only after the event or from the media ?
I support Mrs Ghilardotti 's Amendment No 5 , which requires them to be consulted as early as the planning phase , so that they can have some degree of influence .
There was long debate on Amendment No 7 , which laid down what information supplied by the employer must include .
This includes the economic situation - developments in the market , the structure of the organisation , the company 's strategy - but also turnover and production figures to show the financial position .
This is about in-house information and not in any way about investment control by stealth .
More and more employees have a financial share in their business , now , and so they are well positioned to think entrepreneurially in local and global terms .
They are ready and willing to share responsibility for significant strategies that make their firms more competitive .
Dialogue between informed social partners is a major challenge , and so we also need training and development for qualified employees .
People with in-depth knowledge add to productivity .
These employees are willing to share responsibility even for crucial decisions .
All this adds up to another element in the structure of a modern organisation .
It is in small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) that dialogue between employer and employee is particularly important .
Mr President , you are right to emphatically put the case for them as well .
This dialogue is to be set in motion in the Member States , in accordance with their current national regulations .
The pressure of competition and the challenges posed by globalisation mean that there is no alternative to cooperation within businesses , provided that it is founded on fairness , openness and timely information .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating my colleague , Mrs Ghilardotti , as well as the Council and the Commission for having finally secured progress on this dossier .
As with the Regulation on the Statute for a European Company a few weeks ago , and the annex on participation , we have been making more progress in the last few months than we had for years .
I think that this gives us an excellent opportunity to send a clear signal to the public that , at European level , we have a concept of the company that encompasses all those that work within it , which , it must also be said , is not only a democratic right of workers , but , also , these principles of information and consultation set the right path for companies to become more efficient , more effective , non-authoritarian and participatory .
In these times of globalisation , lifelong learning and the incorporation of workers into the dynamics of a company are crucial .
We hope , Commissioner , representatives of the Council , that , as Mrs Ghilardotti stated very clearly in her amendments , that this is a genuine regulation .
This will require two obvious and fundamental elements : firstly , that the participation of workers should take place before decisions are made , for if this is not the case , they will carry on finding things out through the papers and they will really be under the impression that the work that has been carried out here in Parliament , in Council and in the Commission is a joke .
They have to be involved before decisions are made , because the press is there for everyone else .
Secondly , their participation must also be a legal requirement .
The exact difference between the regulation and the recommendation is that , when the regulation is violated , there can be a sanction .
If there is no sanction , what we do remains purely symbolic and has no legal foundation .
Representatives of the Council , we are at second reading .
I would like to finish by saying that I hope that on this occasion we do not experience what has taken place on so many others , that you forget that Parliament has legislative faculties on a par with your own .
I hope , therefore , that you will take good notice of Mrs Ghilardotti ' s report , which is not only for her own good , but for the good of millions of citizens and workers in Europe .
Like my colleagues in the UK Conservative Delegation , I have consistently supported the principle and the practice of employee information and consultation .
In my previous job as managing director of a large UK food manufacturing company , I was very proud to lead the first such company in the whole of the West Midlands Region to achievement of the coveted Investors People Award .
As has already been mentioned , earlier this month I hosted a lunch debate in Brussels with the Involvement and Participation Association for my fellow members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs to share with them UK best practice and the benefits of flexibility , because that is the issue .
The common position as it stands is fine , which is why I personally did not put forward any amendments to that , but the committee amendments propose yet another one-size fits-all straitjacket which would be highly damaging to managers ' ability to manage and in particular to their ability to manage rapid change .
If companies are held back from taking the key decisions necessary perhaps for the very survival of those businesses , their problems will get worse , which means that more employees could suffer .
The UK government has asked all UK MEPs from all political parties to vote down all these amendments and to support the common position .
Conservative MEPs will do exactly that , so I now call upon UK Labour MEPs to reverse the position they all took in committee when they supported these amendments and to vote with us in the interests of employment and in the interests of the nation .
Mr President , first I would like to apologise : in my introduction I did not mention Mrs Jensen , and I would really like to congratulate her on an excellent job .
As far as Mrs Ghilardotti is concerned , we all know what a difficult job she had and she has .
She had to strike a balance between completely different political , national , social and economic views , and I would like to congratulate her and to thank all the Members of Parliament who have participated in the debate and supported the Commission 's proposal through this process .
This is an important proposal and , once adopted , it will add an indispensable element to workers ' rights .
Recent events , with mass lay-offs across Europe , have only underlined the urgent need for different kinds of instruments and this proposal - this directive - information and consultation is a very important instrument .
Once adopted , the directive will ensure better anticipation of crises and will contribute to developing a positive attitude towards change by both management and workers .
Let me tell you that I fully understand all your requests . Most , if not all , of the issues they raise were the subject of intense debate within all the institutions .
The text before us strikes a delicate balance between different points of view and divergent interests on the sensitive issues at stake .
While I understand your desire to improve the text , it would be unwise , in my view , to depart now from that balance and jeopardise the actual adoption of the proposal .
I refer in particular to Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 16 , 18 and 19 .
Therefore , the Commission is not prepared to accept those amendments .
However , a number of the proposed amendments are acceptable , in full or in part , to the Commission , as they will improve the text .
These are Amendments Nos 3 , 6 , 8 , 13 and 14 .
The Commission will , therefore , actively support these amendments and will do its utmost to facilitate consensus on them between Parliament and the Council .
Allow me , before moving to the two most important issues - sanctions and transitional periods - to respond to Mrs Sandbæk , as far as the Danish model is concerned .
I would like to underline the fact that the current text strikes a balance between the necessary protection of workers and the autonomy of the social partners , as contracting partners .
They can freely conclude agreements which are not fully in line with the provisions of Article 4 , but they have to take into account the principles which are established in Article 1 and in national law .
Now , we know that the most difficult and controversial issues are the two which I have already referred to : sanctions and transitional periods .
With regard to the first of these issues , Amendment No 2 and especially Amendment No 12 propose reinforced sanctions , including judicial suspension procedures in cases of serious breach of information and consultation obligations .
This amendment , while reinforcing the common position , offers a compromise with the Commission 's original proposal .
It is , therefore , undeniable that Parliament is making a step in the direction of the Council , in a serious search for a final compromise .
I would like to thank you for your support of the Commission 's stance on this very important element of the directive .
Nevertheless , taking into account the sensitivity of the issue in the Council , the best basis for a final compromise on this issue would be to limit the request to the first sentence of the proposed amendment .
Under these circumstances , the Commission can accept Amendment No 2 and the first paragraph of Amendment No 12 .
We can accept Amendment No 2 with a minor change .
Finally Amendment No 15 which seeks to delete Article 10 - on transitional periods - is equally a major issue .
In the past , the Commission has always opposed this kind of provision which tends to grant different treatment to different Member States .
This time , we can see some justification in it .
Some Member States will clearly have to introduce major changes to their industrial relations systems .
Therefore , the Commission is of the opinion that Article 10 of the common position constitutes a fair compromise and it cannot accept this amendment .
To sum up , the Commission can accept in full or in spirit Amendments Nos 3 and 8 ; it can accept in part Amendments Nos 2 , 6 , 12 , 13 and 14 .
It rejects Amendments Nos 1 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 15 , 16 , 18 and 19 .
I know that you fully appreciate the challenges ahead of us : we need to do everything possible to find an acceptable compromise between the co-legislators .
I think that our big challenge is to strike the balance between what we think is desirable and what is achievable or possible .
Thank you , Commissioner Diamantopoulou .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Employment guidelines for 2002 / Joint employment report 2001
The next item on the agenda is the report ( A5-0360 / 2001 ) by Mrs Weiler on behalf of the Committee for Employment and Social Affairs on :
1. the proposal for a Council decision ( COM ( 2001 ) 511 - C5-0498 / 2001 - 2001 / 0208 ( CNS ) ) on the guidelines for employment policy measures by the Member States in 2002
and
2. the Commission communication ( COM ( 2001 ) 438 - C5-0423 / 2001 - 2001 / 2168 ( COS ) ) on the draft Joint Employment Report 2001 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , employment policy in the EU was successful last year even though not all our ambitious objectives have been achieved .
But the points have been set .
In few other fields do we have to think in the long term as much as in employment policy .
My impression is that the Member States have not only grasped that , but that they are also acting accordingly .
My report takes the same line as that of the Committee , which has kept to it over the past few years .
We have always followed employment processes in the Member States and offered constructive criticism .
I have therefore concentrated this year on some new key points .
The first of these is the new theme of work quality , on which we in Parliament agree with the initiative of the Commission and the Belgian Presidency , which have also made the quality of work a pre-eminent item on the agenda .
We are very keen that this topic should find its way into all policy areas by a kind of mainstreaming .
The second key point is gender equality in the employment market .
Here , too , according to the Commission 's figures , we have achieved an improvement .
The proportion of women in employment has increased by 2 % in any case , which is of course not enough for us , but it is the right way to go , and also shows the change in the Member States ' thinking .
This reorientation also means - and even that was not so simple - that a change of consciousness has taken place , at least in some Member States such as Germany , Greece and Ireland .
A third point is very important to me - the integration and incorporation of disadvantaged groups into the employment market .
This has for some years been an important topic for this Parliament .
In my report , I put forward the argument that employment policy measures should include immigrants as well .
I believe this to be an important area for the future , precisely because we will otherwise be creating new social flashpoints .
I would like finally to mention the area of continuing education .
We had debates in Committee as to whether it made sense to demand a right to continuing education and to direct the national governments to translate it into action .
I believe that , now , of all times , when we are already finding that bottlenecks in certain trades result from too little training and development in the past , such a national right to continuing education would represent the dictates of the hour .
I am , moreover , convinced that we will have achieved it within four or five years .
Why , then , should Parliament not be the trailblazer for once ?
National and European targets need to be set if these policy objectives are to be achieved .
There is , I believe , an additional need for more intensive cooperation between enterprises and institutions of higher education than hitherto , in order to facilitate more effective knowledge transfer and more speedily initiate entrepreneurial innovation than has previously been the case .
I appeal also to the Member States , to the Council and to the Belgian Presidency to have the courage to initiate a public debate on employment policy in Europe .
The fact is that we have observed that there is in the national parliaments - with the possible exception of Denmark - and in the regional parliaments and assemblies , still , little or no , discussion of European employment policy .
Even employers ' organisations and trade unions , at regional level , do not know of the significance of our debates and resolutions in the European Parliament .
Of course , effective employment policies and coordinated and farsighted economic and financial policies belong together .
I cannot draw a veil over this Parliament 's present dissatisfaction with the Council 's objectives in this area and with its debates on the subject .
I cannot help thinking that we could do with a bit more courage on the part of the finance ministers on the Ecofin Council , in order to guarantee here , too , the appropriate and proportionate goal for a rational European employment policy , for only then can an offensive for growth and employment in Europe be realised .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is , in our view , the Member States which have the primary task of creating the appropriate framework for more employment .
It goes without saying that the European Union can contribute towards it .
I believe , though , that dialogue between the ministers of the various Member States is particularly important here .
On looking into the matter more closely , we note that we have in some countries of the European Union almost full employment , but in others unemployment - and , in particular , youth unemployment - on a frightening scale .
I believe it to be a matter of extraordinary importance that the States should learn from one another and avoid making the mistakes already made by others .
We can see that the countries that perform best have created jobs on the basis of a solid financial policy and have got to grips with the necessary structural reforms earlier than others .
We must also ask ourselves the question : who , then , actually creates jobs ?
It is not the state , it is often not the major enterprises , which indeed tend rather to retrench .
It is , far more , the small and medium-sized enterprises that create the most jobs .
If we want to be successful , the establishment of new enterprises is especially important .
It is a matter of creating the appropriate framework for them .
We must make it our concern that the European Union is not the institution that contributes to life being even more difficult for small and medium-sized enterprises or to making it difficult to set up new ones .
The European Union 's activity must focus more on creating the conditions that will give these enterprises a better chance .
Mr President , equality is a prerequisite for economic growth .
Twenty-five million fewer women than men participate in the European labour market .
That is a huge unexploited resource which needs to be made use of if Lisbon ' s employment objectives are to be achieved and if economic growth is to be guaranteed .
At the same time , the birth rate is falling dramatically .
Demographic experts predict that Europe ' s labour force will consist of considerably fewer people in the future , when more women will therefore have to be in gainful employment and , at the same time , give birth to more children .
How are we to balance the equation ?
A basic prerequisite is an equality perspective in all four pillars of the employment policy guidelines , and I am therefore very pleased that Mrs Weiler has been so attentive to the proposals tabled by the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities .
The most important thing is perhaps to ensure that European women and men can combine professional life with having a family and children .
The Member States must make child care available and offer parental leave .
The women of Europe must not be forced to choose between professional life and having a family .
The Commission ' s focus on better jobs is very encouraging , for better jobs and better working conditions for women are among the prerequisites for having more women in paid employment .
Precarious and low-paid jobs which require little in the way of qualifications and in which women are over-represented at present are hardly going to attract women .
Quality , which is the recurring theme in the guidelines for the year 2000 , must also apply to work done by women .
Overcoming gender discrimination at work and in the social insurance systems is a huge challenge .
Discrimination against women in the labour market is not only unproductive , it also ruins the opportunities for individual women , for women as a group and for society as a whole .
Quite simply , growth and human development require us to put an end to gender discrimination .
Equality is an investment .
Mr President , when the experiment of the Luxembourg procedure was set in motion in 1997 and guidelines for Member States ' employment policies adopted , it was in the conviction that a favourable climate of economic growth might not alone be sufficient to ensure automatic positive results in employment .
Today , we are confirming this strategy , these undertakings and guidelines in an economic climate which we all know to be much less favourable , or , rather , full of risks , and we are therefore doing so , first and foremost , by duly recognising the need , already established at the Lisbon Summit , to bring the economic policy guidelines adopted at Community level and by the Member States into line with employment policy recommendations and guidelines .
This does not diminish the specific role of the Luxembourg procedure and the economic policy guidelines in the context of what has been defined a coordination process , an open coordination process .
We are aware that these alone are not enough ; however , they are , or can be , decisive for maximising the effects or reducing the risks for employment , which are also linked to the economic trend .
All this must be subject to certain conditions , focused on in both the Commission ' s proposals , which we judged to be positive , and Parliament ' s position .
I will mention them very briefly : we feel that this is a process which warrants careful attention , controls and monitoring .
It is not enough just to state the objectives which are then included under the principle of subsidiarity in national employment plans .
There must also be consistency in terms of effectiveness and implementation : that is why we call for the adoption of auditable , reliable common indicators at Member State as well as Community level , in order to achieve national objectives without whose achievement it would subsequently be difficult to reach our common European and Community objectives .
There must be consistency with budgetary policies at Member State level and at local and regional levels as well ; there must be quality employment objectives seeking to combine flexibility , social dialogue , protection , rights and safety , but which also extend beyond that context to include lifelong training , integration policies and employment with a view to increasing the productivity of less elderly workers .
Lastly , and most importantly , there must be equal opportunities policies and active employment policies .
If these conditions are met , the contribution of the Luxembourg procedure will not be the only factor but it will certainly be decisive .
Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mrs Weiler on her report and to thank the Commission for its sustained commitment to the European employment strategy .
No one will now deny that the European employment policy , since it first started in 1997 , has led to a certain level of convergence stress in the Member States and has brought with it increasing unanimity as to what an active labour market policy in Europe could be .
That is apparent from the continued refinement of the employment guidelines , although I would add that this is rather unilaterally evident from the first pillar , namely employability , and that the results in the field of adaptability of undertakings still leave something to be desired .
Yet , the moment of truth is now upon us , in my opinion . In this economic slow-down , Member States must prove that the Lisbon objectives , being sustainable growth , full employment and quality of jobs , were not simply prescribed for periods of boom , but must also remain applicable now .
That means that the Member States will need to lend a hand , for at the same time , I have noticed that a number of cracks are starting to show in the employment strategy .
First of all , I have noticed that people have cold feet about laying down specific , let alone European , objectives and benchmarks .
For example , I think it is great that the Council has recognised that equal opportunities for men and women is a question of social justice as well as economic efficiency .
However , I should also like to see the Council go the extra mile by formulating clear , quantitative and specific objectives in terms of reducing the wage gap and setting up a number of child care centres .
Commissioner , I hope that you will be monitoring this closely .
Secondly , with regard to the mix of policy measures , the method of open coordination is an interesting policy instrument in areas where Europe previously had nothing to say , and I very much applaud the fact that the Belgian Presidency has included the aspect of quality of employment .
Commissioner , it seems obvious to me , however , that collective agreements as well as social legislation will be needed in different areas where the social dialogue has failed .
That is why it is of the utmost importance for my group , for example , to know whether the European Commission will , after the failure of social consultation , produce a draft directive on temporary employment .
Indeed , temporary employment can create new opportunities .
However , for temporary employment to be quality employment which offers social rights , trade union rights , right to training and , at the same time , guarantees for permanent staff in the firms making use of their services , a European directive must be compiled which offers a number of warranties , warranties which have , inter alia , been presented in the joint declaration recently concluded by Euro-CIETT and UNI-EUROPA and that include , for example , equal treatment at temporary employment agencies and at firms making use of their services .
Commissioner , following on from this debate , I should like to know when you will be presenting this draft directive to Parliament and in what way these essential basic conditions will be met .
Mr President , I , too , wish to congratulate Mrs Weiler on her report .
I very much agree with her remark about the significance of training and the importance of making a special effort on behalf of older people in the labour market .
I do not agree that we , in the EU , should have a directive granting any rights , but I well understand that many in this House want to see special emphasis and importance given to actually ensuring a right to training .
However , this is something which the individual countries must take care of .
The employment guidelines provide , of course , both some political priorities and some political objectives , and they also provide a framework for deciding which funds are to be used in order to achieve the objectives .
The funds are allocated to four pillars .
The unemployed must be made better qualified to obtain jobs . They must be given more incentives to get into employment .
That is the first pillar . Secondly , entrepreneurship must be promoted so that we see more companies and jobs created , partly through the removal of constricting regulations and bureaucratic arrangements .
Thirdly , adaptability and flexibility must be promoted so that companies become more competitive . And fourthly , more opportunities must be provided for combining working life and family life so that there is a real opportunity for women to achieve equality in the labour market , leading to an improvement in the employment situation where women are concerned .
Many points have been registered under the four pillars , and I believe we are coming to a point at which it is worth considering whether we are pinning too much on this process , for the more objectives we add to the process , the more we are also in danger of watering down the cooperation and perhaps losing sight of the real goals , namely those of creating more jobs and getting the unemployed into work .
That being said , I am very pleased that , this time , we have obtained an innovation in the guidelines for the year 2000 , whereby local and regional efforts are to be involved and local and regional employment strategies developed . I also believe this underlines the fact that the Commission will need resources for carrying out analyses and studies within this area .
Mr President , I , too , want to thank Mrs Weiler for a good report .
The Commission reports on which this debate is based presuppose that there are to be no major changes this year , because a large-scale evaluation of the first five-year period is to be carried out in the course of next year .
We do not , therefore , wish to start making changes at the present stage .
Naturally , this state of affairs has also had a marked influence upon the current report , which concerns what we have discussed in previous years .
I think that the rapporteur has added some important aspects : quality at work , training , professional education , life long learning , equality etc .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs submitted a number of proposals for the report , of which a number were adopted and introduced into the report .
These amendments worry me because some of them place such heavy emphasis upon price stability policy , budget restriction policy and such like .
They worry me because we are heading for an economy which is no longer as strong .
The Luxembourg procedure has been very focused upon improving the supply of labour , but this presupposes that there are job opportunities and that current economic policy is creating job opportunities and countering the trend towards economic recession .
I therefore believe that , in the current situation , the amendments in question militate against a European employment strategy .
I should also like to say a few words about the future .
A number of evaluations are now under way .
I have been in contact with people working on a number of the ongoing research projects , and I believe that one of the things that will be emphasised is the fact that the Member States are failing to implement the policy properly .
There is relatively broad agreement between those pursuing labour market policy in the Member States but , in spite of that , no such policy is being implemented in the Member States themselves .
The labour market administrations really do not have much to do with the procedure itself .
They are pursuing their own policy .
The parliaments have no influence at all , but it is nonetheless they who must fund the national efforts we are demanding .
It is therefore incredibly important that more attention be paid to the parliaments in particular , but also to the entire political process in the Member States , if the result is to be effective .
I believe that this will be the major task in the forthcoming evaluation .
It is not enough simply to emphasise indicators and such like .
The bodies that supply the finance and then administer the measures must also play an active role in the process .
Mr President , I am pleased to have the opportunity to address Mrs Weiler 's report .
She has identified unemployment as one of the most serious economic and social problems faced by the European Union .
This was true prior to 11 September .
It has now become an even more stark reality in the aftermath and against the background of continuing economic uncertainty which results from war .
One in 12 EU citizens is unemployed today .
This is an intolerable situation and one which is of great concern to all of us .
Indeed , unemployment rates are much higher in some Member States .
Solving the problem of unemployment requires active labour market measures .
Labour markets do not always function efficiently , and Member States must be prepared to take up their responsibilities when the need arises .
The Luxembourg process of employment guidelines is intended to give the Member States a powerful stimulus in shaping their employment policies .
In the short time available to me I want to focus on recent events , but firstly I want to say that a number of key European industries are facing unprecedented difficulties .
Every effort must be made to secure the maximum number of jobs .
Hardest hit at the moment is the airline industry but we must not forget the tourist industry which has already suffered greatly this year from foot-and-mouth disease .
In the case of the Irish national airline , Aer Lingus , 40 % of their business and 60 % of their profits are generated on trans-Atlantic routes .
Ireland 's location as an island state in the north-west periphery of the Union creates a particular set of circumstances to which I would urge the Commission to give full consideration .
The collapse of Aer Lingus simply cannot be permitted .
The economic and social consequences would be unparalleled in any other Member State in the Union , and the knock-on effects to related industries would be enormous .
The fact that we are an island state without any linkage to the rest of Europe means that we require this .
The Commission must look at this sympathetically and favourably .
Mr President , I do not wish to make any profession of political faith in the many detailed proposals to be found in the report and in the Commission ' s proposal for a Council decision .
By far the majority of these are to be welcomed and are politically correct , and many are in response to urgent needs , especially the conclusions of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , which Mrs Theorin has reported on .
However , I have some general remarks on employment policy and the EU ' s labour market policy which have , of course , been an overriding theme of a number of reports and proposals here this afternoon .
First of all , I have a remark to make about the reality as it is perceived .
There is , of course , a very big gap between the reports of various kinds and the social reality .
Armchair manifestos are largely absurd descriptions of social reality and will be completely unrecognisable to Europe ' s enormous army of unemployed and socially excluded .
A similar remove from reality is reflected in quite a few places in this report .
We see this , for example , in recital F , which emphatically opposes the attitude that ' labour market considerations are subordinated to economic policy ' .
The Treaty ' s convergence requirements and such like may , upon examination , perhaps be seen as wishful thinking , but the only problem is that the Treaty is out of step with reality .
The other remark I have to make is that employment policy and labour market policy , in general , consist , in large measure , of just such political confessions of faith .
On the one hand , this means that we are operating in an area where what is decided is not legally binding , and this , of course , gives free rein to a lot of fine words and good intentions . On the other hand , we are , to a large extent , in areas for which the Treaty provides no legal bases for proper legal regulation .
What , however , there is , at present , no legal base for , there may in future be a legal base for . I am thinking , for example , of the reference to harmonisation of social arrangements , of tax policy etc .
However , I would remind you that , in Denmark , we have a saying about all good intentions , to the effect that ' the way to hell is paved with good intentions ' .
Mr President , we all stand for a higher level of employment , indeed for full employment .
But how ?
There are considerable differences in how we answer the question as to how we want to achieve this objective .
Many advocate , to the exclusion of all else , additional measures for employees , but that alone cannot reach the goal .
We must indeed implement measures to benefit both employers and employees - or transpose such measures , as the case may be .
This means , though , that we , together , have to be consistent in ensuring that there is a durable improvement in the economic conditions for our small and medium-sized businesses .
Two-thirds of all European workers are employed in them .
Their productive capacity must be improved , and that by means of easier access to additional finance on more favourable terms and a distinct reduction in the tax burden .
Mr President , unemployment is the most serious problem facing our European national economies .
Young people , women , older people and people with disabilities have a particularly hard time of it .
There is a lack of access to training , vocational and continuing education , retraining and , of course , work itself .
Society 's weaker members must , though , be strengthened in a spirit of solidarity .
Mrs Weiler is right to draw attention to the 1997 Luxembourg Summit .
The Member States have been showing their true colours since the guidelines on employment policy appeared .
Progress has been made in lifelong learning , in the application of practices which have proved their worth , in the involvement of both sides of industry and in action plans for local and regional employment .
Above all , though , incentives for active jobseeking and for investment in research and development , the reduction of the tax burden on work and structural reforms are all still lacking .
In this report , I do not find long-term strategies , but rather feverish measures for dealing with periods of slack growth .
Not everything can be blamed on the tragic events of 11 September .
Predictions of growth must be substantially adjusted , for example Germany 's from 3 % in January to 0.75 % this week .
Chancellor Schröder will not reach his goal of reducing the number of unemployed to 3.5 million in the election year , since the figure is expected to shoot up to 3.8 million .
His famous steady hand is trembling .
An additional EUR 2.5 billion will be required for unemployment benefit and for the Federal Institute for Employment .
If Germany , the engine of growth , falters , the whole of the European Union will be affected .
It is high time that there were financial concessions for SMEs .
Taxes must not be raised still further , especially at a low point in the economic cycle .
Tax reforms must be brought forward and the Member States must become more active in the fight against the black economy and tax evasion .
I urge both sides of industry to make employment contracts more flexible and further modernise the organisation of work .
In doing this , I am counting on the expertise and commitment of responsible managers and employees .
Mr President , I should also like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for an excellent report .
When we look back at the very short period during which we have worked on employment policy within the EU , we have to note that it has been relatively successful .
The level of employment has increased and unemployment has gone down , and that is indeed progress .
Now that the economy is in decline , the moment of truth has , however , arrived , and I believe that the need for a coordinated employment policy is even greater than before .
Even though the situation is encouraging now , we still see shortcomings , such as women ' s low share of the labour market .
It is not just that women ' s share of that market is much lower than men ' s .
Rather , women are over-represented when it comes to atypical and precarious jobs in the labour market , even in countries which have a very high proportion of women in gainful employment .
As has been observed in recent years , there are also problems when it comes to the older workforce .
It is really a pity that such a small proportion of the population between the ages of 55 and 65 are in work .
In this area , a range of measures relating to the working environment , skill development etc. is needed if we are going to be able to increase these figures .
There are also very large regional differences and , for groups such as immigrants and the disabled , levels of employment are still very low .
I welcome the discussion about quality at work and about not only creating more job opportunities but also increasing the quality of those jobs .
In this area , a long list of measures is , however , required .
That applies , of course , to the working environment , and especially to the new problems arising in the working environment in connection with people being stressed , excluded , burned out and such like .
It also applies , however , to the issue of life long learning . I believe that this is perhaps the most central issue if we are to be able to obtain economic growth and create more employment opportunities in the future , and that is why I am supporting this universal right .
I genuinely want to see a framework agreement at European level in which the social partners agree to this right .
I do not know whether that is possible . Otherwise , the Commission will have to act .
However , it would be the best solution . This right to skill development must then be adapted at national level within different sectors .
Finally , a view of the open coordination method .
The open coordination method exists parallel to legislation in the areas of employment law and the working environment .
The open coordination method is good , but is lacking in the areas of democratic control and transparency .
We must free the European Parliament to exercise influence on this process .
The open coordination method has grown in importance over the course of a long period of time . It has operated relatively well , but there is a lack of democratic control .
Mr President , I join with Mrs Weiler in many of her assessments and conclusions , and also consider much of what has been presented by the Commission to represent definite progress .
Mrs Weiler , I would like to express my congratulations to you on this work , but also wish to point out three major problems that I find in the real world , which is not quite as rosy as it is depicted in some of the Commission 's assessments or , indeed , in this report .
First among them is the strategy of full employment by 2010 on the basis of a 3 % growth rate .
I found that illusory from the very start .
The problem with it , though , is that other ways of combating unemployment have been disregarded .
It is lamentable that even Social Democrats stay aloof if you advocate the reduction of working hours .
Scant regard is paid to elements of a third economic sector for social , ecological and cultural services or indeed to the greening of society .
The second problematic aspect - one to which Mr Andersson has just referred - is the split development of employment policy .
There are , of course , some positive trends .
Full employment in engineering and in technical and managerial occupations has increased .
Modernisation really does have winners .
The other side of the coin is , though , a clear increase in part-time employment , especially of women , among whom it has now reached 45.7 % . in the EU .
The third problem is this : you have addressed the issue of the quality of work but , in my opinion , the social content of work is largely disregarded .
The law on employment contracts is ' made more flexible ' but in reality it is relaxed .
We see the promotion of the low-wage sector .
The right of the long-term unemployed to choose their work is being limited .
It is precisely because these things are naturally long-term phenomena that we are , I believe , obliged to act with sensitivity in taking precautions , so that no new social division arises .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Weiler , on the quality of her report .
This House has been an enthusiastic supporter of the quantitative objectives laid down at the Lisbon and Stockholm European Councils with regard to the overall rate of employment , the rate of female employment and the rate of employment amongst the elderly .
Unemployment , as has already been said , is one of the most serious economic and social problems the European Union faces and , currently , one in twelve citizens is unemployed , with the worst-affected groups being women , young people , the elderly , the disabled and members of ethnic minorities .
The 2002 guidelines for employment must be accompanied in all aspects by qualitative objectives , hence the importance of adopting special measures for incentives and action in the field of economic and social cohesion for the least-developed regions which lack the appropriate structures .
One pillar of the employment strategy , the entrepreneurial spirit , calls for priority to be given to the creation and growth of SMEs , which have enormous potential for job creation , as we can see from the most recent data from Eurostat , which shows that micro-enterprises with between one and nine workers made the greatest increase in terms of job creation in the European Union .
The report quite rightly highlights reducing bureaucratic and tax obligations as a means of stimulating the creation and growth of companies .
Nevertheless , we must reiterate that active support must be provided for the creation of infrastructures to support research and development , vocational training and lifelong learning so as to ensure the quality and continuity of employment .
We all know that the European Union will only become a knowledge-based economy if all Member States make investment in human resources their absolute priority .
While the European Parliament deliberates on a report on employment policy , a report that sings the praises of competition , and claims that the social market economy has proved its worth , this same market economy has recently claimed a further 4 000 victims , 4 000 Moulinex workers who now find themselves jobless .
I am citing the example of Moulinex , because the decision has just been taken .
I could , however , cite dozens of other businesses scattered throughout Europe , from Philips to Siemens , as well as several airlines .
This is a tragedy for many thousands of employees , and a disaster for the regions that are affected .
I would like to express my solidarity with the workers of these companies and my indignation at the attitude of their bosses , who have become wealthy on the back of the workers . The latter are made to pay for their bosses ' economic blunders , and they are now jobless , have no wages coming in , sometimes after they have been in employment for many years .
These workers have reaped no benefits whatsoever from their companies ' periods of prosperity , and in no way are they responsible for their difficulties .
Both governments and the European institutions are helping to prolong this despicable situation , where workers are suffering to enable company owners to safeguard their assets .
The money needed to finance jobs must be deducted from the wealth accumulated by shareholders , past and present , and from the resources held by banks .
Without this political will , these great promises on employment policy are nothing more than idle talk .
So , I warn you , workers will not let themselves be pushed around forever ; the greed of their bosses and the policies that favour their employers will eventually cause social upheaval .
This is what will require a genuine employment policy , as it is this alone that will force those who have made their fortune on the back of others to shoulder their responsibilities .
Mr President , further to the present evaluation of the employment process , I should like to draw the attention of the Commission , and of Parliament too , of course , to two points .
First of all , there is the method of coordination itself .
It has become a popular method in the social sector with regard to a number of themes which fall within national competence but which create common problems across all European countries .
It is therefore possible to put forward common goals .
However , Commissioner , the success of the method , given the fact that it is not a binding mechanism , relies on the moral and political pressure that can be exerted .
Media attention plays an essential role in this .
The employment process based on the open coordination method has now been running for some five years , and a dramatic decline has been noticed in the level of attention given to this .
Media attention has waned and , as a result of this , there has been less pressure on national governments to take serious account of the objectives and of the annual criticism levelled by the Council and Commission at their national action plans .
The open coordination method is only successful insofar as convergence stress continues to exist , and efforts will need to be made in order to sustain its existence .
The question therefore arises as to how the pressure can be kept up . In my opinion , this should be one of the crucial points in the evaluation .
The second point is best practices .
The different reports include best practices for national Member States .
The question is : to what extent is a policy being adopted to actually learn something from those best practices ?
How many Member States have visited projects in other Member States ?
How many best practices have been discussed in the different Member States ?
It is one of the methods , even if the pressure subsides , to keep the employment policy going .
I would therefore ask for both these points to be looked at in the evaluation .
Mr President , this is the fourth public debate in the European Parliament on the Employment Strategy .
The Employment Strategy is just one part of the European debate , but this is the first time there has been a general downturn in the economy , the first time there has been anxiety and , however much we want to avoid creating fear or panic , the situation is clearly going to be more difficult and problems with employment and economic development are bound to appear at the beginning of next year .
Several honourable Members have raised the question of the Lisbon target , that is , is it feasible and is the proposal in question an adequate proposal now that circumstances have changed ?
It is true that the analyses underlying our proposed guidelines are based on the excellent results for 2000 , which possibly painted the most positive picture of employment and job creation in Europe in the last twenty years .
The situation is different now , however .
Can we continue within the same framework ?
Can we continue with the same approach to the employment strategy ?
Mr Schmid put this question very clearly .
I think that we should start from the following premise : thanks to the reforms introduced on the job market over recent years , the common , healthy , budgetary base in the Member States and the efforts made to achieve monetary union , the European Union is better placed than ever before to cope with a recession .
Let me just remind you of previous recessions , which were exacerbated to a frightening degree by differences and fluctuations between currencies within the Union .
So today , we are better , much better placed to cope with a recession .
The second point is that , obviously , if serious problems arise in the future , we have tools to deal with them in the form of monetary policy and interest rates , in the form of economic policy and the margins allowed within the Stability Pact .
But what is important is for us to maintain the employment strategy without chopping and changing .
It is important for us not to make short-term changes , but to keep to our objective and step up the implementation of the employment strategy .
It would be a huge reversal at this stage if the Member States failed to focus their energies on efforts to apply the employment strategy as agreed .
There are very specific policies which the Member States need to develop in relation to the targets for employment quotas , the need to incorporate policies on the quality of work , better management of change , especially corporate restructuring , investments in human resources and policies on equal opportunities , where , it has to be said , the results of our evaluation in the joint report on employment were fairly disappointing .
The Member States have not put enough emphasis on policies for equal opportunities .
No major changes have been made in the proposed guidelines , first , because we made changes last year , taking account of the message from Lisbon , and because we are currently in the process of a more general evaluation .
The changes which we propose include three basic factors .
The first is the need for national targets .
The Member States need to set national employment targets .
The second is the need for policies on the quality of work , and the third deals with the widening wage differential between the sexes .
Unfortunately , there is still a huge discrepancy , as much as 15 % , between men 's and women 's wages for the same work .
As far as the European Parliament resolution is concerned , I should like in particular to thank Mrs Weiler for her very serious approach and to point out that your reference to the question of rationalising procedures , to cohesiveness between individual procedures in the European Union is something we fully endorse - we are planning to move on to a new framework for the package next year - and that we agree with you wholeheartedly on the need for cohesion between the general economic policy guidelines and guidelines for employment .
I would refer again here to the agreement between Parliament and the Commission and the view taken by the Council that labour issues should be dealt with within the framework of the guidelines for employment and that the guidelines for employment should be policies which are absolutely distinct from the economic guidelines .
There are numerous points on which there is consensus and agreement . There is the question of the social partners and their role , there is the question of flexibility and security on the job market and , to reply to Mrs Van Lancker , may I say that the Commission is determined to submit a proposal for a directive by the end of the year , due to the lack of success of the social partners .
This proposal is being prepared as we speak .
There is a common view on the need to work with the candidate countries , so that they can incorporate the strategies for employment , and to step up policies on sexual equality .
Your text contains proposals for changes to the guidelines .
The European Commission will examine a good number of them .
Certain particularly important points to which I should like to refer are : the lack of adequate information on the financial means available to the Member States in order to apply the strategy ; the need for a framework between the social partners and the Member States for applying lifelong learning to companies ; the need to combine the objective of promoting mobility with reductions in regional inequalities and for stronger measures to combat illegal employment - this links up with the issue of immigration to which Mrs Weiler referred in her personal presentation - and the need to deal with specific entry barriers to women on the job market .
Honourable Members , we are planning to submit a revised proposal to the Council over coming weeks which takes account of these questions .
I should like to offer you my warmest thanks because the open and highly interesting debate on the guidelines in Parliament has enhanced the substance and role of the strategy for employment in European policy in general .
Thank you , Commissioner Diamantopoulou .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 tomorrow .
Exposure of workers to risks arising from physical agents
The next item on the agenda is the recommendation for Second Reading ( A5-0320 / 2001 ) by Mrs Thorning-Schmidt on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on the Common Position of the Council [ 7914 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0293 / 2001 - 1992 / 0449 ( COD ) ] with reference to the adoption of the Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on minimum requirements to protect the health and safety of workers from physical hazards ( vibrations ) ( 16th individual directive under Article 16 ( 1 ) of Directive 89 / 391 / EEC ) .
Mr President , the Council of Ministers has presented a common position on mechanical vibrations .
There are a great many good things in the common position .
The best is that agreement on a compromise has been successfully reached in the Council .
This means that there is now broad recognition of the fact that vibrations constitute a health risk , when it comes both to hand / arm vibrations and whole-body vibrations .
It is also good that all three institutions appear to be in agreement as to a method of limiting these vibrations .
The key to this method is the parallel introduction of action values and limit values that should never be exceeded .
In the Committee reading , we talked a lot about the limit values .
That is really rather a pity , however , for it is in actual fact the action values that are the most important for , when the action values are exceeded , the employer is obliged to do something and to take preventative action to change the way in which the work is organised .
It is precisely this method which offers flexibility and emphasises prevention rather than injunctions .
Moreover , I find it very annoying that it is precisely this flexibility and the emphasis on prevention that have not been recognised at all by the opponents of the proposal here in Parliament .
That is a great pity , in view of the fact that they themselves often talk about flexibility and prevention rather than injunctions .
However , there are , unfortunately , also less happy facets of this proposal by the Council of Ministers .
The Commission ' s original proposal has been weakened in a number of ways , and it has therefore been necessary to table some amendments .
I will go through a couple of them .
Amendment No 1 is a reminder that we still do not have the directives concerning the remaining physical agents .
We know that the Noise Directive is on the way , but we are now waiting impatiently for the latter , and it would be appropriate if , by accepting our amendments , the Commission were , today , to tell us that they are as committed as we are to putting these directives in place .
We have been waiting for many years .
Amendment No 2 is crucial .
As I say , it is good that the Council could agree to set a limit value , but when you consider how high it really is , you can also understand how agreement could have been successfully reached .
The proposed 1.15 m / s2 constitutes a significant weakening of the original proposal .
The report therefore proposes a limit value of 0.8 m / s2 .
We know from the internationally recognised ISO standards that it can be said with certainty that there are health risks with exposure of more than 0.8 m / s2 .
It therefore makes more sense to set a limit value in which the protection of employees will , in actual fact , be something real .
There is no question of any tightening-up . All that is proposed is a return to the level proposed by the Commission itself at first reading , and there is no new knowledge to justify choosing another limit value .
Some MEPs have repeated again and again that there is not one single proof of the connection between whole-body vibrations and injury .
That is simply not the case , however .
There is a quite clear connection between strong vibrations and injury .
That is something that science is agreed about .
It is true that we cannot put clear figures upon the number of people who will be injured in the case of a specific limit value .
However , that is how it will always be when it is a question of people and their working environment .
In such cases , the precautionary principle must be applied , and this is also something actually laid down in the Treaty .
Amendment No 5 proposes shorter transitional periods than those proposed in the common position .
Clearly , these could be applied in practice out in the real world .
With the common position , however , we should arrive at transitional periods of up to 12 years , and it makes almost no sense to legislate for such long periods .
Finally , on behalf of my own Group of the Party of European Socialists and of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , I have tabled an amendment that makes it possible to exempt agriculture and forestry from the limit values for whole-body vibrations .
We have arrived at a compromise whereby agriculture and forestry , like aviation and shipping , are given the opportunity to be exempt from these limit values for whole-body vibrations .
We have done this because we remained doubtful as to whether agriculture could , in fact , comply with these conditions .
Allow me to emphasise two things in this connection .
First of all , I think that the farming industry ' s impact assessments have been very exaggerated and therefore not to be taken seriously .
It has been maintained that farmers would only be able to work for two hours a day .
That , I think , is wrong .
I believe in actual fact that , in preparing the assessments , it has been forgotten that the directive only applies to employees and not to people who are self-employed .
The second thing it is important to state is that this compromise proposal does not mean that we are giving up combating harmful vibrations within agriculture .
It simply means choosing another method , and it is worth emphasising that the action values must go on being maintained .
I hope that the Commission and the Council will respond positively to our proposal .
I also hope that we shall obtain wide support for the proposals here in the House .
The text before us is balanced and reasonable and fulfils the main purpose of this directive , namely to ensure flexibility in the workplace at the same time as ensuring that employees are guaranteed the necessary protection against harmful vibrations in the workplace .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive which is before us for its second reading , falls within the scope of measures that aim to improve the safety and health of workers . As you know , this is an objective that Parliament quite rightly considers very important .
We must , however , find a fair balance between , on the one hand , the need to protect the health and safety of workers and , on the other hand , the need to prevent this directive from placing excessive burdens on companies and particularly on small- and medium-sized enterprises .
If we adopt overly restrictive exposure limit values , it could , in practice , and technically speaking , turn out to be extremely difficult to abide by them ; it could actually harm the interests of workers , either because this could lead to their working time being limited to two hours per day , or because if the limit values are not applied , the protection they do have could be significantly reduced .
Since this report only concerns the issue of vibrations , we must also take into account the delicate and hard-won agreement between the various national requirements , and we must not impose further excessive restrictions on the sectors and industries concerned .
And in this respect , I would like to say that our Committee was not able to complete its work due to an incredibly busy timetable .
We were unable to interview all the relevant people involved before the deadline , and this is something I regret .
For these reasons , our group believes that the amendments adopted in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs are a relatively acceptable compromise between the requirement for the protection of workers and on the competitiveness of European industry .
Nevertheless , our group considers that it is essential to include the derogation option for the agricultural and forestry sectors , since the current arrangements for servicing and replacing machinery in these sectors would not enable exposure limit values to be effectively applied .
On a personal note , and particularly with regard to the work that we did last week , I would lastly like to thank Mrs Thorning-Schmidt for her cooperation .
Mrs Diamantopoulou , I hope that this spirit of openness , as part of our conciliation work with the Council , will enable us to agree on a halfway point so that the directive can be adopted within a reasonable timeframe .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Thorning-Schmidt , for the tremendous grasp she has demonstrated of this highly technical subject both in committee and in plenary .
My father and his brothers and , in fact , all the male members of my family worked in the coalmines in the northeast of England and most of them have received compensation for both industrial white finger , which is caused by hand-arm vibration , and industrial deafness .
This proposal concerning physical agents is a very real proposal to me .
Vibration has been a major problem in the past .
But it still is , and that is demonstrated by the very strenuous lobbying on all Members of this House from various sectors of industry in relation to this proposal .
I would like to echo what the rapporteur has said about the other elements of the original physical agents ' directive .
Noise , the original directive of 1986 , was due to be reviewed in 1991 .
Here we are , ten years later , and no revision to the existing legislation on noise has been made .
On optical radiation , industrial lasers were in their infancy when the original proposal was brought forward .
They are now in widespread use and we need to update or introduce law at European level on that subject in regard to fields and waves .
We are increasingly bombarded by fields and waves of all types and all intensities in our homes and workplaces .
That is set to increase radically as a result of developments such as the new bluetooth standard .
All of those outstanding elements are becoming increasingly urgent , and I hope the Commission will continue its good work to break the impasse that has so far existed inside the Council .
The rapporteur has introduced a number of important amendments in her report , but probably among the most important is Amendment No 2 concerning whole-body vibration .
Amendment No 2 represents a compromise , it lies between the Commission 's original proposal and the common position , and I hope it will receive the support of the House .
We have received strenuous lobbying , particularly on whole-body vibration .
There is general consensus on the need to act on hand-arm vibration , but industrial lobbyists have worked hard to convince Members that there is no link between whole-body vibration and injury .
I know for a fact that the Commission has at least 17 box-files of evidence showing causality between exposure to whole-body vibration and injury .
The difficulty is in untangling what proportion of the injury is due directly to whole-body vibration and what proportion is due to other factors such as poor ergonomics or bad posture .
There is a causal link and there is a need to act .
I hope we will see support for the rapporteur on that issue .
The rapporteur has also mentioned a compromise to exclude agriculture .
It proved necessary to introduce such a compromise ; the exclusion would be for five years if it does come to pass .
I would have preferred that it did not occur , but it had to happen to secure political consensus here for today 's vote .
If it is agreed , the Commission must not do its usual trick of waiting the full five years before assessing the scientific evidence and bringing forward a proposal .
The preparatory work needs to be done to move quickly once that five years has expired .
What , then , we are aiming for and will continue to seek to achieve in conciliation , beyond the debate and vote today , is a balance between action levels and limit values which it will be possible for industry to accept and implement but will at the same time drive forward improved engineering to eliminate vibration from new equipment and improve the way in which ergonomic considerations are taken into account .
I hope the report will be supported today .
I am going to deal specifically with whole-body vibration .
As has already been said , there is evidence that whitefinger can be caused by hand-arm vibration , but I do not believe that there is sufficient evidence that whole body vibration causes tremendous health risks for workers .
There is a slight health risk , but even the ISO standards say that there is no quantitative health risk , and so without further scientific evidence , I think it would be crazy for us to put more burdens on industry .
I am glad that the rapporteur has eventually agreed that we need a compromise on agriculture , so I urge you all to vote for Amendment No 11 .
This would exclude agriculture and forestry for five years and then it would come back to Parliament after further research and scientific evidence has been provided .
If we do not vote for the compromise in Amendment No 11 , I believe that the harvest across the whole of the EU will not be able to take place .
If we do not vote for it , tractor drivers , for instance , will be able to drive their tractor for between 2 to 4 hours in any 8 hour period and that is if we get the 0.8 m / s2 that the rapporteur is suggesting .
Even if agriculture and forestry is taken back , we need to go back to the common position of 1.15 m / s2 instead of the 0.8 that the rapporteur is proposing , because if we do not go back to that , other parts of the industry such as engineering , mining , construction will have tremendous problems , so I urge you to make sure that you do not vote to put more restrictions on industry when we do not have a quantitative health risk demonstrated .
I hereby beg you not to vote for the rapporteur 's position on this and to go back to the common position and vote for Amendment No 11 and against Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 12 and 9 .
Mr President , in my opinion , the rapporteur has done sterling work .
I have been active in an advisory role vis-à-vis works councils , trade unions and industry concerning conditions at work , among other things .
I have observed that , for some fifteen years , we in the Netherlands - but that also applies to other Member States in terms of best practices - have been working with the ISO Standard 2631 , as recommended and followed by Mrs Thorning-Schmidt .
Only at the end did we decide to adopt the amendment by Mrs Hermange .
I actually agree that we should not simply consider the views of industry .
There are also other angles to be considered .
For example , the trade unions have stated that this is not simply a matter of exposure from a health perspective , but also a matter of symptoms of fatigue , for example .
Consequently , the standard should , from the point of view of safety - or , rather , the lack of this - actually be stricter than is now the case .
I have not yet heard this aspect mentioned here , and it should actually help us find a happy medium .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mrs Thorning-Schmidt on her excellent work and , having said this , I would like to remind you that Article 31 ( 1 ) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union states that every worker has the right to working conditions which respect his or her health , safety and dignity .
This is a wide-ranging declaration , within the chapter on solidarity , which includes not only the measures taken against obvious risks , such as the risk of falling or risks faced when dealing with abrasive materials , but also those preventative measures used against risks that could go undetected by the majority of those who are not experts in this field .
These are the risks that those who work in mines , in construction and in the field of transport have to face on a daily basis , which , according to those who study them , affect up to 24 % of European workers .
These risks originate from two different types of vibration : Hand-arm vibration , which is the cause of whitefinger , impaired feeling and grip , amongst other problems , or Whole-body vibration , which is the cause of back problems , lumbar pains and slipped discs .
It is worth remembering , Commissioner , that these measures should not be limited to including only physical causes , such as vibrations , but should also take account of electromagnetic fields , noise and waves and optical radiation , for example , and also bear in mind the transitional period needed to make the required adjustments arising from the adoption of these measures .
I am convinced that all employers and workers have a common goal , which is the improvement of their workspace and environment , so that the place in which they work is suitable .
A transitional period will be needed so that equipment can be replaced and procedures can be improved and adapted . Differences relating to technological development and type of activity , such as agriculture , will have to be taken into account , with a conviction that ' no-risk ' does not exist and that the quest for safety is the responsibility of all those involved : workers , be they self-employed or employed , employers or local , regional or national administrations .
Mr President , in my two years in this Parliament I have never received such a barrage of letters of complaint as I have about this report .
I am talking particularly about whole-body vibration aspects , rather than hand and arm vibration .
These comments are not just from employers , large and small , in farming , quarrying , mining , engineering and construction businesses - to name but a few - who are rightly concerned about the very viability of their entire industries under these proposals .
They are also from ordinary employees concerned about their jobs if the rapporteur 's amendments go through .
Recently published and well-respected scientific work from Germany , Italy and the UK , as well as the rapporteur 's own country of Denmark , shows no direct quantifiable link between whole-body vibration and back pain .
I note that Mr Hughes maintains otherwise ; not for the first time his own government disagrees with him .
The above comments from constituents have two things in common : their anger that Socialist MEPs should be proposing such amendments in the first place , and their sheer disbelief that such MEPs could be so out of touch with reality .
Let me be clear .
The above comments are nothing to do with health and safety , issues which all of us recognise as important .
They are everything to do with the rapporteur jumping to conclusions that are not supported by specific scientific evidence .
The UK government is strongly opposed to the rapporteur 's proposed amendments which , it maintains , would damage industry and agriculture for no benefit .
UK Conservative MEPs agree , and we urge the UK Labour MEPs , who supported this report so resolutely in committee , now to support the common position , and meanwhile to support our compromise , tabled jointly by a number of political groups .
I urge you all to join us in voting for sound science and sound sense .
Mr President , this is really one of the worst pieces of legislation I have seen in this Parliament .
The benefits it offers are vague and speculative - they are unproven and unquantified , but the costs are real , immediate and massive .
Credible estimates suggest that the costs of implementation in the UK alone could range between EUR 15 and 30 billion .
The effects will reach into a wide-range of industries - not only agriculture , but road haulage , construction and many other areas .
I have been contacted by an exceptionally wide-range of business organisations and they are universally opposed to the measure and especially to those amendments which would make it even more repressive .
Those organisations include : the Confederation of British Industry , the National Farmers ' Union , the Road Haulage Association , the Quarrying Association , the Coal Industry and JCB , the heavy equipment manufacturer .
It appears that the limit set by the directive would restrict a truck driver to six hours work , a tractor driver to two or three hours and a brush cutter to 15 minutes .
This will do huge damage to European economies . It will cost jobs .
It has been pointed out that the average jogger exceeds the limit by a factor of 7 or 8 , while even walking down a road could break the rules .
I suspect that I was over the limit on Monday on the bus from Basle Airport to Strasbourg !
The directive also places huge new costs and administrative burdens on industry in terms of measuring vibration levels and recording exposure .
There is a crying need , Mr President , for proper regulatory impact assessments to be applied to European legislative proposals .
If that had been done in this case , it would never have got this far .
Any possible benefits are far outweighed by the costs .
It appears that we cannot reject the whole proposal , but I appeal to colleagues to support amendments which would soften it and to reject amendments which would make it even more disastrous than it already is .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission I would like to congratulate Mrs Thorning-Schmidt for her excellent report particularly because it is such a difficult technical issue : It is not only that is a difficult dossier , but it has been before the Council since 1994 and only now are things on the move .
I consider that this legislation on vibrations will be a fundamental step to achieving better protection of the health and safety of workers exposed to risks arising from physical agents , but of course , we have to take into account the economic impact , the impact in the enterprises - the small , medium and large .
That is why we propose a step-by-step approach .
We cannot forget that a considerable number of workers suffer from the effects of their exposure to vibrations , notably neurological , vascular and musculo-skeletal disorders .
This is a particularly serious problem which is costly for business and society and which , more importantly , causes suffering for the people directly involved as well as for their families , and when we discuss costs , we must calculate the cost that enterprises have because of the health problems of their workers .
On your amendments , the Commission has worked very hard to maintain a high level of protection while , at the same time , ensuring that a compromise could be reached .
Although we consider that lower values more in line with the amended proposal would be more appropriate , we have accepted the Council 's common position with a view to achieving a global compromise .
The common position increases the exposure limit values and exposure action values for the whole-body vibrations and introduces new provisions on transitional periods for existing work equipment in general and for equipment used in the agricultural and forestry sectors in particular .
For reasons of consistency , the Commission cannot therefore accept Amendment No 2 , which decreases the exposure values for whole-body vibrations in the common position , nor the part of Amendment No 5 which reduces the length of the transitional periods .
However , the last part of Amendment No 5 would be acceptable if slightly redrafted .
Similarly , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 8 and 12 because they merely restate the principles of the employer 's responsibility already contained in the Framework Directive without additional added value , nor Amendments Nos 9 and 13 since they either remove the possibility for Member States to grant derogations on whole-body vibrations in case of seasonal work or simply allow for the averaging of exposures which is already considered by the ISO standards to which the directive refers .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 11 for both technical and political reasons .
Although the Commission agrees with the principles behind the changes proposed by Amendment No 1 , we can only agree with the first part but we cannot accept the second part which foresees the commitment of both the European Parliament and the Council to continue with the adoption of other parts of the original physical agents proposal .
This is not a question of political disagreement .
This part of the recital contravenes the rule that the recitals ' shall not contain normative provisions or political exhortations ' .
I accept Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 7 .
These amendments clearly improve and clarify the text .
I regret that I have to reject Amendment No 6 as it stands .
Nevertheless , I could accept the idea of justifications to be provided by Member States on any transitional periods or derogations granted by them .
This should however be integrated in Article 14 ( 1 ) .
Finally , let me remind you that the step-by-step approach we have used , starting with vibrations , implies that we should now push ahead with the remaining three physical agents included in the Commission 's original proposal : noise , electromagnetic fields and optical radiation .
To conclude , the Commission can accept in full Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 7 .
It can accept in part Amendments Nos 1 , 5 and 6 and it rejects Amendments Nos 2 , 8 , 9 , 11 , 12 and 13 .
Thank you , Commissioner Diamantopoulou .
Ladies and gentlemen , to judge by what I am hearing now , I think we will soon be needing a new Directive on noise in the Chamber during a debate !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon today .
Mr President , I wanted to ask you about the decision of the Bureau that was taken last night on the issue of a Staff Regulation .
I want to know on what basis that decision was taken .
I think that the House should be reminded that when the present Commission was accepted , it was accepted on the basis of the need for radical reform .
A decision was taken by the Bureau last night to adopt a rather more cautious approach than the one that has been adopted in plenary , but we did not want as in the past , we wanted a radical overhaul .
I wish to know why the Bureau has gone against the spirit of what was accepted in the plenary both on the van Hulten report and on the Harbour report and why , given the critical importance and interinstitutional nature of this issue , the Vice-President for Reform , Commissioner Kinnock , was not invited to speak at that meeting .
Could you , Mr President , give me an assurance that the Bureau will look at this again and also invite the Vice-President of the Commission to speak to the Bureau in order to amend the letter that was agreed last night ?
I was at the Bureau meeting last night and I am not aware that the Bureau actually took any final decisions .
They took a decision to write a letter to Mr Prodi and therefore there are still ongoing discussions on this matter .
At the last part-session , I raised under points of order , this whole question and asked the presidency to give this House a comprehensive report about the state of reform discussions as soon as possible .
So far , we have not had this report and I emphasise here the concerns of my colleague Mrs Morgan .
In my report , that was passed by a very big majority in this House , we set the linear career structure on merit as the centre-piece of the reform .
But it appears from comments being made by one of the Vice-Presidents of this Parliament in the newspapers and not to this House , that the whole issue is now not regarded as important by the Bureau .
I hope I have the support of all colleagues in the House in saying that we still consider this the centre-piece of the reforms and we do not see any reason why Parliament should not follow a similar line to that being taken by the Commission in this crucial area .
The point made by you and by Mrs Morgan will be raised again in the Bureau .
I can assure you that it will be given proper consideration .
Mr President , can we take that as an assurance that no letter will be sent until the Bureau has met again on Thursday , because that is what I think the House would like to hear ?
I cannot tell you the status of the letter .
I imagine that it has already been sent , so I cannot say that it will not be sent .
But the matter will be given full discussion when the Bureau meets again tomorrow .
Mr President , can I just object to the fact that the Thorning-Schmidt report and the Ghilardotti report are going to be voted on immediately after the debate ? Some Groups have not had a chance to look at the Ghilardotti report in particular and to debate them .
Can we at least , if this happens in the future , have far more warning ?
We only heard last night that this was about to happen when it was too late for us to do anything about it .
This report has been scheduled for today since the agenda was drawn up .
We get a great deal of complaints from the press who say that we do not vote quickly enough after we have had a debate .
Therefore a balance has to be struck .
VOTE
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal ) - Draft Council decision on the protection of the euro against counterfeiting ( 10616 / 2001 - C5-0362 / 2001 - 2001 / 0804 ( CNS ) ) ( Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal ) - Proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2262 / 84 laying down special measures in respect of olive oil ( COM ( 2001 ) 455 - C5-0437 / 2001 - 2001 / 0181 ( CNS ) ) ( Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
Reports without debate :
Report ( A5-0317 / 2001 ) by Caroline Jackson , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision laying down a Community Action Programme promoting non-governmental organisations primarily active in the field of environmental protection ( COM ( 2001 ) 337 - C5-0281 / 2001 - 2001 / 0139 ( COD ) )
( Parliament approved the legislative resolution )
- Report ( A5-0346 / 2001 ) by Diemut Theato , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the appointment of nine Members of the Court of Auditors
( ( C5-0282 / 2001 - 2001 / 0808 ( CNS )
C5-0283 / 2001 - 2001 / 0809 ( CNS )
C5-0284 / 2001 - 2001 / 0810 ( CNS )
C5-0285 / 2001 - 2001 / 0811 ( CNS )
C5-0286 / 2001 - 2001 / 0813 ( CNS )
C5-0287 / 2001 - 2001 / 0814 ( CNS )
C5-0288 / 2001 - 2001 / 0815 ( CNS )
C5-0290 / 2001 - 2001 / 0812 ( CNS )
C5-0291 / 2001 - 2001 / 0816 ( CNS ) )
Theato ( PPE-DE ) , rapporteur .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to make a few short remarks on the procedure .
In accordance with Article 247 of the Treaty , the Council has on this occasion , after consulting Parliament , to appoint nine members of the Court of Auditors .
Four of the appointments are re-appointments by France , Luxembourg , the Netherlands and Austria .
The members concerned are to be reappointed for a term of six years .
Three Members are new appointments by Germany , Greece and the United Kingdom .
Two are to take over for the remaining four years of the term from their predecessors , who have left office early .
Denmark and Sweden are the countries in question here .
Article 247 ( 6 ) of the Treaty makes this possible .
In accordance with rule 35 of the Rules of Procedure , the Committee on Budgetary Control , being the competent committee , was entrusted by the President of Parliament with the examination of the nominees to the Court of Auditors .
On 10 September and 8 / 9 October , these examinations took place in public session .
This was followed by a brief in-camera discussion and then candidates were voted on individually by secret ballot .
Candidates were , of course , examined as individuals .
The result of the examination and the secret ballot that then took place was that we had voted in favour of all nominated members and also recommend them to this House .
Mr President , I see from Rule 114 of the Rules of Procedure that procedure without debate applies when the committee responsible has not tabled any amendments or when all the amendments for deliberation have been adopted with no more than three Members voting against them .
This report has now come to us without debate , although the Committee took a vote on the Swedish candidate , Mr Tobisson , when more than three Members voted against him because he has no experience as an auditor whatsoever .
For this reason , I would like to hear your interpretation as to whether it is right that this matter can be voted on without debate , without the possibility of openly putting forward these points of view , as more than three Members have voted against a nominee .
I insist this matter be referred to Parliament ' s plenary for debate there .
Of course every Member is allowed to vote as they so wish .
You correctly state Rule 114 .
The committee has requested that this be put to Parliament .
We are now in a position where the Conference of Presidents approved this being put on the agenda of Parliament at the request of the committee .
Therefore the vote will go ahead .
( In successive votes Parliament adopted the nine resolutions )
Report ( A5-0318 / 2001 ) by Didier Rod , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a Council recommendation on the prudent use of antimicrobial agents in human medicine ( COM ( 2001 ) 333 - C5-0411 / 2001 - 2001 / 2164 ( COS ) )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , resistance to antimicrobial agents now causes hundreds of thousands of deaths the world over .
Diseases that we thought were under control , such as tuberculosis or the plague , are re-appearing and are posing a serious threat to human health , particularly in developing countries .
We acknowledged , by voting in favour of the Khanbhai report , that resistance to anti-malarial agents was one of the causes of malaria-related deaths .
But we now know that one of the true causes of the current situation in Europe is the incorrect use of antibiotics and over-consumption , not only in the field of human medicine but also in animal feed .
Reports on GMOs also indicate this ...
I am sorry to interrupt you , as rapporteur , but it is not correct for a rapporteur to start making a speech before we take a vote .
If you have something pertinent to say about the vote , we will listen to you .
But if it is not to do with voting procedure I suggest to you that , as rapporteur , you have already had your opportunity of speaking to the substance of the debate .
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of appointing nine new members of the Court of Auditors .
All nine candidates are well qualified to become excellent members of the Court of Auditors .
We would nonetheless remind the Member States that , in appointing candidates , they must take Article 247 , Paragraph 2 of the Treaty seriously : ' The Members of the Court of Auditors shall be chosen from among persons who belong or have belonged in their respective countries to external audit bodies or who are especially qualified for this office . '
The Court of Auditors plays a very important role in relation to supervising the Community ' s funds .
It is therefore very important that there should be enduring respect for its Members .
We have voted on these nine re-appointed and newly appointed members of the Court of Auditors with mixed feelings .
The EP ' s role in this instance is marginal , since the Council is the designated institution .
We endorse this distribution of tasks in accordance with the Treaty .
However , the quality of the candidates should be paramount in the EP ' s verdict .
We were bitterly disappointed in this respect , both in terms of some of the Member States and in terms of the majority of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
A few candidates are , in our opinion , clearly not up to the task and , in one instance , do not even meet the Treaty requirements .
A Member State that puts forward a candidate simply on the basis of a long political career , without the relevant candidate having qualifications in the area of accounts , should hang its head in shame .
But also in other areas , the level of candidates was very diverse .
For such a post with high accountability and a huge significance for community funds , only heavyweights in the financial-political arena should be put forward .
Since this has not happened in a few cases , we have given some the benefit of the doubt , but we were unable to give the weakest candidates our vote .
Report Rod ( A5-0318 / 2001 ) :
We shall not discuss the medical arguments put forward in favour of restricting the use of antibiotics and other antimicrobial agents .
However , the report mentions the need to save money on health care costs .
Although this need could , generally , be justified , we nonetheless reject any argument for this .
We know only too well that , when it comes to making savings on medical spending , it is always the health care of the working classes , and particularly the poorest sectors of society , that suffers .
The result of these ' careful recommendations ' , which governments usually use as a pretext to take restrictive measures , does nothing to affect the excessive use of medicine by the rich , whilst the poor are deprived of even the most basic levels of care .
We therefore abstained from voting on this report .
Report Schmidt ( A5-0324 / 2001 ) :
Mr President , I have made so many speeches that I have lost my voice .
Maybe I have delivered too many explanations of vote !
I voted for the directive on undertakings for collective investments in transferable securities because one way that pensioners get rich - I am not being serious here - is through reaping the benefit of fruitful savings .
In this way , if their savings bear fruit , as the directive proposes , pensioners will be able to follow the example of the great single-handed circumnavigator , Mr Francis Chichester - the father of our beloved fellow Member , Mr Giles Chichester - who celebrated his sixty-fifth birthday while sailing single-handedly round the world .
Report Jensen ( A5-0319 / 2001 ) :
Mr President , the Pensioners ' Party voted for the Jensen report .
I would nevertheless like to tell Commissioner Diamantopoulou , who works so hard to help workers and to increase the number of jobs throughout Europe , that , as representative of the Pensioners ' Party , I believe that , if we are to have more jobs , we must reduce the cost of labour : we must , therefore , reduce the cost of pension services and contributions while still increasing the size of pensions .
We want less contributions and larger pensions , and that can only be achieved by careful , sound administration of contributors ' money .
. ( PT ) We have supported this report since its first reading in February 2001 .
Its relevance warrants our support once again and this is why we have voted in favour of it .
Developing , programming , monitoring and assessing the European employment strategy with the involvement of the social partners and local and regional authorities are important and essential objectives for fully and effectively achieving the strategic ambitions defined at the Lisbon European Council .
More and better jobs mean greater economic and social cohesion .
It is , therefore , crucial that cooperation between Member States is improved with regard to exchanging experiences and information and identifying best practices in addition to the involvement of the social partners and local and regional authorities , not forgetting the implementation of an active and transparent public information policy that takes account of the public ' s requirements for transparency .
One particularly praiseworthy aspect of this report is the attention it pays to the promotion of equal opportunities for men and women in the employment and labour markets .
Undertaking studies on the provision of childminding structures and of home assistance and care services is an essential instrument for assessing shortcomings in this field , initially and then putting into practice , in a later stage , an action plan designed to enable people to reconcile their professional lives with their family lives .
With regard to the budget and annual appropriations , we agree with the rapporteur ' s position and fully support it .
Report Ghilardotti ( A5-0325 / 2001 ) :
Mr President , I voted for the Ghilardotti report .
Keeping employees informed is a very good thing , Mr President , but I tried substituting the word ' pensioners ' for the word ' employees .
The result is a wonderful report : the European Union calls for pensioners to be kept better informed ; the European Union wants improved consultation of pensioners .
The pensioners would be happy to know that there is a report addressing the issue of more information and consultation for pensioners , for it is still the case today that some European pensioners do not even know how large their pension will be the day before they start to draw it , they do not know at what age they will be able to retire and they find the documents presented to them totally incomprehensible .
I therefore hope that I will soon be able to vote in favour of consulting and informing pensioners as well as employees .
. This particular proposal can be traced over 20 years and today we should be reaping the benefit of the conclusion of intense negotiations and compromises , not only here in Parliament , but also in the Council and amongst the social partners .
The Common position offers the most appropriate means of ensuring that we can achieve the objective of guaranteeing that employees have real access to information and consultation , and also offers them an opportunity to have an input into the continuing operation of the enterprise .
Unfortunately , the amendments proposed by the rapporteur and approved by the Committee of Employment and Social Affairs goes totally against the spirit of co-operation achieved up to now .
In particular , the issue of sanctions to be imposed at an EU level flies totally in the face of subsidiarity and competences of national governments .
All that has been gained is that this issue ends up in conciliation and brings us no nearer to achieving the real goal of securing information and consultation for the employees of the European Union over the running of their companies .
. Generally , I welcome the outcome of this vote , although I wish more Members had been willing to support the amendments dealing with sanctions against companies that fail to implement the directive 's requirements .
However , there is no doubt that the measures agreed by Parliament will make an important difference for many workers throughout the EU .
Hopefully , thanks to the tighter definitions of the information required and the proposal for a delay for full consultation in the light of proposed large-scale redundancies and other potentially harmful changes , we shall avoid the situation where we see workers appealing to this Parliament to protect their rights and interests .
I also welcome Parliament 's insistence on the rapid implementation of this directive for all Member States , whatever the current state of employee representation .
I trust that Council will now follow Parliament 's lead .
. I wholeheartedly support this report by Mrs Jensen .
The call to increase the EU 's fund for job creation comes at a time when the EU is attempting to coordinate its employment strategies by the so-called open method of coordination .
This fund could do much to bolster these efforts and consolidate the work under way since the Lisbon dot.com Summit .
Moreover , the report also recognises the valid and worthwhile role that local and regional authorities can play in the process of job creation .
It is only when we work with such authorities , who have vital in-depth knowledge of regional employment needs and peculiarities at their disposal , that we shall be able to reap the potential benefits outlined in this report .
Report Thorning-Schmidt ( A5-0320 / 2001 ) :
Mr President , the pensioners who sent me , Mr Carlo Fatuzzo , here include a large number of people who have become ill as a consequence of exposure to mechanical vibrations throughout their working lives .
I therefore voted for Mrs Thorning-Schmidt ' s report , although I know she would prefer me not to speak any more in this Chamber and has tabled an anti-Fatuzzo amendment which , I am glad to say , was rejected by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I therefore call for working hours to be limited in places where there are vibrations which are unavoidable because of the nature of the activity to be performed but which are more frequent than the maximum permitted limits .
According to Mrs Thorning-Schmidt , 24 % of workers in Europe are exposed to mechanical vibrations .
These are mainly those working in the mining , building , manufacturing , forestry and transport industries .
Hand-arm vibrations cause serious and virtually systematic problems , such as the ' white finger ' phenomenon in woodcutters and forestry workers ; carpal tunnel syndrome , poor circulation and loss of feeling .
Whole body vibrations cause lumbar pain , slipped discs , as well as premature degeneration of the spinal column .
However , despite the fact that these problems are known to be harmful to workers ' health , it has taken almost ten years for a European directive to be drafted !
The reason why this has taken so long is because the management in these sectors and equipment manufacturers are taking a stand , and they do not want restrictive standards , which would mean the equipment used would have to be replaced immediately in the light of technological developments .
Furthermore , businesses do not always use approved equipment .
And where they do , they do not necessarily inspect it on a regular basis , so the vibrations increase .
Above all , however , the conditions under which people are obliged to work are considerably aggravating factors .
The equipment concerned is often used by workers who are paid for their output , in terrible conditions of intensive work .
We must oblige businesses to pay for regular breaks throughout the day .
It is scandalous that workers continue to risk their health in order to earn a living .
Report Korhola ( A5-0321 / 2001 ) :
When the environment is respected as it is in Mrs Korhola ' s directive , Mr President , we are all extremely happy .
Indeed , I have just returned from a visit of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy to Slovakia , where we saw the progress made by this country in environmental matters , and I have to say that we were all happy campers , Mr President .
Just think , one evening , as I was about to get into the lift to go to the second floor , I saw Mr Bushill-Matthews and the usually impassive Mr Blokland rush into the lift , both extremely happy too , shouting in unison : ' Mr Fatuzzo , we cannot leave you alone with Mrs Malliori ' , who , as we all know , is extremely attractive like all Greek women .
Even Mr De Roo , who places great store by silence , heard these utterances !
' Public participation ' in ' plans relating to the environment ' is something we are obviously in favour of .
However , this report is another of those indecisive documents , where the proclaimed good intentions do not hide the ineffective measures proposed .
If we consider current events in France alone , the Mont Blanc tunnel has been reopened despite the views of the people living nearby ; the protests of those living in the Rhône valley against the noise pollution caused by lorries using the motorway , or even against the route of the TGV railway line , have been disregarded , we can see how little importance the authorities attach to public opinion when it is voiced .
Apart from that , what control can the public now have over preventing a disaster , such as that of the sinking of the Erika , from polluting hundreds of kilometres of coastline ?
What control can the public even have over preventing a disaster , which , unfortunately , is not only ecological , such as that of the explosion at the AZF factory , from happening again ?
In reality , since the public does not have the right and the means to control the activity of businesses such as TotalFinaElf , nor does it have the possibility of banning any economic policy that is detrimental to society and to its own workers , ' public participation ' comes across as a hollow expression .
We abstained from the vote .
Although this proposal for a directive makes some welcome amendments to certain aspects of Community legislation , it represents a reductive and inadequate view of the implementation of the Aarhus Convention , which has already been ratified by all of the European Union ' s Member States .
Nevertheless , its contribution to the implementation of the Aarhus Convention in the Member States is very small , as is the implementation of the Convention in procedures and decisions at Community level .
The proposals contained in the Korhola report do , by and large , improve the document , although they do not sufficiently resolve all the shortcomings of the proposal for a Directive , which is why we have also voted in favour of other proposals that extend the report ' s proposal , thereby helping to ensure that an opportunity is not wasted in the complex process of implementing the Aarhus Convention .
What has also become clear during this debate is that the importance of this Convention ' s content and its ratification by all the Member States justify an extension of the debate , a broader and more inclusive discussion and a more appropriate and committed response from the Commission , and not the minimalist vision contained in the proposal it has submitted to the European Parliament .
. This proposal intends to ensure that opportunities are given for public participation at an early and decisive stage of environmental decision making .
This includes public participation and the drawing up of certain plans and programmes , greater participation in the procedure concerning the implementation of environmental impact assessment statements as well as in the putting in place of integrated pollution prevention and control measures .
Annex 1 of the Directive lists the instruments in relation to which the public for the first time are be given the opportunity to participate in the drawing up of plans and programmes .
Such provisions are to be inserted in the directives on waste , the protection of waters against nitrate pollution as well as being included in the hazardous waste , copper packaging , air quality and landfill of waste directives .
The main thrust of this directive is to ensure that information must be made available to the public within a reasonable timeframe .
The public must be given the opportunity to express comments and opinions before decisions are made .
It is important that the citizens of Europe are involved in decisions that are taken at a European Union level .
The European Union and national governments support the principle of subsidiarity which guarantees that decision-making incorporates a local input at every opportunity .
We are also all aware of the environmental proofing of EU regulations and directives which is now constantly taking place .
I support progress .
I support economic development .
We must ensure that there is a balance between the protection of our environment and economic progress at all times .
This directive which is before us is a balanced piece of legislation which I am sure will be supported by all Members of the House .
. I welcome this initiative and was very happy to support many of the amendments and the report itself in the final vote .
I deeply regret Parliament 's unwillingness to really open up access to such decisions to the widest possible number of people .
The willingness of the largest groups to maintain the restrictions to the ' concerned public ' , which will be defined by the Member States , is a surefire way to continue to leave certain people deeply dissatisfied and feeling sidelined .
At least we managed to support the rapporteur 's proposals to have some definition as to what the ' concerned public ' might be .
We have also managed to argue that the relevant authorities should make some response to show that the concerns of the concerned have been heard .
However , a frequent complaint is that objections were raised but nothing happened .
Parliament has given itself little room to manoeuvre in future negotiations with Council , so I hope we shall at least maintain the limited progress made today .
. I wholeheartedly support this report by Mrs Korhola .
In an era where many citizens , from all sections of society , feel disenfranchised and marginalised , the call for public participation in respect of the drawing up of certain plans and programmes relating to the environment is certainly needed .
This proposal , the first of its kind , could see everyday citizens involved in and having say about issues ranging from air quality to the protection of water .
The report makes concrete and practical recommendations as to how public participation in this domain can be realised ; for example , information must be made available within a reasonable time-frame .
In addition , citizens would be entitled to submit their comments either orally or in writing .
The report addresses many of the tricky issues that have faced decision-makers since the demonstrations at Seattle , Stockholm and Genoa : it could lead to greater transparency and accountability since citizens could act as both a check on decision-makers ' complete autonomy and they could be more informed of the decisions which are being taken in their name .
Effective public participation in the drawing-up of plans and programmes for the environment is of the greatest importance and , therefore , all means of disseminating information to the public are essential , particularly the Internet .
There are other areas directly linked to the environment , in which the public must also participate , such as the Structural Funds , the Cohesion Fund and the common agricultural policy . The Commission must , therefore , review its decision to consider general policy options to be non-binding and ensure that its proposals meet the requirements laid down in the Aarhus Convention on effective public participation .
It has become necessary to broaden the definition of ' public ' as much as possible .
Inequality in access to adequate means of assessment for small and local voluntary groups compared with the resources of large corporations or public authorities is an important issue and must be taken into consideration .
Report von Boetticher ( A5-0339 / 2001 ) :
Mr President , while I was in the aeroplane on the way to Slovakia , I closed my eyes for a second , as frequently happens , resulting in interesting dreams which I have related in many explanations of vote .
This time , I saw my daughter , Cristina - who , as we all know , has been striving to finish her degree in law for six years - graduating at last .
She had specialised in Community law and received a prize of EUR 1 000 for developing Community law , which is also what the von Boetticher report seeks to do . I therefore voted for the report .
But Mr President , which was the dream : the fact that my daughter Cristina had graduated in law or the fact that we had , at last , succeeded in establishing the European lawyer , with a EUR 2 000 prize , which is what should happen in Europe ?
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of this report because we agree that the EU should develop cooperation in the area of civil law for the benefit of EU citizens .
We are nonetheless alert to the fact that the regulation does not apply to Denmark , cf. the protocol on Denmark ' s position with respect to the Treaty on European Union .
Report von Boetticher ( A5-0333 / 2001 ) :
Mr President , I voted for the second von Boetticher report .
How could I have voted against a report whose objective is to make it possible to move within the European Union more quickly and rapidly , providing for effective identity checks on the undesirables in our Union ?
With regard to this report , during my visits to the Eastern European countries - Slovenia , Slovakia , Bulgaria and Hungary - lots of pensioners came up to me and said : " Mr Fatuzzo , we are pleased that the European Union is doing its best to make it possible for us to move freely within the Union but , even today , we are always being asked to show our documents , we are subjected to checks every few minutes and we have to prepare a large number of documents in order to be able to move from one part of the Union to another .
Please bear in mind that we are waiting anxiously for the day when we will genuinely be able to move freely . "
We voted against this report because this report does nothing other than apply the Schengen accords , something we do not wish to approve , either directly or indirectly .
Whilst claiming to facilitate the freedom of movement of individuals within the European Union , the Schengen accords actually put up barriers along the path to achieving this freedom of movement , at least for those who are from countries outside the European Union .
We are in favour of total freedom of movement of individuals , whether or not they are from the European Union .
In fact , the European treaties guarantee the freedom of movement of capital , regardless of its origin , to the extent that they allow profits from arms trafficking , drug trafficking , even terrorism , to be laundered on European territory as long as the sacrosanct banking secrecy and business secrecy are protected .
Our vote expresses our opposition to a Europe built for capital , and not for individuals .
Report Goebbels ( A5-0302 / 2001 ) :
Mr Goebbels ' report stresses the importance of the international monetary system for those who use money to attempt to boost their economy .
I voted for the report but I was unsure about one thing : I remembered that Neapolitan shoeshine , that penniless Neapolitan boy who , when he met a wealthy old industrialist in Ischia , was told : " When I was your age , I used to clean shoes instead of sitting here sunbathing .
Then I bought a taxi , then a public transport firm and then an airline , and then I became the owner of a satellite network . "
" And what are you doing now ? " asked the boy .
" Now I am sitting here , sunbathing in the sun of Italy and Ischia .
" And I , " replied the boy , " what am I doing ? ! "
The Goebbels report on how to avoid international monetary crises is , on the whole , accurate , reliable and reasonable .
We are simply surprised that the report does not mention the euro once and that it does not reiterate the ( very serious ) argument that has been put forward before , whereby the euro , which is soon to become a major international currency , would control the dollar by forcing the US monetary authorities to abandon their policy of ' benign neglect ' .
It is true that the dissident analysts believed , on the other hand , that a dollar / euro bipolar ( or tripolar , if you count the yen ) international monetary system risked being more unstable than the previous unipolar ( or bipolar ) system .
At any rate , this was an interesting debate , which should have fallen completely within the scope of the Goebbels report , having the added advantage of experience on its side , since the euro has been in circulation for almost three years , on the international currency markets at least .
Yet , the rapporteur carefully avoids this question .
Why is this so ?
Simply because the theory of the euro having a stabilising effect , like that of the euro having a destabilising effect , was based on the same hypothesis , namely that the euro was to quickly become the second international currency , next to , if not equal to , the dollar .
This is far from being the case .
Not only is the euro not a major currency , but its value has depreciated , it is permanently on the verge of a crisis of confidence , and its international role is not progressing .
And , on top of that , we are heading towards unavoidable problems between the Member States !
If the European Union had not obeyed those with dogmatic views , if we had gradually developed the ECU whilst respecting the national currencies , the process would have been safer and more straightforward .
To sum up , the experience of the last three years confirms what we always believed : a wrong move in European monetary unification will actually make life much easier for the dollar .
In spite of the recent attacks , the good health of the latter also seems to be further evidence of this .
We understand why the rapporteur does not wish to dwell on the subject .
Following Mr Goebbels ' excellent report , a motion has been tabled in the European Parliament that is too narrowly framed from the outset .
Moreover , the Commission ' s representative expressed a position on its behalf , that is , firstly , false and , secondly , unacceptable , as it does not mention all the abuses now being committed other than terrorism , such as the international financing of the drugs trade and corruption .
Finally , a majority in Parliament , either inattentive or complacent , rejected many constructive amendments , including the creation of an Economic and Social Security Council , the need for better representation of all continents in global financial institutions , and the need to restrict financial transactions with Member States and off-shore centres which do not abide by even minimal international regulations .
Parliament has even refused to declare that ' financial speculation is one of the major causes of international financial instability ' .
When democratic parliamentary institutions refuse to acknowledge the evidence , they cease to serve the common good .
The reason that I abstained was in order to highlight this , as I did not wish to counter the few positive effects that can still be found in the resolution after the report has foundered .
As the report points out , between 1975 and 2000 , the world has gone through some 120 monetary crises , which the IMF defines as depreciation of a currency by more than 25 % in the course of a year .
Regrettably , however , even in the knowledge that every such crisis involves enormous costs for the countries involved , as happened in the Asian crisis in the summer of 1998 , the report offers no basic measures that could prevent the emergence of new crises with any degree of effectiveness .
Data from the Bank for International Settlements shows an enormous increase in international financial activity , which practically doubled in the 1990s , with trading on stock exchanges appearing increasingly disconnected from the real economy . This , combined with an increase in the speed of circulation in the financial sphere has heightened instability , thereby helping to increase the gap between richer countries and developing countries .
Despite the report ' s considerations and criticisms , specifically regarding the lack of democratic accountability of the IMF and its use by the USA and the G7 , does not offer much by way of an alternative .
On the contrary , it suggests from the outset that it is unrealistic to expect the creation , in the foreseeable future , of a United Nations organisation that would exercise full universal powers of regulation and supervision , when this is precisely the path that should be promoted and pursued in order to achieve fair and democratic international relations that provide solidarity and are concerned about development and the fight against poverty .
Although it is to be welcomed that the rapporteur acknowledges that starting from scratch on growth and on combating poverty will require cancelling the debts of the poorest countries , it is disappointing that he does not put forward any other practical proposals , such as a Tobin-type tax or abolishing tax havens and that the majority in this House has rejected every move in that direction .
The Goebbels report sets itself the ambitious goal of how to make the international monetary system work better .
But for whose benefit ?
We are entitled to ask this question , when the rapporteur believes that ' the IMF is the only institution concerned about the smooth operation of the world economy ' .
The victims of its structural adjustment programmes will be delighted to hear this , and will not be particularly convinced by the request to the IMF to henceforth allow for ' social aspects ' .
It is also significant that the report chooses to disregard any tax on speculative movements ( Tobin style tax ) and the need to abolish tax havens .
However , I did not vote against the report , in order to support two specific requests , which we see as fundamental .
We are in favour of eliminating third world debt and we therefore support cancelling the debt of the poorest countries and introducing a standstill procedure for the others .
In this spirit , this procedure should not produce a restructuring plan , but should enable us to cancel an illegitimate debt .
In spite of all these reservations , these proposals are heading in the right direction and I do not wish to stand in their way .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.12 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

2002 budget
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , guided by the ' guidelines for the 2002 budgetary process ' , approved on 3 April , Parliament has attached particular importance to improving the efficiency of the European institutions , with particular emphasis , in this field , on the Commission reform that is currently underway and on the quality of the budget ' s implementation .
In this context , we must once again state our continuing political support for the reform of the Commission and mechanisms are being put in place to effectively monitor it , in an attempt to avoid both the delays that we have seen and those concerning staff regulations , in which we want to see the position opportunely adopted in the European Parliament resolution respected . These are the mechanisms of the long-awaited reform , which must be implemented by all the European institutions : an increase in the size of the external delegations , and also better coordination between the legislative and budgetary procedures , amongst others .
These are well-known objectives and we shall continue to work to achieve them .
At the same time , and with a view to improving the monitoring of the budget ' s implementation , we expect the Commission to produce a definition of clear objectives for implementation and a timetable for this , and we will see how the timetable is being respected in the course of the year by means of sources of information that are now being made available .
It is not possible to effectively assess the implementation of a budget if we do not have both clearly defined objectives and the means of finding out whether these objectives are being met .
It is also widely known that the European Parliament attaches clear priority to producing a more detailed study of the budget ' s implementation .
We feel it is important to be able to forecast the budget for the following year .
Indeed , the budget is , by definition , a forecast .
Equally important , however , as establishing the forecast for the following year is being able to see how this forecast is being put into practice and , in cases where this is not being done , to know the reasons why .
This will also contribute to making good delays in payments that have already been identified and to being able to pay out new commitments more rapidly .
We want to eliminate outstanding payments as far as possible and also to ensure that new payments outstanding , or new RAL , to use the commonly accepted term in this field , do not occur .
Increased operational spending will also be promoted , with corresponding reductions in administrative spending .
This is also related , as you all know , to a set of horizontal amendments , in other words , amendments that cover the whole budget proposed by the Committee on Budgets , and which are designed to provide an real reduction in the RAL , greater speed in making payments and also increased operational spending rather than administrative spending .
Along the same lines , we state once again our intention to only decide on the basis of the most complete information and , consequently , we hope to have the following information supplied by the Commission soon : on the one hand , and most importantly , the study examining the impact of the various measures that have already been adopted in the field of agriculture under the reforms laid down in Agenda 2000 , as well as their budgetary consequences and also those of the BSE and foot-and-mouth crises , in addition to the prospects for changes to the agricultural budget .
The European Parliament cannot be a budgetary authority in name only .
In order to reach a decision on a given budget line and , even more , on a given category of the budget , we need full and up-to-date information .
It is clear that , at the moment , with regard to the last reform of the common agricultural policy and the impact of the foot-and-mouth and BSE crises , we need more information .
This is why we have been asking for information since at least March of this year , so that we can make an informed decision , both on the 2002 budget and on the Letter of Amendment .
As important as our concern to have information , we hope that new measures will be identified , which will provide a response to the situation arising from the terrorist attacks of 11 September , specifically concerning Europol and Eurojust in the fields of justice and home affairs . We would also like to see measures in the field of external action , on increasing humanitarian aid and a diversification of development cooperation , without , of course , undermining previously given commitments .
I think that we all accept that the situation arising from 11 September has changed many aspects of world policy and therefore , since the budget acts as a mirror for this policy and reflects this policy , there are bound to be budgetary consequences for the new situation .
The consequences of this new situation are being felt in 2001 and will be in 2002 and in the future .
We see these consequences chiefly affecting refugees , and the tragic problem they create , but they also affect concerted action in terms of the European Union ' s external policy .
We do not want to be systematically faced with faits accomplis . We can now , therefore , certainly forecast changes in these situations and these new situations must be reflected in the budget .
The budget must accommodate them although they must not endanger other commitments already given by the European Union .
We have the greatest respect for the 1999 provisions on the financial perspective but we also have great respect for social and political dynamics and where political dynamics are concerned , we cannot fail to draw the necessary conclusions .
We have also stated on various occasions that we will not accept new needs and new challenges being met to the detriment of longer-standing needs which are still as topical as they ever were .
We also have great expectations of the report to be drafted by the Secretaries-General of the institutions on the multiannual study of administrative spending on preparations for enlargement .
We even feel that , as a natural consequence of this work at a technical level , it could then be followed up at political level , with cooperation between the two branches of the budgetary authority .
At this level , therefore , we will be able to draw political conclusions from information that we obtain technically , which is already being done .
Continuing with a different type of issue , but which is also pending , in the case of the Commission ' s proposal , we are waiting for the drafting , in the very near future , of the proposal to mobilise the flexibility instrument that will ensure the means necessary for the conversion of the fishing fleets that were dependent on the old Fisheries Agreement with Morocco .
This flexibility instrument is a mechanism provided for in the Institutional Agreement . It has been used year after year and we are waiting to see the corresponding proposal for the year 2002 .
In terms of sectoral objectives , I should like to highlight a few to which we attach particular importance , such as that of improving the European Union ' s competitiveness , to which the priority of more and better employment has been linked . It is not sufficient for declarations to be made at European Councils and summits .
What we need is for these declarations then to be put into practice . More and better employment also means more and better support , more and better support mechanisms for small and medium-sized businesses , progress on the e-learning initiative , which we would very much like to see have a corresponding legal basis and also the consolidation of common policies in the field of asylum and immigration .
It is also worth making special mention here of the intention to support the competitiveness of Member States ' border regions in the context of the forthcoming enlargement , as well as extending the benefits of the Leader programme to cover the future Member States .
All of these aspects are considered , in our guidelines , in the proposals for amendments that we have tabled on the budgetary proposals , and in the comments that we have included on the budgetary proposals .
Of course , we shall also continue to fight to improve the level of payments .
I know that this is something that the Member States often attempt to avoid , but the fact is that , if we want to see more effective European institutions , if , furthermore , we want their actions to have greater credibility , and if we want to see their results being more successful , we must have the necessary means to make payments .
I would also remind you that under the terms of the Interinstitutional Agreement , in terms of the financial perspective , in 2002 , the level of payments should stand at 1.08 % of the gross domestic product of Member States and the Council ' s proposals fall considerably short of this figure .
I shall conclude by expressing my complete willingness , in the period between this first reading of the budget for 2002 and the vote on it in December , to work together with the Council and the Commission in a systematic process to reach the most appropriate allocation of available resources and to find the appropriate responses to the challenges we are currently facing .
Hopefully , after the vote that will be held this coming Thursday , the European Parliament ' s proposals will lie clearly on the table .
We would also like to see that our priorities are considered in all the discussions that take place between now and December and that they take account of what I have just said , which is that the position of the European Parliament and that of the Council must both be respected , so that , ultimately , it will be possible to use the best from each proposal .
What we cannot , of course , accept now is something that we have never accepted in the past : a dialogue of the deaf , in which some people state their wishes and other people accept what some people say they wanted .
In this specific case , and to ensure that real negotiation takes place , there must be respect for the positions of all parties involved , attention must be paid to everyone ' s priorities and that a close look is really given to everyone ' s priorities .
Only by adopting this approach will the discharge of the budgetary process be worthwhile . Only through this approach will we ultimately have any guarantee of success and only in this way can we have any hope that the budget will receive a favourable vote in December and be approved .
We do have strongly-held positions but we are also willing to negotiate and what we want is an in-depth examination of the proposals of all sides so that the final outcome is a balanced one .
Thank you , Mr Costa Neves .
As Mr Costa Neves has finished his speech early , leaving us with a few seconds left over from the time he was allocated , I would like to take the opportunity to tell you something that will be of interest to you all : each second we spend debating here in Parliament costs us EUR 9.73 .
I am telling you this so that you will understand that the reason I am so inflexible when it comes to the allocation of speaking time is this cost .
Mrs Buitenweg has the floor .
Mr President , you have once again pushed the boat out with this long conclusion , but perhaps I can once again try to finish my speech in less than ten minutes , and then the balance will be redressed after all .
This week , we are hoping to take a big step towards establishing the 2002 budget .
I , as rapporteur , have worked towards this for the past couple of months , and I have received a great deal of support from the MEPs of the other groups , Mrs Gill , Mr Ferber , Mr Virrankoski and the other MEPs , as well as from the rapporteur for the general budget , Mr Costa Neves .
I expressly want to thank them all here for their pleasant and also very fruitful cooperation .
The trilogues involving the Council have also proved useful , and let me therefore count our blessings for once .
From this year onwards , the Council budget contains a special chapter dealing with the common foreign and security policy .
Since the Council now covers operational costs in its budget - which , unfortunately , do not fall within the remit of the Commission - such as for military planning capacity , it is necessary for democratic control to be possible .
It is also important to gain a clear insight into the administrative structures which are being set up , so as to avoid overlapping with Parliament offices .
That is not possible in a general Council budget if it is not clear how much is being spent on what and if Parliament does not give its opinion on those administrative expenses in general .
We are therefore pleased with a separate chapter since , in this way , Parliament can try to gain some control .
Now that we have chosen this path , I hope that the Council will approve a number of rational and very logical requests by this Parliament at second reading too .
For example , there is the issue of long and wild nights at the European Councils .
In the midst of all this wheeling and dealing , do Heads of Government still consider the financial implications ?
I wonder about that .
During the meetings of the European Councils , the Dutch government is always equipped with a special calculator which closely monitors the implications for the Dutch contribution .
But who is accountable for the impact on the European budget ?
A pertinent example of this is the Nice Summit .
In order to facilitate an agreement on vote weighting in the Council , compensating seats in the European Parliament were distributed lavishly .
Who will pay for this ?
The Treaty of Amsterdam stipulated a maximum of 700 seats ; we are now sentenced to 732 seats and the buildings are not designed to cope with this number .
In the short term , the number of MEPs could run well into the 800s , and I had better not hear a squeak from the Council when it is presented with the bill for this .
An example of a totally different nature is the Balkans .
Whilst , in front of running cameras , billions were given for reconstruction with one hand , the Council took away development aid with the other .
In order to avoid any repeats , it would be wise to add a financial picture to the political conclusions at important summits .
How much is it all going to cost us and does it involve new money ?
It would be a sign of honesty if this were presented along with political conclusions .
For example , the situation in heading 5 has changed dramatically since the Berlin Agreement because , in those days , no consideration was given to , for example , developments in the second pillar , the common foreign and security policy , the third pillar , Eurojust , Europol , or expenses for the European data protection supervisor .
I welcome these developments , but I would equally welcome an explanation as to where the funding is coming from and at what expense that funding will be granted .
A second subject on which I should like to ask the Council to adopt a positive stance , quite apart from the annual budget discussion , is our request to consider how we want to give the taxpayer more value for money .
During that trilogue too , Parliament talked in that context about setting up a political working party , which will enable us jointly to examine how we can give more value for money for , each year , we discuss the nuts and bolts and minor changes to the budget , but the institutions , once they are up and running , are not subject to thorough reviews as far as their objectives and working methods are concerned .
Despite this , we should have the courage to move away from the way things have developed and question , once again , whether all the institutions , for example , all the agencies , should continue to exist in that way .
We are making a start this year at micro level by asking all the institutions to draw up a list of negative priorities .
After all , we should not only add items to the European budget , we should also learn to scrap some of them .
Interinstitutional cooperation is another area where huge savings could be made .
In this respect , I should like to make a concrete proposal .
Since the Treaty of Nice , it has been mooted that the Council would need a new meeting place for its half-yearly summits .
But the impact on the taxpayer and on the quality of life in the Leopold Quarter if yet another huge building were to be erected would be enormous .
Let us therefore examine together whether some of the Council meetings could take place here in the parliamentary House , in Brussels or in Strasbourg .
Look around you , as you already are doing . It is a beautiful building , and you will understand that we would not mind if cooperation were to develop in such a way that Parliament were to meet in Brussels only , and we would be delighted to make this environment available to you .
Until such time , and until the seat issue has been solved in another way , we really are stuck with two buildings that need to be altered to cope with a larger number of MEPs .
The Bureau has drawn up a three-year plan which serves as an indicative framework for expenses related to enlargement .
The other institutions , too , are working hard to ensure that the effects of enlargement are ironed out , and we cannot wait for these adjustments until 2004 .
It is not an option for us to be in the middle of activities , still , when the first new Members join .
This means , therefore , that more funding is required prior to the accession of the candidate countries .
The Committee on Budgets has noted that , by means of rigid budget management , it is possible , in the coming year , to remain within the self-imposed maximum of 20 % in the category of administrative expenditure , although we have always said that enlargement and buildings do not fall within this maximum .
As for the subsequent years , however , I am not convinced that this will work again .
Even if the other institutions implement their plans in preparation for enlargement , and even if Parliament faces higher costs because , by that stage , preparations will have got well and truly under way , in my opinion it will then be difficult to remain within the established ceiling .
Berlin in itself does not , therefore , merit unconditional praise .
However , the intention to enlarge by spending tax money in an efficient , effective and desirable manner does merit such praise . Let it therefore be the guiding principle in the budgetary procedures which follow .
You will have gathered by now that I am greatly irritated by the Council ' s stance , and despite this , I shall try to mention a few other elements from my report .
I shall , first of all , focus on what it does not say .
The report does not contain any judgment by Parliament of the basis on which expenses must be paid as soon as a new statute for Members has been approved , and that is something which I very much regret .
Precisely because Parliament wishes to retain the power to decide on its own arrangements and does not therefore want expenses to form part of a package involving the Council , it is important for us to indicate at this stage what we want .
I should particularly like to ask the PSE and PPE-DE Groups to endorse the position which was initially included in my report , namely that , once the statute enters into force , only expenses actually incurred will be reimbursed .
I would like to mention something which is in the report .
I am delighted that the institutions reacted in a quietly positive manner to the request by the Committee on Budgets to take part in EMAS , the EU ' s Eco-Management and Audit Scheme .
I should like to warmly congratulate the European Commission on the fact that it has already committed itself to this , and I hope that it will set an example for others , including the European Parliament itself .
There is still room for improvement on many levels , including in our House , for example with regard to differentiated waste processing and the use of environmentally-friendly materials , saving electricity and setting up a mobility plan for staff and Members alike .
Parliament has a model role to fulfil , and this also applies to realising sound environmental objectives . I would be grateful if we were to make a start on that next year .
Mr President , the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community was signed in 1952 , and was to run for fifty years .
It comes to an end next summer and there is no intention to extend it .
We are therefore to debate the last ECSC budget , now , with expenditure to cover the period up until 23 July of next year .
Thereafter its assets , estimated to be worth EUR 1.1 billion , are to be transferred to the EU ' s general budget , to be invested safely and profitably .
Earnings from the assets are to be used for funding research in the coal and steel industries .
It has been estimated that around EUR 45 million in earnings per annum will be available for these purposes .
The ECSC has not attracted payments for many years .
Its expenditure has mainly been financed out of a reserve intended for funding under the operating budget .
The largest item of expenditure in the last six months of the ECSC ' s existence will , according to a proposal by the Commission , be in respect of social aid .
Of that , most is intended to be spent on special adjustment aid in countries where production in the coal and steel industries has been wound down .
In many countries the industry has social problems associated with it , and , consequently , the Committee on Budgets has decided to propose that EUR 16 million more than the Commission originally recommended should be paid in adjustment aid to Great Britain , Ireland and Belgium with regard to the special problems associated with their steel industries .
When the ECSC ceases to exist , social aid for employees in the coal and steel industries will end .
The Commission has not promised to distribute special aid out of the EU ' s general budget for social purposes in these industries .
When the ECSC ceases to exist , the social dimension it represents will not continue in another form .
The ECSC ' s resources have been used to finance important research .
Although earnings from the ECSC research fund will be channelled exclusively into research after it ceases to exist , there will be less money available than there is now .
For example , early next year EUR 72 million will still be channelled into research .
That is a considerable sum compared with the EUR 45 million that represents the earnings from the ECSC ' s net assets that will be used for research .
Consequently , we could say that the fact that the European Coal and Steel Community is coming to an end makes for a negative situation from the point of view of social action and research .
The Commission is charging quite a sum in compensation for earnings from ECSC funds under the guise of managing the investment of the ECSC assets and allocating money for research : EUR 3.5 million a year .
That will pay the salaries of more than 30 officials employed to manage the ECSC ' s remaining functions .
The activities involved are so limited in scope that the officials seem to form just one group , which will not suffer from the ECSC ' s cessation of operations the way the workers and researchers in the coal and steel industries will .
The Treaty ' s cessation will have surprisingly little effect on the lives of the officials who have been attending to the ECSC ' s banking business and are managing its effects .
This brings to light the inefficiency of the new organisation of the Commission ' s functions .
There is a problem I wish to draw attention to , although it is not strictly relevant to this report .
The legal basis for the Coal and Steel Community Research Fund was established by the Treaty of Nice .
If the Treaty of Nice is not in force next July , there will be no legal basis for any subsequent management of the estate .
The Commission must adopt a position on this swiftly .
Finally , there is good reason to say a few positive words in memory of everything the ECSC has achieved , not least the fact that the European Coal and Steel Community has probably been one of the institutions that had an impact on building peace and international co-operation in Europe after the Second World War .
While it was in operation its Member States did not wage war on each other .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in a few days ' time , you will be voting at first reading on the amendments to the draft budget as it was drafted by the Council in July .
I already had the honour of making an explanatory statement concerning this draft budget at the part-session in September .
I will therefore not enter into any detail today .
Instead , I should briefly like to outline the aspects which will undoubtedly be on the agenda in the framework of our dialogue .
I hope that this dialogue will be fruitful , so that we can reach an agreement which is satisfactory to everyone , but particularly to the European citizens , of course .
I should like to reiterate quite emphatically that the presidency would like to reach an agreement on the 2002 budget as early as November at second reading of the Council .
A few days after your first reading , the overall structure will be in place and the different positions will be known .
In November , we should consequently be able to put the finishing touches to the activities which will culminate in a sound budget for 2002 .
In this connection , it seems useful to me to remind ourselves briefly of the guidelines which the Council used when it compiled the draft budget , in respect of which you will be proposing amendments in the next couple of days .
This draft budget is able to fund all policy components and priorities of the European Union , without imposing too great a burden on the Member States that work towards achieving stricter control of government finances .
At the same time , however , notably under the ceilings of heading 3 of the financial perspectives and of heading 4 , it creates some leeway for coping with new priorities .
For that purpose , the Council has made sure that the different actions of the European Union are funded appropriately within the available financial means under the ceilings of the financial perspectives , in connection with which no changes have been made to the funds allocated to programmes on which a decision was made in the codecision procedure , whilst the extent of the commitment appropriations has been determined on the basis of implementation options .
In addition , the Council has paid particular attention to the development of payment appropriations by curbing and controlling their growth compared to 2001 . In this context , particular consideration was given to the implementation options and the expected rate of payments in connection with commitments outstanding and national budgetary requirements .
After these general considerations , I should like to broach a few subjects which will be on the agenda in the next couple of weeks and these concern , of course , agricultural expenditure .
As you know , the Council did not adopt the Commission ' s proposal at first reading and has asked the Commission for a detailed analysis of the requirements .
During the conciliation meeting of 20 July , Parliament sided with the Council , and I have every faith that , once we have discussed the letter of amendment which the Commission will be sending us shortly , we will reach an agreement through which we will be able to cushion the effects of the different crises .
I think that I can already say that , at the moment , it is becoming increasingly clear that , in this connection , a solution is certainly in the offing .
As far as the other agricultural expenses are concerned , when the Council ' s draft budget provided for an increase in the appropriations , although they were still slightly below those which the Commission had initially put forward in its preliminary draft , consideration was given to the effects which the decisions by the European Council of Berlin would have on the reorganisation of the common agricultural policy .
When we analyse the final appropriations to be included in the 2002 budget , we must obviously take account of the most recent data in the letter of amendment concerning agricultural expenditure .
I should now like to turn to a second point which , according to the Interinstitutional Agreement , is also pertinent , in the framework of the letter of amendment which the Commission will be sending us shortly , namely the financial implications of the delay in the fisheries agreement with Morocco , together with the funding and restructuring of the fishing fleet in question .
In July , the Council followed the Commission ' s preliminary draft of the budget as far as the international fisheries agreement was concerned , and the Council asked the Commission only to use these appropriations for other fisheries agreements .
It is unfortunate that this position by the Council in July did not lead to an agreement .
With regard to the structural measures , heading 2 of the financial perspectives , the Council insisted on including this entire heading in the budget in the form of commitment appropriations in accordance with the conclusions of the European Council of Berlin of March 1999 .
In this connection , I should like to point out that the Council , at the time of compiling its draft budget , did not have a full overview of the situation , and that it stated that it would review the situation in the light of the letter of amendment in the autumn , which is prescribed according to the Interinstitutional Agreement .
The Council will do this as soon as it has received the letter .
I would remind you that the appropriations for international fisheries agreements , in accordance with the Interinstitutional Agreement , fall within compulsory expenditure , whether they are indicated in the budget line or in the reserve .
As for the letter of amendment , to which some of our discussions in the coming weeks will relate , I should like to note that the Council expects a balance estimate for the 2001 budget year to be included .
This request is an illustration of the principle of good management , which means that the budget burden for the individual European taxpayers will , where possible , not become any heavier .
I know how much importance the European Parliament attaches to the expenditure under heading 3 of the financial perspectives .
That is why the Council has ensured that its draft budget sufficiently covers the priorities of the EU ' s internal policy , notably the honouring of commitments concerning the funding of multi-annual programmes , in respect of which both our institutions have taken a decision .
I would also point out that , at first reading , the Council increased appropriations in its draft budget in order to launch Eurojust and the SISII system for Schengen .
The Commission had proposed the budget lines for this in its preliminary draft .
In the current climate , these objectives are more topical than when we compiled the draft budget back in July .
In this way , the Council has created a margin of EUR 110 billion which is wider than the margin in the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget .
This margin should be sufficient to cover priorities , some of which , including e-learning and immigration , will undoubtedly be mentioned by your rapporteur or , in any event , will be suggested at our forthcoming dialogue .
I would now like to turn my attention to the funding of the EU ' s external measures , as included in heading 4 of the financial perspectives .
The Council has largely followed the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget .
The Council has also made an effort to allocate resources to the different priorities in the field of external measures .
For example , the Council has created a margin of EUR 100 million under the ceiling of heading 4 of the financial perspectives , which should enable us to shore up the priorities in this sector .
With regard to this heading 4 of the financial perspectives , I should nevertheless like to point out one particular aspect pertaining to the appropriations for the common foreign and security policy .
I very much regret the fact that , during the conciliation meeting of 20 July involving the European Parliament and the Council , an agreement was still not reached with regard to the level of appropriations to be included .
That is why the Council has adopted the amounts in its draft budget which the Commission proposed in its preliminary draft .
I have to confess that I do not fully grasp why requests for a reduction in these amounts were made .
You will agree with me that these amounts , which are already lower than in 2001 , are very modest as they are and are really the bare minimum to ensure that Europe can play a prominent role on the world stage .
The wish to reduce these amounts at such a crucial time as in the current international crisis could particularly harm the EU ' s credibility .
I do not believe that that is what is intended .
I should now like to move on to the administrative expenditure of the institutions .
When the Council compiled the draft budget , it was motivated by the wish to meet the needs of the institutions as much as possible , taking into account their specific characteristics .
In the draft budget , there is a surplus left over to the tune of EUR 53 million under the ceiling of heading 5 of the financial perspectives , which allows new needs in the field of administrative expenditure , notably for the budget of the European data protection supervisor , to be accommodated .
In this connection , the Council recently sent you its letter of amendment No 1 for 2002 .
Despite this , I am of the opinion that each of the institutions represented here are acutely aware of the pressure which the ceilings of heading 5 are under .
A first step in this connection was the agreement that was reached during the conciliation meeting of 20 July involving the European Parliament and the Council concerning a request to the Secretaries-General of the institutions to compile a report for the benefit of the budgetary authority by the time the Budgetary Council is held in November . This report should comprise a multi-annual analysis of heading 5 , as well as proposals concerning necessary economy measures to prevent the maximum allocated to this heading being exceeded , also in the framework of enlargement .
In the light of this report , the follow-up action that needs to be taken should subsequently be determined .
I should already like to underline that a number of suggestions made a moment ago in connection with the report are certainly worth looking at further .
I should also like to mention another aspect concerning administrative expenditure , notably the Commission ' s staffing requests .
The Council continues to support the reforms on which the Commission is working , and agreed at first reading to the creation of 78 new offices requested by the external delegations in the framework of decentralisation .
With regard to the other 239 offices , the Council failed to adopt a position on 20 July because , on the one hand , it requires more clarity concerning the decision on the regulation for the definitive termination of service by Commission officials and , on the other hand , it nurses the hope that your discussions on this matter will yield a solution which can accommodate our respective wishes .
I should like to finish this list of the different points which will be occupying our minds for the next couple of weeks by returning to a question with which you are all too familiar , namely the extent of payment appropriations .
First of all , I am delighted that the European Parliament and the Commission share the Council ' s concern as to the commitments outstanding ( in our Community jargon also known as the ' RAL ' ) .
The progress report of 30 June 2001 , requested by the Commission in the framework of the previous budgetary procedure , is certainly useful in this connection .
However , I should like to point out that the vast increase in payment appropriations is not a cure-all for RAL absorption .
This is evident from the extent of the balances over the past budget years which were repaid to the Member States .
On the one hand , there will still be commitments outstanding as a logical extension of the split appropriations , while , on the other hand , the improved follow-up of the commitment appropriations , notably by an opt-out policy , is also an effective means of absorbing potentially abnormal RALs .
As to the extent of payment appropriations in the draft budget , the Council has expressed a preference for limited and controlled growth .
Indeed , the Council is striving to include payment appropriations which correspond to the actual implementation options .
In this way , we prevent the individual European taxpayers from being faced with too heavy a burden .
I have given you a brief outline of the points which will undoubtedly be the topic of discussion over the next couple of weeks .
The seriousness with which the Commission and the two arms of the budgetary authority are treating the start of this new budgetary procedure is obvious to me , and a source of real pleasure to me .
It is my wish for the budgetary discussions , after you have cast your votes in a couple of days , to be continued in the same spirit and , if possible , for agreement to be reached as early as November about a budget of the European Communities for the 2002 budget year which will provide us with the resources to meet the priorities and challenges which the European Union will be facing shortly .
Mr President , honourable Members , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , planning the Budget for next year demands flexibility and provision for the unforeseen .
Flexibility and provision for a rapid and appropriate response to new financial demands on the European Union and on a common European policy .
The current year has indeed shown what demands can be made on a budget , demands that cannot be planned for or envisaged in advance .
We had the BSE crisis and foot-and-mouth disease , we now have the new Global Health Fund project that has come into being this year , greater demands are being made on our humanitarian aid , not only in Afghanistan , but also because of the escalating situation in the Middle East ; Palestine 's dependency on external aid , including from Europe , has continually increased .
The EU 's budget quite clearly needs the capacity to respond to crises and to surmount them , and we have - I believe - managed in the past two years to draft the Budget so as to cope with this demand .
I am optimistic that we will manage it for next year too .
At this point , I would like , on behalf of the Commission , to thank the rapporteurs for the 2002 Budget , first of all you , Mr Costa Neves , but also Mrs Buitenweg , Mr Seppänen and of course the entire Committee on Budgets for the work you have put in .
Anyone who has seen the mountains of amendments that the Committee on Budgets again had to get to grips with this year , will know what is meant by hard committee work .
There is , though , a great deal of work ahead of us , and we have a long way to go .
Flexibility and willingness to compromise are required of us all .
Of course , I know that the Belgian Presidency of the Council is endeavouring to pass a good EU Budget , which will fulfil all requirements .
I thank you , Mr Vande Lanotte , for re-emphasising in your speech this aspect - the willingness to negotiate - for I believe that this demand must also be addressed to the Council , that flexibility is necessary in negotiations and that what is said in the various sittings must not be merely a repetition of what was decided by governments in the capitals .
It is just at the point where the Committee on Budgets does not want to respond to increased responsibility and to greater demands with an expanding budget , that our proceedings need flexibility .
I intend now to discuss individual aspects of the European Budget , beginning with agriculture .
The Commission 's preliminary draft for the budget , which we presented at the end of May , planned for a EUR 1 billion reserve to facilitate a response to the demands of the BSE crisis and foot-and-mouth disease .
We have now moved on a bit , and the Commission will next week be adopting the letter of amendment .
Developments in the livestock sector have turned out , thank God , to be less dramatic than had at first been feared .
We have indeed managed to put aside EUR 400 million from the Budget in this year already for the costs of foot-and-mouth disease .
The consequence of this will be that we have to plan for less of an increase for foot-and-mouth in the Amending Budget for next year than had at first been feared .
This means that current developments make it possible for us to release the reserve we had proposed in May .
There are , however , developments in some areas of the agricultural sector that still give cause for concern from the budgetary point of view .
The key word here is ' wine ' .
Here , there is a production surplus whose constant increase is reflected in the financial results .
Expenditure in this field has , in the meantime , doubled in two years , with the natural consequence that we have to observe carefully what steps can be taken to stem this overproduction and slow down the growth in the agricultural budget .
The letter of amendment that we will be laying before you concludes by saying that we can release the reserve and that we require less expenditure on agriculture than our calculations had originally provided for , so that a fairly substantial margin remains .
At this point , I must however state quite clearly that agriculture ministers must not take this margin to mean that there is plenty of scope for every kind of shiny new expenditure package ; this year has shown how quickly such a margin can be required for things which could not have been planned for .
So , in my judgment , caution demands that we keep this margin in this area .
I might mention in passing that I welcome the fact that the Committee on Budget 's various amendments and resolutions show its desire to look into the agricultural sector more deeply , including with regard to the Midterm Review , which is due next year .
We do have an agricultural aid programme for the acceding countries , which I would now like to mention briefly , namely the SAPARD pre-accession instrument .
I share your absolute dissatisfaction with this programme not yet having , so to speak ' arrived ' , in the sense of aid payments being able to be made from it for agriculture , and with our still being at this preliminary stage in which the appropriate administrative structures are being set up .
Of course it is important to have absolute control , and certainty that nothing will go wrong , but if this leads to the other extreme of the programme not working at all , then that is not what its inventor had in mind either .
You have now , in this Parliament , come to the logical conclusion and said that a new stage in the programme is to be set up , in particular to finance information for the agricultural sector about the EU 's future agricultural policy .
I must now , despite this , ask you to please reconsider this proposal , which would mean that we would have to create a new legal basis for this programme .
All of SAPARD 's components would have to be reprogrammed , with even greater delays as a consequence .
That cannot be what you meant .
Hence my plea to you to negotiate it again with great precision , in order to find room in SAPARD for your demand for more information along the lines of the LEADER programme to be made available for rural areas .
On this point I must also address a few words to the Council : In your first reading of the preliminary draft of the Budget , you made substantial cuts in the means of payment for the pre-accession aid packages .
It is of course contradictory to say on the one hand that we want better implementation and a reduced backlog of payments , and on the other to cut funds so drastically .
So I must ask you to keep an open mind on the Commission 's reasoning .
Of course we have to produce evidence that next year we will need the items we have proposed , but that we shall surely do .
Coming to the topic of enlargement , I , of course , have to mention the ' frontier regions ' , as Mr Costa Neves , the rapporteur , has already done .
Of course we all know that the frontier regions , the regions that are at present situated on the borders of the European Union , will profit in the long term from the enlargement of the EU , because they will at last be frontier regions no longer .
Despite this , we also know , on the other hand , that there are problems with adjustment .
In order to absorb the impact of these , or , to put it the other way around , to work towards making use of the opportunities that will be available , the Commission has proposed this programme for the frontier regions .
The Budget provides for an additional EUR 150 million to be made available for transport infrastructure measures in the frontier regions and for a further EUR 15 million for cooperation with small and medium-sized enterprises , an additional EUR 20 million from the INTERREG programme and EUR 10 million more from the youth programme , in order to promote this programme for school students ' exchanges and so on in the perspective of enlargement .
Last year , Parliament had adopted , for the 2001 Budget , the new pilot project " Cooperation with small and medium-sized enterprises in the frontier regions with a view to enlargement " .
I have to say , with the benefit of hindsight , that this was an excellent idea of Parliament 's , as a great deal can now be done with this programme .
I welcome Parliament 's statement that this project should continue to be supported , and I , of course , follow with interest , Parliament 's endeavours to activate supplementary funds for this area as a whole .
Mounting demands on European policy , of course , also mean that greater demands are made on personnel and also on the Commission 's staff .
For years , the Commission has faced ever-increasing tasks which have had to be dealt with without additional human resources .
Last year , this brought us to the conclusion that we would have to take stock by analysing our workload .
As a result of this , we presented a claim for 717 new posts .
The budgetary authority approved 400 additional posts for the Commission last year .
Let me take this as an opportunity to thank you again for this on behalf of the Commission .
We also ask for approval of the second tranche of 317 posts , however .
I would again point out that some departments are really not lavishly provided for .
To take only one example , that of Mr Vitorino 's Justice and Home Affairs Directorate-General .
It has 189 established posts .
The temporary posts bring the total to 215 .
The Scoreboard for more intensive cooperation in judicial matters decided on in Tampere , is really not a bad thing .
Indeed , it is , of course , justified .
The post-11 September situation has now shown that it is in the field of more intensive judicial cooperation that joint action is required .
Not enough has yet been done about this at European level .
We must , therefore , make the effort to move forward in this area , which means , of course , a need for staff to work in this field .
I wish to thank you for your support for the Commission 's reforms as a whole , which you have reiterated here today .
You have now tabled various amendments which you will probably adopt on Thursday , and the Commission , in consequence , will be asked for further reports , for example on the delayed presentation of the Budget .
We will of course do all in our power to satisfy this demand for reports .
I must also point out that the Commission has responsibilities as an executive , and so it is also necessary to find a balance .
I would , though , like to thank Mr Costa Neves for reiterating your offer of negotiations .
Ladies and gentlemen , the ability to use budgetary policy to react to crises and intercept the unexpected is of course particularly necessary in the field of foreign policy .
This was true when we had to work together to find the wherewithal for the reconstruction of Kosovo and incorporate it into the 2000 Budget .
Together , we managed it .
It was the case last year , when additional funds for Serbia had to be added to the 2001 Budget .
As I have already mentioned , we are now in a situation in which a contribution is to be made from the European Budget to the Global Health Fund .
We are talking in terms of EUR 60 million for this .
We will be presenting to Parliament the relevant proposal for a transfer , in order to use the fisheries reserve , which is still in this Budget , for this purpose among others .
When we sat together in our three-way talks last week , you supported making EUR 25 million from the emergency humanitarian aid reserve available for Afghanistan , EUR 7.5 million for Palestine and EUR 7.5 million for the Caucasus region .
That shows what current demands are .
I would like to return to one point in particular , which you , Mr President-in-office of the Council , mentioned : I refer to the funds for the common foreign and security policy .
Public opinion sometimes misunderstands this and takes it to mean that this is the only budget line where foreign policy is concerned .
On the contrary , of course other measures are of a foreign policy nature , that is quite clear .
We have , though , this specific line for the common foreign and security policy .
The Commission has proposed EUR 35 million for it .
Parliament proposed its reduction by EUR 14 million .
Now we have to give more careful consideration to precisely why .
Parliament does not , indeed , believe this to be an unimportant area ; it is far more a question of how decisions are reached , of whether it is actually right that the Council should have sole discretion as to how the funds are applied .
We note - I note in my capacity as Commissioner for the Budget - that this principle , according to which the Council decides on the use to which funds are put and the Commission then writes the cheques out , does not work well , as there has to date been under-utilisation in this area , even though everybody knows what demands are made .
I believe we have to talk about the fundamentals of how future finance for the common foreign and security policy is to be secured , quite independently of the 2002 Budget .
In my judgment , it is not tolerable that the Council attempts to appropriate ever more operational duties in this area ; we need , on the contrary , a common foreign and security policy that will also provide the necessary financial security .
There are a whole lot of related issues to be sorted out .
We must also consider the people 's expectations in this area when we really thoroughly discuss , investigate and then define , what we want to do in future .
This demands a common response and , I believe , in many respects a stronger Community response .
To return to the Budget for 2002 : the Commission had until now envisaged a EUR 125 million reserve for the fisheries agreement with Morocco .
That fisheries agreement has now finally collapsed .
In the letter of amendment that the Commission will be discussing next week and then presenting to you in due time , this reserve is released .
The funds will be used in part for other fisheries agreements , which have been extended .
A large amount will become available .
I would say it would be a mistake to budget all these additional funds which have become available from the reserve , at this early stage .
I know we are going to need this money .
It is not a matter of saving this money but - and I urge this - not already allocating it all .
Why do I urge this ?
Let me now make only one point : battle is at present being waged in Afghanistan against international terrorism , and the European Union is keeping humanitarian aid in readiness for the civilian population , and the amounts involved are not small .
The European Union will be providing a total of over EUR 310 million .
Let me also , however , point out that the USA was a great donor of funds for humanitarian aid in Afghanistan even before 11 September .
Now , though , we should already be thinking of what the period after this conflict will mean for the region and for the country of Afghanistan , and it is quite clear to me that this means the post-Taliban era in Afghanistan .
I think we can all agree that the European Union will then also have an obligation and a responsibility to build up a democratic society , a society that has regard for human rights and makes it possible to live with human dignity .
In this Budget , we should make provision in such a way as to enable us to meet this obligation financially as in other ways .
Looking back over two years as Budget Commissioner and on two years of Budget discussions with Parliament and the Council , I can truly say that the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission have together managed to meet well the demands made on the European Budget , and I am very optimistic that we will achieve this again for 2002 .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the general rapporteur for the Committee on Budgets , Mr Costa Neves , for his efforts to reconcile the different interests in this House .
Mr President , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy would like to remind you that we are at the first reading stage , which , although this seems obvious at first sight , makes it clear that many of the balances and agreements we must achieve will be of a general nature and will have repercussions upon the final appropriations under this heading .
In this context , I would like to give a vote of confidence to the general rapporteur for the Committee on Budgets , as long as he , of course , takes on board to the greatest extent possible the priorities set out by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , which are balanced , given that they seek an equitable distribution between different geographical areas , and aim to respond to the European Union ' s various commitments on the international stage .
The Commissioner referred to the finely balanced measures we have had to take in the last few years : Commissioner , we cannot continue in such an unmethodical fashion , we cannot continue to finance new priorities with the same resources .
I understand that this is not an exercise in revising financial perspectives , but we cannot continually take on new priorities to the detriment of the commitments that the European Union has already made .
We will have to look for formulae that are more imaginative and more creative in this area .
Mr President , the Committee on Foreign Affairs has given its opinion : we want to strengthen the Commission ' s administrative reform policy , particularly with regard to the decentralised management of external aid .
With regard to the proposals made by Commissioner Patten , the Committee on Foreign Affairs has expressed its strong support on this matter .
In conclusion , the Committee on Foreign Affairs gives its support and vote of confidence to the general rapporteur from the Committee on Budgets , Mr Costa Neves , we affectionately urge him to pay very close attention to the objectives that the Committee on Foreign Affairs has set out in its opinion for this 2002 budget .
.
On behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I would also like to offer my congratulations to Mr Costa Neves for guiding us so far and for the very good job that he has done .
I have been asked by my committee to raise a number of points , the main one being the amendment that we are retabling on the Court of Auditors .
As the House will know , the Court of Auditors asked for a number of new staff .
The Council recommended that only five new staff be granted and various positions have been taken on the additional staff requested and the money for them .
The Committee on Budgetary Control decided quite wisely , in my view , that we should take an apolitical stance on this .
We should ask the Court of Auditors to assess the performance of financial control systems in the applicant countries ; improve the Court of Auditors ' cooperation with the national audit institutions - which is a requirement of the Treaty of Nice - and establish more detailed specific DAS assessments - again , a requirement of the Treaty of Nice .
We would therefore be fairly apolitical and once those issues had been clarified , we would ask for the money to be released for the other posts .
However , in the Committee on Budgets a completely different amendment was tabled .
It is much more political , and we are very worried about the independence of the Court of Auditors in relation to the requirements set down by the Committee on Budgets , so I do hope that will be considered .
I have also been asked to say a word about implementation .
We have looked at the implementation figures and we will continue to look at them in the future and use them for future amendments to the budget .
You have our full backing on everything you have done in getting better information on implementation for us so far .
We have also looked at tabling amendments .
We have an amendment coming through asking for money to be tied up and asking the Commission to tell us whether an evaluation unit has been set up in DG V.
Finally , we are very concerned about the future of the A-30 lines , or rather how they are going to be spent .
Those are the points that the Committee on Budgetary Control would like to raise .
Mr President , on behalf of my Committee , I would like to emphasise one point , namely the PRINCE programme .
We see it as very important that the information campaign on the euro should be carried on for another half-year , for we find an information deficit here despite great campaigning efforts .
It is particularly marked among small and medium-sized enterprises , and this programme is intended to make good this deficit .
As permanent rapporteur for the agencies , I can say at the present time that the most acute problems have been resolved with the help not only of our colleagues in the Committee on Budgets , but also that of the general rapporteur .
We decided , on the basis of the facts , to consider the agencies individually .
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to say a few things for future reference .
The agencies carry on growing , as they have done for years .
Everyone who works in one seems to have a vested interest in the agencies ' expansion .
To give an example , between 1995 and 2001 , the personnel complement of the agencies increased by 366 % .
We are creating another 99 posts this year alone .
I get the impression that many of the European agencies maintain to some degree a separate existence .
In the Budget procedure , we always have to deal with one demand - they say they need more money .
The consequences of this development are clear to see .
The agencies take up all the scope for other programmes , and at some point the Community ends up having to pay the pension costs as well .
We must make changes here .
No longer must the Budget be adapted to the programmes decided on by the Management Board , but the programmes must fit the resources provided by the Budget .
We need a working audit of the agencies , involving all the actors concerned on a permanent basis . In other words , Parliament 's specialised committees must likewise carry out an evaluation .
We urgently need to examine the question of whether the services provided by the agencies are actually needed and then put to good use .
The Budgetary Control Committee , the Court of Auditors and all the other actors must be involved in helping us get a grip on the whole thing .
Over the coming weeks , I will be attempting to create a structure for this purpose , one which can be put to use in the next Budget procedure .
Mr President , I am going to combine my time as rapporteur for the Committee on Industry and spokesperson for the Socialists on the other institutions .
Firstly , I congratulate both the rapporteurs for successfully completing the mammoth budgetary task , and also the chairman of the committee , Mr Wynn , for getting through the votes in record time .
Speaking on behalf of the Committee on Industry , I am disappointed with the outcomes in this budget because many of the priorities which we highlighted have been totally ignored .
Let me single out three issues . The e-Europe initiative , launched with much fanfare at Lisbon , highlighted how it would increase the competitiveness of European industry ; increase employment opportunities ; and acknowledge that a knowledge society is indisputably a fundamental prerequisite for future economic prosperity .
The extension of e-Europe to the applicant countries was again much heralded at Stockholm , but we are proposing not to extend this programme .
I would like to remind everybody that the Council and Parliament confirmed e-Europe as a priority .
By not supporting it we are undermining one of Europe 's priority programmes and this will be to the detriment of the applicant countries .
We need to ensure , as the rapporteur stated , that rhetoric is matched by action , that the EU citizen is not left to ponder .
We have all these programmes ; they are acclaimed ; and then they seem to dissipate into thin air !
This applies equally to my second point on Save .
This has been a parliamentary priority for a number of years .
Here we have a proposal to decrease the funding for the coming year .
An environmentally-friendly European energy policy is at the top of most people 's agendas and it is important that Europe leads the way in our Kyoto obligations .
Therefore , to reduce programmes that promote sustainable energy consumption and impact on climate protection is extremely short-sighted .
The third area in which the Committee on Industry will be retabling amendments is the decommissioning of weapons of mass destruction , and waste management . These are key to promoting a safer world .
This is even more critical in the light of the recent atrocities of 11 September and to ensure that states have a proper strategy for dismantling chemical weapons so that there are no opportunities for these weapons to fall into the wrong hands .
I would urge the rapporteur to rethink and support these amendments .
Moving on to the other institutions , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Buitenweg , for the open and inclusive approach she adopted in arriving at the budget for the other institutions .
This year , as she said , Heading 5 was under tremendous pressure for a number of reasons , including the preparation for the forthcoming enlargement .
My group 's efforts have been to continue to improve effectiveness , efficiency and transparency .
As far as Parliament is concerned , these are not just hollow words , but words of substance .
We have demonstrated our commitment to improving efficiency by staying under Parliament 's 20 % self-imposed ceiling , whilst absorbing the costs of preparations for enlargement of some EUR 18 million .
However , this will be extremely difficult in the coming years .
I would urge the Council to address this , so that the costs associated with the proposed enlargement are dealt with before we commence the budgetary procedure next year .
Furthermore , I welcome the three-year enlargement plan that the Bureau has approved .
At this stage , it is fairly sketchy and perhaps conservative - with a small ' c ' - and not very radical .
This is a shame because enlargement offers a real opportunity to make Parliament more dynamic in its operation .
Some of the ideas outlined in this plan need to be developed further and we need to have a broader view of how things are done .
Yesterday we heard in plenary that Parliament was unable to look at the money laundering proposals , which were agreed by the Council , for another three weeks because of the need for translation into 11 languages .
This is extremely frustrating for everybody concerned , but what will this mean when we have 10 more languages ?
We must address this issue because it causes us fundamental problems in terms of the image of Parliament . It creates negative perceptions in the minds of European citizens , in that the European Parliament is seen as undynamic and unresponsive .
Whilst we are on the subject of radical thinking , I would like to make some suggestions to the Council to improve their own efficiency .
The under-utilisation of Parliament 's buildings , for instance .
We have buildings in Brussels which are almost empty for one week every month , and a building in Strasbourg which is hardly used and remains empty for three weeks a month .
As the Council is consistently pointing out waste , here is an offer it cannot refuse .
It could share and make full use of our buildings by holding its meetings in our buildings .
I hope that will also benefit transparency in the way it works .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Mr President , we on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy this year can generally welcome the progress that has been made so far in formulating the budget for next year .
Looking back historically , we are doing a better job every year and this is certainly due partly to the work done by the rapporteurs .
Things are going along much more smoothly than they were , despite the fact that we are considerably squeezed for money because of external demands upon our budget .
Nevertheless , I am pleased to see that the Committee on Budgets has supported the view of Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy in restoring some of the budget lines which we are particularly concerned with , at least to the level of the PDB .
Also , it is worth mentioning that we look with approval upon the work that was done in terms of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Budgets with regard to the tobacco subsidies .
They urge the Council to take a good look at this .
We urge the Commission to take a good look at this .
We know something must be done .
I am pleased that the Committee on Budgets acknowledges this .
Its proposals for a gradual reduction over a period of time of that subsidy make sense , and it is time the Council and the Commission started talking about this issue .
One particular success is on the issue of the budget line associated with the approval of orphan drugs by the medicines agency .
I am very pleased the Committee on Budgets has accepted our point of view and I hope the Commission does as well .
This has been a very successful budget line since created last year together with the SAB procedure .
We were concerned about what the Council wanted to do in terms of the massive cut it demanded in that line , which was completely unjustified .
We are pleased about the restoration to an appropriate level of that budget line and we hope the Commission will also defend that point of view to the Council .
This is a budget line which does genuinely good work for the people of Europe and brings real and genuine benefits and it must be protected .
Finally , I would say that we have some concerns about the way in which the agencies have been handled .
I can fully understand why money must go into the reserve and I can fully understand why there is increasing concern about the way the agencies operate , but we need to give them the appropriate resources to do their job and that particularly applies in the case of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Agriculture Committee wishes to address the Council and express its fundamental opposition to the cuts across the board that the Council is always making .
We see this , in political terms , as a rather unimaginative way of handling Budget guidelines .
We are working on the assumption that the letter of amendment will be the right basis on which to adjust individual areas in preparation for second reading .
Apart from that , we hold to our demand for agricultural expenditure to be made more flexible in future by enabling the transfer of funds from the mandatory to the discretionary division .
We know how complicated that is and how many changes have to be made , but we will carry on demanding this whenever budgets are laid before us , until our demands have been met .
The Commission 's proposal on the introduction of a reserve meets with our explicit support .
That is needed .
We are sure that we do not have to explain why it is necessary .
We also assume that the Commission will act responsibly if it becomes necessary to make use of it .
Our colleagues on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy have just spoken about tobacco .
We too on the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have had to return to the tobacco issue .
We are most dissatisfied with the inadequate use being made of money from the Tobacco Research Fund .
On the Agriculture Committee , we , too , are fed up with forever flogging a dead horse where this subject is concerned .
We have , on the one hand , the demand for preventative health education , and , on the other , the need to promote tobacco growing .
We must , though , face reality .
For as long as we have farmers who grow tobacco - and they are not the richest - and have no alternative crop to offer them , we cannot help them .
This sector therefore needs possible alternatives not only to be examined , but also offered .
Most of all , I would like to say something more about SAPARD : we are glad that the appropriations have been increased , but , like the Commissioner , we are critical of the way the Council has cut by EUR 100 million the amount of funds SAPARD is authorised to pay out .
This is not on !
It is absolutely not on !
Please , Commissioner , let there be no fear of a new implementation along the lines of LEADER .
Take your courage in both hands !
Let me take this opportunity to thank the general rapporteur for working so well with me and my colleagues on the Agriculture Committee .
Mr President , to begin with , I should like to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves , for offering such close and constructive cooperation .
That does not mean that he was able to agree on all counts as far as the fisheries budget is concerned , but he listened carefully to everything we had to say and created , in any event , a basis for further collaboration , which we found useful .
The huge problems in the fisheries sector and the partial failure of the common fisheries policy have left their mark on the fisheries budget .
Clearly , the multi-annual orientation programme and the unilateral closure of areas have not proved successful .
Failure to conclude a new fisheries agreement with Morocco has led to an explosive situation along the Spanish and Portuguese coasts , an area which is already facing major social problems in connection with illegal immigration .
It is for that reason that the Committee on Fisheries has asked for nearly EUR 200 million in order to be able to tackle these problems .
The rapporteur suggests including a token entry first and challenging the Council to meet the pledges made in Nice .
The Committee on Fisheries endorses this view .
However , the Committee on Fisheries is disappointed by the fact that the budget proposal for more money for quota control , which was desperately needed , has been watered down by a liberal amendment in the Committee on Budgets , while the original amendment did receive wide support from all groups in the Committee on Fisheries with this proposal .
In the capacity as shadow rapporteur of the PPE-DE Group for the agricultural budget , I note that , of the original request for EUR 1 billion extra for food safety and animal disease control , eventually 580 million was left over , but what we say is : better some of a pudding than none of a pie .
In actual fact , we also regret to some extent the Commission ' s failure to adhere to the original request for EUR 1 billion extra .
Fortunately , the PPE-DE position , that more money must be earmarked for animal disease control , has met with approval .
In general , we are of the opinion that , in order to restore consumer confidence , it is vital to bring the European markets , including those for beef , back to normal .
As a final point , I have to say that I am delighted with the fact that , with regard to foreign policy , the PPE-DE Group will be tabling an amendment for more attention for Kyrgyzstan , Uzbekistan and Tadjikistan , and I should also like to recommend this amendment warmly for further discussions .
Mr President , the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on behalf of whom I am speaking , put forward ten or so amendments to the draft budget with regard to the four Community initiatives ( URBAN , INTERREG , EQUAL and LEADER ) , for safety and sustainability in transport and tourism .
Despite the current circumstances following the tragic events of 11 September , tourism will soon be the largest service industry in the European Union .
The World Tourism Organisation anticipates a doubling in the number of tourist arrivals up to a figure of approximately 720 million per year by the year 2020 .
The 9 million people who already work in the tourism industry will be joined by a further 2 to 3.5 million between now and 2010 , to reach 12.5 million people employed .
The Committee on Budgets , however , rejected our proposals .
Fortunately , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has once again been able to put forward an amendment to this House so that , at European level , resources are assigned to stimulate the promotion , monitoring and evaluation of a tourism policy that is both ecological and socially sustainable .
I trust that the majority of my fellow Members here will have the sensitivity necessary to support this reaffirmed proposal with their vote .
Mr President , the budget of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport contains three important new features :
Firstly , a separate appropriation of EUR 12.6 million is being proposed for the implementation of the elearning initiative .
It is justified because IT studies have a key place in the EU ' s strategy .
A considerable increase in the appropriation for IT teaching would also be wise , as if it is to be financed merely from the Socrates , YOUTH and Culture 2000 programmes this might put the implementation of the fundamental aims of these programmes in jeopardy .
We have to remember that information technology is a tool , not an absolute value .
The second new feature is connected with sport , which still does not have a legal basis in the Union .
Sport is mentioned , however , in the Treaty of Amsterdam , and the conclusions of the Nice Summit stressed its social importance .
The Committee on Budgets has approved a proposal for a EUR 5 million appropriation for sports club work to prevent exclusion amongst youth .
The third new matter in our Committee ' s budget is the EUR 1 million appropriation for establishing a centre for monitoring cultural co-operation .
In my opinion , the co-ordination of cultural co-operation could be practised in association with the Council of Europe , which has much experience in the field .
Chapter A-30 again caused problems .
I am very disappointed with the work of the Committee on Budgets in item A-3042 , which concerns the funding of European cultural organisations .
We in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport had done a lot of work in connection with this point .
We took the Commission ' s report on the funding of organisations into account as well as the recommendations of the Committee on Budgets ' working party .
We , above all , tried to assess how money might be used in the best possible way from the point of view of European culture .
I cannot accept that the Committee on Budgets has interfered with a proposal that required the expertise of a special committee the way it has .
I warmly support the proposal contained in the report drafted by Mr Costa Neves for a legal basis and proper rules to apply to A-30 .
Parliament cannot act as if it were in a ' grab as grab can ' type of wrestling contest , in which the most unscrupulous party of all is the victor .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Vande Lanotte , I would like to draw your attention to the three amendments tabled by Parliament ' s Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
The aim of these amendments is to enhance the information given to citizens and to stimulate the debate on issues relating to the future of the European Union , pursuant to Declaration 23 of the Treaty of Nice .
The aim of Amendment No 223 is to restore the commitment appropriations granted to the Prince-Programme , as proposed by the Commission in its preliminary draft budget .
The increase in these appropriations has , in fact , been reduced by the Council .
We feel it is inconceivable not to support strong investment to provide more information for the public on the euro , enlargement , the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and , of course , on measures in the area of justice and home affairs .
All these subjects are extremely topical .
I would also like to reiterate that we are already involved in a period of reflection and consultation on the future of the European Union .
We also believe that it would be counter-productive to enter , as suggested by the Committee on Budgets , a part of these appropriations into a reserve .
We know that using the appropriations entered in the reserve is a much more complicated procedure , and we see no reason why the Commission ' s room for manoeuvre should be hampered in this area .
I would add that , in any case , monitoring is undertaken by Parliament by means of its presence within the inter-institutional working party on general and specific information .
Lastly , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has also expressed its support for maintaining , and even increasing the financial support given to the European Movement .
We know that this Movement ' s actions are effective , and it would be surprising if the European Union withdraws its support for the European Movement at a time when we need , more than ever , to encourage dialogue with the citizens .
Furthermore , all Member States should support European Union day , which is organised for 9 May , as this would greatly contribute to developing the rapport with the public that is severely lacking .
Mr President , since the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , both the powers of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities and , in particular , European Union policies that promote equality of the sexes , in which particular emphasis is given to the Community programme for equal opportunities as a fundamentally important instrument in the struggle for equality , have been strengthened , as have the Daphne programme against domestic violence , and the Equal programme to encourage the incorporation of women into the labour market and compliance with the employment objectives of the Lisbon Summit , to name but a few .
Social exclusion is another concern of the Committee on Women ' s Rights , given that we are unfortunately witnessing the phenomenon of the ' feminisation of poverty ' .
In order to achieve these priority objectives , we have put forward a series of amendments to the budget , which have been well received , and I would like to give special thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves , for his support in obtaining a majority in the Committee on Budgets .
A small proportion has been rejected , because it was already included in other budget lines : information actions in the common agricultural policy ; methods to combat exclusion ; the information society ; the fight against poverty and the illnesses that arise as a result of it : malaria , tuberculosis , AIDS ; care in the field of health and welfare ; consolidation of democracy and human rights , etc .
Aid for women ' s organisations that work for the promotion of women in the European Union should also be pointed out , not only the women ' s lobby , but also other organisations that monitor the respect for pluralism in our society .
We cannot affirm that one sole organisation represents all of Europe ' s women .
This action is therefore intended to promote justice and recognition for many other European organisations that have been working towards the equality of the sexes for a long time now , which also have a right to receive financial aid from the European Union .
The Committee on Women ' s Rights is therefore very pleased that the rapporteur and the Committee on Budgets has accepted its proposals .
Mr President , I apologise to the rapporteurs that I was not able to be here at the beginning of the debate , but I would wager a euro that nobody has yet touched on the subject that I will raise on behalf of the Committee on Petitions .
Deep in the Buitenweg report is Amendment No 2022 on Budget Line 250 and this makes a new proposal to allow in certain circumstances , individual expenses to be paid to particular petitioners if they feel it appropriate to come to Parliament to put their case .
I want to thank the rapporteur for accepting this report and the committee for passing it .
Parliaments , you know , have various responsibilities .
They decide who is to be the government , of course , that is not a responsibility of this Parliament .
They decide budgets , but you know , we have only partial budgetary powers .
We have no powers over taxation , we have no powers over 50 % of the expenditure more or less devoted to agriculture .
Parliaments decide legislation : that is a power we have to share with the Council of Ministers and we have no powers of legislative initiative .
But parliaments also have a responsibility to protect the rights of the individual citizens in dealing with the bureaucracy and that is a responsibility that we discharge in this Parliament through the work of the Committee on Petitions and the work of the Ombudsman .
I would say to Parliament this afternoon that the money spent on petitions and the EUR 3 million that we make available to the Office of the Ombudsman is money that is extremely well spent .
It works out at less than EUR 0.1 per person per annum , so it cannot be said to be a great deal of money , but it is money that is being spent on real European democracy and we want to ensure that we keep that up and that we see that we do more in future years .
Mr President , I shall concentrate in particular upon the remarks on the ECSC ' s operating budget , in which context I shall talk about the report issued by Mr Seppänen on behalf of the Committee on Budgets .
We are pleased about the role played by the ECSC as a pioneer in the European integration process and about the way in which the ECSC has made a positive contribution to peace in Europe .
We note that the ECSC was financed by means of revenue of a fiscal nature which facilitated the development of economic and social intervention measures associated with sectoral industrial policies .
At present , the coal and steel sector employs 357 000 workers and , as we enlarge the EU by means of the candidate countries , enlargement will mean that coal production in the EU will be doubled and that steel production will be increased by a third .
We can note with pride that , thanks to the ECSC , something was constructed and further developed that led to the European Union as we know it today .
The Committee has approved the Commission ' s draft operating budget of EUR 151.8 million in 2002 , and it is of course on 23 July 2002 that the ECSC Treaty expires .
We might have wished that , when it came to both operations and research , there had been a little more money for future energy needs relating to clean coal technologies , and we call upon the Commission to take account of this in the other programmes .
Mr President , I would like to put a question to you .
I do not understand why , when I am the official draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , when I prepared the amendments tabled by my Committee , when I arranged the vote on these in my Committee , when I defended them , rather vigorously at times , in the Committee on Budgets - where , in most cases , I also managed to obtain the approval of my fellow Members - why , therefore , my name is not on the list of draftsmen due to speak .
I , therefore , ask permission to take the floor now , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms .
Mr Deprez , your name does not appear on the official list of Members allowed to present committee opinions and I am , therefore , unable to give you the floor at this time .
I shall therefore request permission to take the floor now , Mr President .
Mr Deprez , the list of speakers is produced from the official requests presented by the various committees on behalf of which one can speak .
Since your name is not on the official list and as I see no reason for this to be changed , I shall give you the floor later , when you do have the right to make a speech .
President , our spokesman will be speaking for our Group later , but I also have a few comments to make at this stage .
As other speakers have already done , I should like to congratulate our two main rapporteurs , Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg .
It is never an easy job to steer something through this House , as I know , and I think that they should be warmly applauded .
With the Commission budget this year , we have a proposal in front of us which , at 1.06 % of GDP , is one of lowest budgets we have seen proposed in this House and therefore well below the ceiling as foreseen in the Financial Perspective , but I guess that with enlargement on its way , the Financial Perspective could well be tested before we reach the end of 2006 .
In referring to the Costa Neves Report , I should like , first of all , to congratulate the rapporteur on having focused on the progress report , on what had been done in terms of following up on the Joint Council / Parliament Declaration at the end of last year which has shown its worth in our budgetary procedure .
It may well be a useful idea to think of continuing this on an annual basis , because where we have gained is looking at the efficiency and effectiveness of the operations of the European institutions , and this for us in Parliament is a point of major importance which I shall come back to at the end of my speech .
I should like to raise a few points on the particular matters of the Commission budget where we would , as a group , be looking for value for money - a tried and tested position with us .
Firstly , in terms of agriculture : we do not believe in having a reserve - we already have some money which has already been made available and a letter of amendment on its way , and I feel that it is quite sufficient .
But we think there should be an enquiry into the management of foot-and-mouth by the Commission and the British authorities , and we will be pushing for that .
Secondly , we believe that in information policy there is a continuing problem : every time we see Commission proposals come through without the interinstitutional working groups , we as a Parliament have to put them back on the information policy lines .
I urge the Commission to make sure that they become a permanent part of your proposals - this will save some effort on our part to ensure that this interinstitutional work is continued .
Thirdly , in terms of the food safety agency - I noted that was raised in the European Council in Ghent - I would remind the President-in-Office ( instead of laughing , he might listen to parliamentarians when they are speaking ) that Parliament 's position is that the money will stay in reserve until we are satisfied about the operations and the location of this agency .
I therefore assume that you will consult Parliament before any final decision is taken .
Fourthly , as regards Afghanistan - and I turn to the Commission again here - there is an amendment down to create a ' pour memoire ' entry for aid to Afghanistan , and we will be asking the Council with Parliament to put this into the budget on second reading because we want to see in our Group that there will be an international alliance to help the reconstruction of Afghanistan once the conflict is over , and initial thinking on this issue is already under way in the United Nations .
Lastly , I would like to refer to the question of the posts which we have put in reserve and we would like to ensure that the conditions for the reserve are met before the posts are released - including the fact that the Commission has the capacity to use the posts during the next year in terms of the vacancies .
There is , however , one more very critical point , and I turn again to the Council of Ministers here .
Rumour has it , Mr President , that the early retirement package which is being negotiated in the Council at the moment is not open to Parliament .
I would like you to confirm in any future remarks that it will be open to us - that is a critical point for our Group as we wish to see it applied across all institutions .
I conclude , Mr President , on a point for our institution .
Yesterday evening , the Bureau decided , in opposition to the resolution of Mr Harbour , to go against the idea of having a linear career structure - I quote paragraph 38 of the Resolution which we voted in this House last November - " urges Parliament 's administration to introduce a linear career structure in parallel to the Commission allowing for easy interinstitutional transfer " .
It is unacceptable that Parliament 's Bureau seems to have gone totally AWOL and decided for itself : under pressure from Parliament 's administration , Parliament 's Bureau has chosen to ignore what this Parliament has voted for .
Therefore , you will have to answer three questions , and I end on this .
Why is the organisation and the function of Parliament so distinctive from the Commission as to require a different career structure ?
Secondly , how can a career structure retaining four different categories meet the objectives of a linear career structure with progression on merit as strongly supported by Parliament ?
And lastly , how can staff mobility between institutions be encouraged if Parliament and the Commission have different career structures ?
The Bureau has to come and justify before this Parliament the decisions it has taken as they are not in line with our resolutions .
Mr President , I do not want to repeat things , so I will stick to just a handful of points - although James Elles has stolen some of the thunder from my speech with his last two points .
I congratulate the rapporteurs .
Their work is never easy .
This year they have done a particularly good job under difficult circumstances .
I welcome the President-in-Office 's statement that at the next conciliation he hopes we can get an agreement with the Council .
I hope so too because on 20 July , at the last conciliation , we agreed virtually nothing .
There is no point in having conciliation meetings if that is the level we are going to reach .
Hopefully , in November we may get something more positive .
As for the situation regarding the margins , which the President-in-Office also mentioned , there will not be much of a margin left by the time we vote on Thursday .
One of the reasons for that is because , once again , we could not get into any discussions with the Council ; we could not get any agreements with the Council .
I made the point on several occasions in July that the three institutions must seriously discuss the problems of trying to finance categories 3 , 4 and 5 for the future .
The Council cannot ignore these categories as though there were no problems .
At times it seems it is like an ostrich with its head stuck in the sand trying to ignore all the problems around it .
When the Council takes that attitude , we are left talking to the backside , although sometimes we get more sense out of the backside of an ostrich than out of some of the people that we do have to speak to !
That is not a reference to you President-in-Office ! There are times when it is so frustrating trying to get the message through that we waste our time having conciliation meetings .
Hopefully , in November we will get something a lot more concrete .
On the issue of reform , James Elles has just touched on a very significant point .
I was going to refer to the concern that we have about the progress that is not being made , but Parliament has not helped itself with that decision last night by the Bureau .
One has to hope that can be changed rapidly .
Realistically , it is now left with the Council : almost three years have passed since the resignation of the Commission , and we still have not seen the reform that everyone is looking for . The general public , the taxpayers of Europe , are looking for the reform which we promised almost three years ago .
Where are we ?
It is stuck in the Council .
President-in-Office , you are aware , because I have discussed this issue with you , that the message must get through that we need a solution to this as quickly as possible .
Otherwise the whole process will be bogged down in the mire .
Hopefully , Parliament can play its part and unravel last night 's decision and continue on the track of getting a speedy process going so we can get the whole issue sorted out , not just for the Commission but for all the institutions .
I want to turn to the Global Health Fund which we have a budget line and a relatively small amount of money for next year .
As we are all aware , the Commission will be bringing forward proposals to finance that from this year 's budget , taking EUR 60 million from the general budget and EUR 60 million from the EDF .
I need to ask the Commission a question : on the monies from the EDF , once that budget is agreed , it is agreed with the ACP states , so can we be assured that the ACP states have agreed to the use of EUR 60 million for the Global Health Fund ?
Several of my colleagues have asked me that question , and quite frankly , I do not know the answer to it . So if Commissioner Schreyer could reply to that , I would be grateful .
Let me turn to the contentious issue of the A-30 lines .
It seems that whenever we vote on the A-30 lines , we please very few people and displease a lot of people .
I would hope that the situation that we found ourselves in this time will give us the courage for next year to make proposals which envisage a more transparent system .
We are concerned that if we hand the whole process over to the Commission , it will be no better .
The Commission will take the decisions instead of Parliament .
I hope we can get some sort of an agreement within Parliament on how we handle A-30 in the future .
Finally , I want to make a plea to the Council and to repeat what I said in conciliation and at the recent trialogue .
What we need is a working group of the Council and Parliament at a political level to start looking at value for money within the European Union , to look at the institutions , to look at the activities and to make sure that we can persuade the taxpayers that they really are getting value for money .
I hope you will take that on board .
Mr President , firstly my sincere thanks and congratulations go to Mr Costa Neves , Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Seppänen for their excellent work .
At the same time I wish to thank Terence Wynn , as chairman of the Committee on Budgets , who has proved a competent leader in the work of the current year .
The job of general rapporteur is a tough and demanding one , but Mr Costa Neves has managed well and my group supports his policy on the Commission ' s budget .
The budget ' s general lines include cancelling the cut in agricultural expenditure , attending to arrears in payments , and the Commission ' s reform .
The strengthening of the policy on the northern dimension in the budget ' s explanatory statement may also be regarded as a positive move .
The handling of the budget is based very much on last year ' s financial statements , which showed a surplus of EUR 11 billion .
Expenditure was EUR 8.5 billion less than anticipated and EUR 6.5 billion of the Structural Funds remained unspent .
For that reason , we now have to pay special attention to improving administration and not producing such large estimates for expenditure .
Otherwise , the bottom will fall out of budget policy altogether .
One particular focus in the budget is the reduction in payment arrears .
At present they stand at more than EUR 60 billion .
My group supports this goal .
It also supports the reform of the Commission , which is one of Parliament ' s most urgent priorities .
It will increase efficiency and the importance of personal responsibility .
It is being proposed that a part of the appropriations should be placed in a reserve , so that the Commission may quickly propose a reform of its staff regulations and clarify its ideas on the early retirement scheme .
Heading 4 is difficult .
The Commission and the Council are proposing EUR 125 million for the Moroccan fishing agreement , although this agreement is not forthcoming .
This is clearly a matter of a concealed reserve which , indeed , contravenes the Financial Regulation .
It must be dissolved .
As a counterweight , it is being proposed that a flexible instrument should be used to modernise the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets .
This could be partly acceptable .
On the other hand , our group cannot accept the cut of EUR 84 million in the CARDS Programme .
We , as liberals , like participating in joint agreements to carry through the budget in Parliament , but we cannot be party to this idea .
The CARDS Programme has been an undisputed priority with Parliament , and , for that reason , we are hoping for similar cuts in the budget for other programmes where payment appropriations have not been used to the extent they might have been in any case .
Of the small programmes , the most considerable is the A-30 appropriations , which are earmarked as assistance to organisations .
These appropriations take up a totally unreasonable amount of Parliament ' s time in relation to their importance .
For that reason , the whole system should be clarified .
In addition , the way the organisations are selected is very rarely based on objective criteria .
We particularly support Mrs Buitenweg ' s recommendations concerning discipline in Parliament ' s budget , as mentioned in her report .
They remain beneath the ceiling we , ourselves , set , that is to say 20 % of all administrative costs , even though it includes the costs relating to enlargement .
The question of eastward enlargement itself is one that must be dealt with in such a way that Parliament ' s work is not made any harder and that in the future we may congregate in our own united assembly .
Mr President , I , too , would like again to express my thanks to the rapporteurs , and also to the Chairman of the Committee .
If you consider the conflicts that arose from attempts to pass budgets in the past few years , it seems as if greater calm prevails this year , as if the conflicts were not so evident to the public eye .
But it must be recorded that , this year too , the Council is not actually facing up to its responsibilities .
As a component part of the budgetary authority , it has the task of supporting a Budget with real commitment and in a politically explicable way .
Whilst Parliament worked very carefully for a balanced budget , in long debates , discussions and negotiations with most of the interested parties , weighing needs against the duty to budget prudently in the taxpayers ' interests , the Council again merely cut lump sums without any underlying political thought .
At any rate , its political thinking is not clear to us , and the question arises of whether it ever engaged in any .
Problems are needlessly exacerbated by the way the Council acts , for , this year too , the Budget is below the margin , far under 1.27 % of Gross Social Product , despite special tasks , preparations for enlargement and many other problems .
This year , the Council has cut payments by 10 % across the board , something made all the more incomprehensible by the delay in implementing programmes in many areas .
Parliament is now reinstating these figures .
We cannot , on the one hand , build up expectations in areas such as the Structural Fund or overseas aid , but then live up to them only with great hesitation .
This undermines trust in the institutions of the EU .
So the Council must bear its share of responsibility for this if its action is to be approved .
This action is particularly problematic in Category IV , foreign policy .
Whilst the Foreign Ministers and Heads of Government make great speeches about the Common Foreign Policy , the Finance Ministers narrow-mindedly cut the supply of funds , without considering the prestige lost by the EU institutions .
It is far from clear why the instrument of a flexible reserve is not fully available to us this year .
We still have major problems in the Balkans , new tasks await us in Afghanistan and in its neighbouring states and more new tasks await us in the Middle East .
We need a response from the Council too on the way that the EU is losing its capacity for flexible reaction .
The Council must explain how the EU is to continue to be flexible and capable of political action .
We , as a group , are more critical of the A30 lines procedure .
The great number of individual motions - including those from Parliament - has led the two major groups to attempt a solution by dealing with them en bloc .
Our committee would then no longer be able to do any fine-tuning in this area , and we would thus be inadequately performing our monitoring function .
Now Mr Wynn has clearly mentioned that changes are to be made to the Budget process next year .
I hope we will be able to work together to produce an intelligently thought-out procedure which will also enable Parliament to perform its function of monitoring the A30 lines .
We must not lay ourselves open to the accusation that we are engaging in economics for the benefit of special interest groups .
This really is not what we should be doing in the Budget .
No , I do believe there must be a certain amount of self-criticism .
I am perfectly aware of the fact that there is a great deal of pressure on the time available to us , but every individual item in this field in particular must be politically justifiable even to people outside this Parliament .
I would like to sum up and end my speech by referring back to what previous speakers have said and , again , challenging Parliament to push ahead with its own reforms .
Our demands to the Council and the Commission for reform will only be credible if we strive credibly for reform ourselves .
Yesterday evening 's decisions from the Chair did not , I believe , take sufficient account of that .
Mr President , a very strict budget policy has been adopted in the drafting of next year 's budget .
As the GNP for the EU Member States has grown faster than the increase in payment appropriations , the amount the EU budget represents in the figure for combined GNP has shrunk to 1.03 % .
That indicates that next year ' s draft budget will not exhibit any special areas of focus .
The permitted ceiling in the EU budget is 1.27 % of the combined GNP for the Member States .
There will consequently be room in the budget for areas of special focus , but the Council and the Commission do not seem to have the political will or the ability to prepare any such areas .
Examples of them might be employment or healthy food .
The EU political élite no longer even debates the matter of the prevention of unemployment , let alone try to combat it with appropriate policy .
Our group has traditionally stressed the importance of preventing unemployment .
In most cases unemployment is not the fault of the unemployed person him or herself : that person is at the mercy of the economic situation as it happens to be at any one time .
We must have a policy against unemployment .
The political élite and EU officials certainly look after their own interests .
We are to have an early retirement scheme that will generously reward those who no longer , even through retraining , can be made into functional tyres to go on EU wheels .
If there are hundreds of officials no longer needed , that shows just what a bad state EU staff policy is in .
The Commission ' s ability to implement Parliament ' s political decisions is nothing less than wretched .
The gap between the budget that has been decided and the budget implemented by the Commission is always much too wide .
There are no delays in payment when it comes to issues that are important to the Commission , whereas there often are in issues important to the Parliament .
The EU budget is a political document , as it channels money to the EU élite bodies , and now also to the European political parties and for EU propaganda .
That is not the way to make a citizen ' s Europe .
If an illegal war was waged in the bombing of Yugoslavia , assistance for the country ' s reconstruction should not be the object of cuts .
Let us hope that the CARDS vote does not take the large groups by surprise .
Mr President , we note that , for the first time , the Commission ' s preliminary draft budget exceeds the symbolic EUR 100 billion mark and is firmly dominated by crisis spending on agriculture and external commitments .
In this first reading , our group supports many of the choices made by the rapporteur , such as the horizontal amendments , in principle , and particularly when this involves a systematic reduction of the RAL and the desire to prevent further RAL from building up .
As for agriculture , almost all of the appropriations for this sector have been restored , and this can only reassure our farmers , who are greatly in need of these funds .
The package of EUR 180 million approved by the Committee on Budgets in favour of other agricultural interventions also helps , even if we must condemn the obvious lack of appropriations for the emergency fund for veterinary complaints , for the distribution of agricultural products to the less wealthy sectors of the Community and for the setting up of young farmers .
With regard to cross-border regions , it is worthwhile reiterating that these regions already benefit from extensive financial support , and we might well consider whether , in view of their diversity , a unique instrument could be the appropriate response .
As far as internal policies are concerned , the interests of small- and medium-sized businesses are safeguarded , and Parliament can welcome the increase in appropriations that aim to combat violence against women and children , such as paedophilia and misuse of the Internet .
In our view , however , the reduction made by the Council concerning advertising for the euro , and which was increased by Parliament , is sufficient .
This advertising , for which the citizens of our countries pay a high price , seems to be nothing more than propaganda .
Furthermore , the French delegation of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group is opposed to the appropriations included on a multitude of headings in Chapter A 30 , which do nothing more than to encourage federalist presuppositions and these alone , whereas other tendencies are not recognised , in spite of the choice of the electorate .
With regard to Europol , and this thinking also applies to Eurojust , all our energies must of course be channelled into the fight against terrorism in all its guises , as reiterated by our Chairman , Charles Pasqua , who has relentlessly pursued this fight . However , the necessary strengthening of solidarities and police and judicial cooperation between our nations would only serve as a pretext for the rampant communitarisation of policies and actions that fall fully within the remit of national sovereignty .
Furthermore , Europol is funded by national contributions , and , in our view , has no place in this budget .
As far as external actions are concerned , whilst our group appreciates that the appropriations in favour of the MEDA 2002 programme have been doubled , we condemn the drastic reductions in appropriations for the fishing agreement with Morocco .
You cannot achieve good policies from figures alone and this decision by the Committee on Budgets is the worst message that we could send our counterparts in Morocco , particularly during this difficult time when there is an international crisis .
Lastly , Mr President , although we are able to welcome the method used by the rapporteur , we must admit that the excessive level of payment appropriations put forward by the Committee on Budgets will certainly not help to control public spending , as this would represent an additional cost of some FFR 27 billion , even for France alone .
Mr President , Commissioner , the budget must be the perfect instrument for choosing the EU ' s political priorities .
And those choices , I should like to underline once more , must serve the interests of all European citizens .
The on-going debate on the final form to be taken by the Union indicates that there are many different opinions on the subject .
I am alarmed by the fact that this diversity of opinions is not reflected in many European projects .
The fact that a unilateral propaganda megaphone is resounding from Brussels across the Union , and at the citizen ' s expense , concerns me greatly .
Those concerns were recently intensified when the Committee on Budgets rejected an amendment tabled by our Conservative English MEPs to inject impartiality into the Commission ' s information policy .
There is more .
The Commission , as well as the majority in this Parliament , want to press on .
Driven by the intense desire to bring about political Union as soon as possible , the European Commission has submitted a proposal for making contributions to European political parties from community funding .
This is highly peculiar , for those European parties hardly exist .
The citizens are not familiar with them , yet we are expected to sponsor them .
Once again , the EU ' s political diversity is being overlooked .
In this way , only mainstream European parties qualify for European subsidy , while the national political parties - which are closer to the citizen - do not .
Time and again , polls illustrate that the citizens in the Member States are not keen on interference from Brussels .
Promoting European political parties will only further alienate the citizen from European politics .
This is why we warmly recommend our amendment which proposes scrapping these contributions .
The Commission ' s and Parliament ' s urge to stress the distinctive features of the European political parties does not end at the Union ' s borders .
I should like to quote one example by way of illustration . More than EUR 180 million is pledged annually to the Palestinian Authority .
If the schools paid from that budget use inflammatory school books full of racist and anti-Semitic language , the Commission washes its hands of the matter .
Why does the Commission continue to ignore this evil and keep running away from its political responsibility ?
I have to say that the Union is punching above its weight .
The Union should confine itself to those areas of policy where European action has an obvious added value .
The fundamental choice which I , apart from all the positive things , miss in this budget , is that of prioritising the EU ' s core tasks and leaving the other tasks where they belong : with the Member States .
Mr President , this Budget has again committed substantial sums of money to the planned enlargement .
We must not , though , in doing this , forget the 23 frontier regions which will be particularly - even adversely - affected by the accession of these countries .
Being a Member for one of these regions , Carinthia , I am disappointed .
I am sorry that the Commission , the Council , and also the Committee on Budgets are not giving these regions adequate support by allocating sufficient budget resources .
To cut resources for these regions is to play a dangerous game with popular feeling .
If the population of these regions suffers overwhelming disadvantages , as is to be feared , the possibility cannot be excluded that they will vote against enlargement and thereby jeopardise the whole undertaking .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if , today , we are discussing at first reading stage the Community budget for the coming year , we are of course talking about politics coated with figures .
A lot of the European Parliament 's initiatives can be seen in that way .
We want to exert pressure on the Council - those who have spoken before me have pointed out how urgently that is needed - but also on the Commission , because many points have not yet been given the consideration they deserve .
I will push on with the subject on which Mr Ilgenfritz has just finished speaking , that is to say , the frontier regions .
It is just not the case that we have cut something , rather we are of course waiting , Commissioner for a rather feeble communication to be followed up by the presentation of something more from the Commission for the frontier regions , as the Commission has a monopoly on initiative .
You were perfectly well able to propose legal foundations for other things in quick order .
When it comes to the frontier regions , though , you cover yourself with modesty .
But it will not do for you to tell us that you observe Parliament 's intentions with great interest .
The Commission is being called on to produce an initiative .
That is your duty - it is an honourable one - and you cannot evade responsibility for it .
So I hope that we will succeed , here in this Parliament on Thursday , in adopting the inclusion of EUR 10.8 million in the reserve for the PRINCE programme .
I think this will motivate the Commission to present a corresponding proposal on the frontier regions .
The same goes for the issue of the 317 new posts that the Commission has asked for .
I think it high time to synchronise the Budget procedure and the Commission 's legislative process .
We cannot have the situation where we briefly discuss the annual reports on the legislation in preparation if the Budget has , in principle , already been passed .
Here , too , it is a matter of ensuring synchronisation of these two activities .
So it is right to keep these posts , and the resources for them , in reserve .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the same is true of the common foreign and security policy .
It is enough to make me weep when I hear your disquisitions on how we would be making savings here in an important area .
Please bear in mind that we have an interest in dealing with these things as part of the Community Budget , where , to a large degree , they rightly belong .
Correspondingly , of course , cuts must be made in the relevant Budget line .
The Council cannot get itself a savings tin for this and thus develop activities independently of the Commission and Parliament .
There are papers to this effect in the Council .
You may be sure that Parliament will not let that go through .
The same goes for Europol and Eurojust .
I do not propose to go into further detail about this .
I wish to extend heart-felt thanks to the rapporteurs , in particular to Carlos Costa Neves and of course Mrs Buitenweg as well , for making our work together so pleasant .
We got a bit further with the Parliamentary budget in terms of truth and clarity .
It makes little sense to put funds in reserve for the purposes of a law , and then end up spending it on buildings .
It is therefore more right and proper to put it straight in the Budget line for buildings where it will be used at year-end anyway .
We will , though , have to ensure - and this is a lesson from this year 's Budget procedure - that all proposals for our Parliamentary budget are presented by the Bureau as early as May .
A procedure such as today 's , with many important decisions being taken only in September and immediately before the discussions in the Committee on Budgets , is something we cannot accept .
I still have grave concerns about the state of health of our colleagues in the various institutions .
We had requested a report on sickness absence for this year .
Working in certain institutions is indeed very dangerous , as a lot of people in them are off sick .
We will have to get to grips with this and take steps to improve the health of our colleagues in the institutions in question .
In conclusion , I really would like to ask - and Terry Wynn has already mentioned this to great effect - that we should now make progress in November on the issue of cooperation , so that , in December , we can adopt a proper and orderly Budget for 2002 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would also like to start by thanking most sincerely the three rapporteurs , Mrs Buitenweg , Mr Costa Neves and Mr Seppänen , for the work they have put in .
Anyone who follows the process as intensively as the coordinators sometimes do , can see how much work is actually involved .
Hence my special and wholehearted thanks on behalf of all my group .
I am glad that the President-in-Office of the Council is still here , as I think every year 's Budget process must bring with it the opportunity to point out one thing : this Budget process is not complete .
Its ability to contribute notwithstanding , this Parliament is not yet in full and complete possession of the power that citizens ' Parliamentary representatives must have when the budget for the coming year is at issue .
I have hinted that I will say that over and over again .
I will do as Cato the Elder did to the ancient Romans - he was the one who wanted to see Carthage destroyed - but perhaps I will not go quite that far .
I desire only the destruction of an undemocratic process and I will always be reminding you of that .
This Budget process , even as regards the agricultural budget , is complete only when it has got us well and truly on board , and when we have complete responsibility for receipts and outgoings .
I know that I am not meeting with much resistance on your part , but of course we have to develop this further in discussion and argument .
Only then will the citizens of the European Union be able to decide by their votes whether we , this Parliament , have done well or not .
The Council and the Commission must of course have a part in this process in future .
We will accord them high honour for it .
I believe , though , that Parliament , being composed of elected representatives , is the primary partner in dialogue .
We will in future continue to point to the need for further developments here .
We are working on Budget matters in a very restricted framework , which itself is prescribed by the Financial Perspective , to which we adhere , even though we see that additional demands are made on us which were not recognisable as such at the time the Financial Perspective was adopted .
We must adapt to this and facilitate further developments within our Budget framework .
At present that is surely still possible , for we see from the backdraughts at the end of every year that there is still enough air .
So , either there is not proper implementation - a fault which will have to be tackled - or the items really were estimated too high .
Even there it is still possible to let some air out .
I will tell you though , Mr President-in-Office of the Council and Commissioner , that we will in the foreseeable future - in other words by the expiry date of this Financial Perspective at the latest - have to talk about further developments .
When it comes to the further development of the Financial Perspective , we will have to do some thinking about much more intensive and definite ways of meeting new challenges .
Up until then , we will have been letting air out all over the place .
We will be back on the launch pad , and will have to discuss what appropriate terms for this House 's budget and the Budget as a whole might look like .
We will be ready to energetically dispute over further developments with you .
On the road to this destination , we will give the Commission the support it needs when it comes to modernising its administrative procedures .
We will be at its disposal when needed staff are to be taken on .
But , on the contrary , we will also be making quite massive demands .
We will be demanding a great deal so that our programmes , which we cast in numerical form in the Budget , actually come into being in the course of the year .
No longer will we stand by and watch payment arrears being built up .
Progress is being made - I will admit that here and now .
I certainly would not claim that we are where we were two or three years ago .
But despite this progress , there is still a need for a massive amount of further work .
As I have said , we will support you , but we will also make demands .
In the area of individual Budget lines and categories , too , we will hold fast to that which has proved its worth .
The people who rely on us to give support when it is needed , will be able to rely on us in future too .
That starts in Category I , with the farmers who cannot change everything around from one day to another , but need a certain headstart .
These people must also know that there is to be a change in this European Union .
We , as a Parliament , will help to bring it about .
In future , we will take an intensive look at Category I and bring in modernisation .
We will introduce innovation .
If there is no discernible development in these areas , which are in Category VII rather than Category I , but still affect agriculture , if SAPARD is not implemented , we will ask you to take the innovative resources that made LEADER such a success and transpose them so as to provide rapid short-term help .
We will bring this in , and we will also take care that all the security for farmers will not prevent the consumers , too , being certain that produce will be safe for them and not injurious to their health .
At first reading , we will vote to add the necessary resources to the reserve , resources that formerly seemed to be needed in order to properly treat BSE and foot-and-mouth disease .
We are aware that these diseases have recently appeared among sheep and elsewhere .
I do not know whether appropriate steps will be taken on this front .
We will act accordingly in the first instance , until the letter of amendment has been presented and we have an overall view of things .
We will make it our concern to meet and overcome the two great challenges presented in Category II .
The reconstruction of the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets is crucial and of the utmost importance .
People there have relied on being able to pursue their livelihood subject to certain restrictions .
The failure of the Morocco Agreement means that will no longer be possible .
I am now addressing both the Commission and the Council when I say that we found that provision of these EUR 125 million , even though it was clear at the beginning of this year that the money could not be used , hardly a serious way of doing things .
Despite this - or indeed because of it - the fishermen have a claim on help from us , and we will ensure in the Budget process that appropriate action is taken .
The same applies to the frontier regions , which are not always rich and able to help themselves .
I think , for example , of Bavaria ; regions like that are a bit better off .
There are other regions which really need more aid , with which we will be concerned .
What we will be developing in Category III will be oriented towards the future .
Developments following 11 September have shown us that developments are needed in this area .
Europol and Eurojust must be developed further , and national sensitivities must be overcome .
If terrorism is to be combated , all its advantages in the game must be done away with .
We must not stand on old rights .
There is room for progress here .
What we want is to continue with what was begun last year , that is to say , the inclusion of people in society by means of access to the labour market .
We must not simply forget this a year on from it having been a crucial point in Mrs Haug 's Budget report , now that new problems are in the offing .
People also have a right to social inclusion through training in modern information and communications technologies .
This applies not only to cultivated and highly educated people , but also to those who perform very simple work .
Thank you very much for your attention .
I again thank the rapporteurs and hope that , in cooperation with the other two institutions , we will be able to bring this process to a successful conclusion .
( Applause )
Mr President , I too should like to start by thanking the rapporteurs , particularly Mr Costa Neves .
It is , in my experience , the first time that the rapporteur has not tampered with the financial perspectives .
I welcome this , especially since we have ended up with a budget surplus of some EUR 11 billion .
I should like to make some observations concerning the different headings .
I will start with the first heading . I am in favour of the reserve for foot-and-mouth disease .
I do not know what other disasters could be heading in our direction , but I believe that the end is not yet in sight .
I repeat once again , but I have said it so often : in my opinion , the Commission should not stop thinking about possible alternative ways of funding the fight against crises of this type .
We can look into insurance systems .
We can put all kinds of restrictions in place , but I do not think that we can rely on the fact that , in the years to come , there will be an annual surplus of one to two billion in the agricultural budget .
I should particularly like to recommend the amendments on further foot and mouth research , tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to the Council of Ministers .
Can we develop marker vaccines , or new testing methods ?
Can we examine whether a vaccinated animal is still infectious ?
With regard to heading 2 , I endorse the gist of the rapporteur ' s policy designed to achieve an improved expenditure and commitment policy .
I am thus in favour of the amendments which he has tabled in this connection , with only one exception : the increase in payment appropriations is rather extreme in my opinion .
Along with the Commission , I fail to see how this can be spent in a reasonable manner .
Consequently , I will in this connection vote differently from the way in which many of you will probably vote .
Concerning the proposals to use the flexibility instrument in order to restructure the fishing fleet in Spain and Portugal , I am anxiously awaiting the Commission ' s proposals .
On a final note , I think we ought to bolster Eastern Europe .
The SAPARD payment periods must be extended to 2003 .
The fact that the payment bodies have not yet been approved should not put those countries at a disadvantage .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in my capacity as Chairman of the EP delegation for relations with Central Asia , I shall confine myself to a few comments concerning those budget lines .
What are they about ?
In the first instance , they are about aid to the partner countries of Eastern Europe and Central Asia .
Central Asia is an unstable region and has , since the outbreak of the war in Afghanistan , really been at the epicentre of world politics .
We all know that military action on its own will not bring a sustainable solution in the region and that we will need to invest in democratic institutions , in a civil society , in socio-economic and ecological reforms , in the fight against drugs and poverty and in sound education .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that is the key aim of our efforts in Central Asia .
Hence our call to increase that budget line by 5 % for commitment appropriations and by 20 % for payment appropriations .
Secondly , I should like to ask you to give your attention to the aid for victims of radiation , particularly in the Semipalatinsk region in Kazakhstan .
In that region , the Soviet army carried out 607 nuclear arms tests between 1949 and 1999 , the bulk of which were above-ground .
The Soviets obliged the population to come out of their houses and watch the huge nuclear mushroom .
The effects are catastrophic : the incidence of cancer is five times higher than the national average , birth defects are three times more common than the national average , many young men are impotent and twelve-year old girls suffer from breast cancer .
Psychological disorders and suicide are very common , and the average life expectancy is around 52 .
That is the reason why , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we would like to increase the payment appropriations in budget line B7-524 from EUR 45 million to 60 million .
Mr Vande Lanotte , you are visiting our House and attending the sitting . You said you have come to listen , rather than make any comments , and I can understand that .
However , I should nevertheless like to draw your devoted and kind attention to these two important amendments and maybe , upon completion of this 2002 budgetary procedure , we could visit Semipalatinsk together to witness the disastrous effects of the nuclear insanity and to see how European money could be spent in a effective and useful manner .
I would be much obliged .
Mr President , the proposals for 2002 confirm the trend of recent years to reduce the relative value of the Community budget , as can be clearly seen from the fact that the proposed amount is the lowest in the last decade ; only 1.03 % of GDP .
Because of the restrictive guidelines of the Stability Pact and also because of the problems resulting from a major economic slowdown , the Council is continuing to suggest cuts , which creates real problems for the budget ' s implementation .
This year ' s procedure once again betrays true budgetary chaos , with new needs arising and the number of priorities increasing and appropriations becoming smaller and smaller , leading to cutbacks that can only be overridden by revising the Financial Perspective , which is what we have always advocated .
Hence , by subscribing to the Council ' s way of thinking , the European Parliament is doing no more than vainly attempting to disguise these needs , which are undeniable .
This also clearly highlights the absence of clear priorities and a coherent strategy for guaranteeing the proper funding of Community policies in various fields , specifically those of cooperation , agriculture and employment .
This is a concern that increases yet further with the creation of considerable reserves which , in the current context , can only give rise to greater doubts .
With regard to category four , the only chapter of the budget that continues to show a consistent reduction in sums , the lack of appropriations is striking , particularly if we take account of the needs of and the commitments given to the Balkans , to Palestine , to Afghanistan , on the World Health Fund or for the conversion of the fleets operating in Moroccan waters .
The rapporteur ' s idea , which is not new , seeks to cut spending , particularly on the Balkans , in order to be able to increase the remaining aid for cooperation and to force the Council to negotiate .
Let us hope that this does not lead to further cuts in cooperation such as those we saw last year .
We shall see in December what happens .
These are some of the reasons why we do not support this budget .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur as well as the rapporteur for the other institutions .
I think that they have both done an excellent job .
They presented a proposal to the House that is , on the whole , acceptable and which , in any case , the radical Members will support .
I would also like to highlight the participation of the President-in-Office of the Council in the overall debate , to thank him for taking part and who demonstrates a willingness for dialogue .
I hope that his participation will bear fruit at second reading and even that , looking beyond the budget , it will have a positive effect on other very important budgetary issues , particularly the financial regulation .
I would simply like to make two comments on the rapporteur ' s overall strategy .
The first comment concerns the RAL .
I fully support the strategy used to attempt to reduce their levels , which are becoming rather unmanageable , and to send a clear message to the Commission for its help in trying to do this .
I ask myself , and I ask the rapporteur , the following question : how do you know it is right to apply this strategy to a very specific situation , that of Afghanistan ?
The RAL are obviously related to the issue of providing aid to refugees , of providing humanitarian aid .
I therefore wonder whether or not this could be the time , perhaps - and I put this to the rapporteur , although I understand that it may be difficult at this late stage - to put money - and , in doing so , send out a political message - in the reserve for Afghan refugees .
Of course , this should be part of an overall strategy , which is perfectly justified , but I wonder whether or not , for this specific message , we could possibly change the strategy , in any case , at second reading .
My second comment concerns the reform of the Commission .
I strongly deny what James Elles said .
Furthermore , I believe that yesterday ' s Bureau meeting and the Conference of Presidents unanimously supported the proposals from the parliamentary group responsible for this dossier .
I reiterate that this group suggested - or indicated in any case - to the Commission , and in particular to the Vice-President charged with reform , that the path that the Commission recommended was not the correct path and was not the path that Parliament advised .
Furthermore , given the misunderstandings regarding the number of non-assigned posts , I even question whether the previous system , with one commissioner responsible for both budget and staff , was not the best approach , insofar as the overall picture can be seen .
I therefore reiterate that Parliament supports the proposal that runs counter to the proposal outlined by the Vice-President , Mr Kinnock .
Mr President , on behalf of my group and on my own behalf , I would like to thank the general rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves , and the other two rapporteurs , Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Seppänen .

From a budgetary point of view , by 2002 , the rhythm of implementation of appropriations must have reached cruising speed : there is no overlapping with the previous programming period and there can be no delay in the implementation of programmes .
It is a year in which the forecasts contained in the financial perspectives can be fully achieved .
In order for the two powers responsible for implementation ( the Commission and the Member States ) to achieve this fully , the rapporteur offers us a strategy for reducing the backlog ; in order to support his strategy , he uses the performance targets identified by the Commission at the request of an initiative presented by the European Peoples ' Party for the 2001 Budget .
It is important that this House accepts the Costa Neves strategy in the field of payment appropriations .
Without decisive action by the European Parliament , it is going to be difficult to achieve an interinstitutional political commitment on improving the quality of expenditure , which has always been our priority .
We also support the strategy of the general rapporteur in relation to the new demands , the Commission ' s letter of amendment , where it refers to the mobilisation of the flexibility instrument in order to finance the new structural needs , the restructuring of the Spanish and Portuguese fleets which fished in Moroccan waters , which is awaiting the proposed funding the Commission has promised but has still not presented .
The rapporteur has also presented both pro memoria in the budget lines for that restructuring , and also in relation to a programme for increasing the competitiveness of the border regions with a view to the enlargement of the Union .
Let us hope that between the first and second readings , the Commission will clarify the situation of this programme and the possible funding proposals .
Furthermore , we have the insoluble problem of the lack of financial resources in Category 4 for external action .
This problem threatens to tarnish budgetary procedure after budgetary procedure .
The Union takes on more and more external commitments , often without consulting this House .
Later , unilateral cuts are decided on in the traditional external action lines under the pretext of deficient implementation , responsibility for which is always attributed to external factors and never to the functioning of the Commission or the Member States themselves .
Parliament must therefore , year after year , become embroiled in a pointless fight to remove the cuts which both the Commission , in its preliminary draft , and the Council , in its first reading , carry out .
This prejudices the role which must be played by such important committees as Foreign Affairs , Development and the Committee on Budgets itself .
A very good example this year is the EUR 125 million for the never-signed fishing agreement with Morocco .
It has never been explained why the Commission included these appropriations in the reserve , but the true consequence is that the rapporteur has had to employ ( and the political groups support him ) a strategy of cuts in order to achieve the mobilisation of these fishing appropriations which were never used .
Honest interinstitutional cooperation must be based on recognition of the budgetary prerogatives of each of the institutions .
To wait for the November conciliation to resolve fundamental issues weakens the role of the parliamentary negotiation and the role of the tripartite dialogues for the whole year .
We in the European Peoples ' Party consider essential to the good operation of the budgetary procedure , amongst other things , the harmonisation of legislative and budgetary procedures , the genuine participation of the European Parliament in the creation of the rules of the game , that is , the Financial Regulation , prior knowledge of the Commission ' s working programme , more active involvement by Parliament in the budgetary element of the Commission reform , etc .
All these aspirations are contained in our amendments , which we will put to the vote on Thursday , and which we hope will receive majority support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , like many others , I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves .
The cooperation has been really good .
As ' shadow rapporteur ' for the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I have also encountered a very constructive attitude , and that is something for which I am grateful .
By this time , almost all practical proposals from Parliament have been dealt with , and I must therefore concentrate on a number of more theoretical points of view .
The budget is the ultimate expression of democracy and social development .
It is through the budget that we decide that our public institution needs to use tax revenue in order in some way to influence society , and it is the EU ' s budget that is relevant when it comes to transnational European issues .
It is always difficult to strike a balance between , on the one hand , the desire to do important things and , on the other , the need to respect budget discipline and to ensure that taxpayers genuinely get value for money .
In the EU , this balancing act is unusually complicated due to the fact that it has to be carried out both by two budget authorities in tandem and by each authority in its own right .
In the case of the Council , it even has to be performed within each and every one of the fifteen governments .
Unfortunately , the problem is often that , with one voice - for example that of the agricultural and foreign ministers - the Council pledges a whole lot of money to , for example , agriculture and the fight against BSE and foot and mouth , to the transformation of poor regions , to fishing fleets , to the Balkans and to Afghan refugees etc , while , with its other voice - that of the finance ministers - it says no to increased expenditure .
The problem is not made any easier by the fact that those who promise aid do not so often ensure that the Commission , which is to implement all these measures , has the resources needed to turn the promises into a reality .
There are often considerable commitments made , but the level of implementation is low and the funding insufficient .
In spite of this criticism , I believe that , for the most part , taxpayers get value for money .
I am an MEP for Sweden , the EU ' s most Eurosceptic country and , at the same time , the country in which the individual taxpayer contributes most money to the EU .
This situation means that it is not always so easy to persuade people to believe that the money is in actual fact used well .
The myth of the EU as a hopeless colossus is so strong that I am scarcely believed at home when I say that , even for Sweden , the net cost of the EU amounts to only 1 per cent of the State budget , that the budget is not increasing in real terms and that it is implemented in such a way that the Swedish exchequer gets back a large part of its contribution each year .
Indeed , a tenth of the whole budget is in practice paid back to the Member States .
I believe , as I say , that we get value for money , but there are still a lot of shortcomings .
We need to do quite a lot in the future in order to convince people that the funds are being properly used .
First of all , I believe that we must simplify the budget procedure itself and ensure that it is made more transparent .
The new budget regulation and activity-based budgeting should contribute to this .
Secondly , we must speed up internal reform .
We have certainly now placed a number of services in the reserve , but the aim of this is not to slow down , but to force the pace of , reform .
I am also convinced that , as Commissioner Schreyer pointed out in his speech , we are going to have to make the budget more flexible and increase our ability to respond to new events .
In order to achieve this , I also believe that a new spirit of cooperation is needed between the two branches of the budgetary authority .
Most obvious , perhaps , are the deficiencies in category 4 , that of external expenditure , to which the Council has added new expenditure year after year on , for example , aid to Kosovo and Serbia , new fisheries agreements etc .
This year , we have had far-reaching discussions on assistance to refugees , the Global Health Fund and other efforts to combat AIDS etc .
In both 2000 and 2001 , we solved this problem by means of the flexibility instrument , which gave us a further EUR 200 million per year .
The problem this year is that the programmes for Kosovo and Serbia which necessarily gave rise to this flexibility instrument must still be implemented at a high level but without our being able this year to use the flexibility instrument ' s EUR 200 million .
In spite of this , the Council will prevent us from using those funds that are not needed for the fisheries agreements , and that is something I do not understand .
Why are we not allowed to use them when we , in actual fact , have major costs for the programmes to which we have agreed ?
This does not hold water .
With this policy , the Council is forcing us to do something I should preferably have liked us to avoid , namely to say no to a proportion of the major expenditure on the Balkans , even if we are obviously using this to protect the most sensitive areas , that is to say Serbia and Kosovo .
Let us conduct an open dialogue in this area , characterised by trust .
We understand the Council ' s priorities when it comes to the Balkans , AIDS etc , but then we should also ask for a certain amount of understanding for the fact that we cannot prioritise away all the issues closest to our hearts .
We want to rescue aid to the Balkans .
Let us get around the negotiating table .
Mr President , the 2002 EU Budget , amounting to EUR 51 billion , appears at first sight to be balanced and straightforward .
The increase of 5 % over the outgoings of the Budget year 2001 corresponds to the Berlin agricultural guidelines .
That is not only good but also inevitable , as no other policy is as thoroughly submitted to Community methods as agricultural policy .
I note with particular concern , however , that this great chunk of agricultural expenditure is increasingly the object of covetous desires on the part of not a few politicians who see it as a sort of disposable object which can be moved around at will .
If this intention is to be countered , the Financial Perspective will have to be qualified by the Commission , any kind of speculation eliminated and the across-the-board cuts that are always being sought in the agricultural budget not in fact implemented .
The appearance of foot-and-mouth disease eleven months ago has meant a very unbalanced situation in animal husbandry , especially as regards food safety , animal protection and the internal market .
Distorted competition in markets leads to the loss of jobs and income .
Pricing is becoming chaotic and nobody can explain why .
So I wish to advocate a temporary increase in the financial allocation to the market organisation for animal husbandry .
I urge that the so-called interim balance sheet of Agenda 2000 should not be put off simply to do a favour for a particular country .
I urge moreover that the reserve should be kept until an explanation is given of the contradiction by which we were talking about EUR 1 billion last year and only EUR 400 million now .
Mr President , at the first reading of the 2002 budget , we would like to express our reservations about a number of amendments tabled by the European Parliament and which put increasing pressure on spending in order to meet , as explained in the motion for a resolution - and I quote ' the legitimate expectations of citizens , regions and governments of the European Union ' .
Go on , blame the citizens !
In the few minutes ' speaking time that I have , I will give one example ; that of the B3-500 budget line , to which the European Parliament would like to allocate EUR 7 million in order to fund the so-called European political parties .
This appropriation is without legal basis and has no moral justification .
Of course , the citizens have never given their opinion on this , but if we asked them if they want to pay more taxes to fund political parties in Brussels , they would obviously say no .
On the other hand , the MEPs would say yes , as this is of great interest to them .
These European political parties are inter-party organisations that have no militant base to speak of . Their funding - provided thus far by the parliamentary groups of this House out of their administrative appropriations - has been the subject of a recent report published by the Court of Auditors .
Because of this , the so-called European parties are seeking other sources of funding .
And since the citizens do not seem to want to pay of their own accord , we are going to make them pay by means of tax and social security deductions , so that they have no choice .
For reasons that I have already explained during our debate on the Schleicher report on 17 May 2001 , and in my explanation of vote given on the same day , the B3-500 budget line has no legal basis , no more than the draft regulation on the status and funding of European political parties . The Council has still not reached agreement on this regulation .
Admittedly , the Treaty of Nice provides the possibility of a legal basis by adding a second sub-paragraph to Article 191 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , but there is no need to remind you - especially in the wake of the negative outcome of the Irish referendum - that there is still a long way to go before this Treaty can be ratified .
Lastly , the draft regulation without legal basis and currently being examined by the Council aims to put in place an underhand funding system that runs counter to freedoms .
To cap everything , the chairs of the five European parties have recently written to Council and to the Commission to demand that the funding from Europe is increased to EUR 15 million instead of EUR 7 million .
Such is inflation !
We believe that the political parties in Europe must be freely financed by citizens and by the national political parties , who are themselves funded according to national regulations in line with their respective legal system and constitution .
That is why , Mr President , the MEPs of the Mouvement pour la France group , along with the Members of the SOS Démocratie group , will vote against the B3-500 budget line .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this Budget process has many problems which we know of old , and new challenges which we cannot yet , in the course of this first reading , conclusively evaluate and deal with .
I wish at this point to return explicitly to something about which there are some rather vague conceptions in this House , namely that , since 1992 , there has been a fundamental change in the common agricultural policy .
Commissioner , in announcing a letter of amendment , you reminded me that this is the same procedure as every year , with , first , the spectre of a budgetary crisis being conjured up , and then the discovery of room for manoeuvre in the agriculture budget .
At this point , I say an emphatic ' Yes ' to a contingency reserve , but when there really is a crisis , this reserve must actually be used , for many sectors currently find themselves fighting for their very existence .
I would very much like to take up the debate on the eastward enlargement , in order to make one thing clear : I have no problem whatever with the full integration of the acceding countries ' agriculture into the Common Market by 2004 , if at the same time the free movement of persons , capital , services and goods , which is part of full membership , is also made a reality , so that there can at last be a fair debate on the whole context of this topic .
The conclusions of the Heads of State and of Government at Nice have , on the one hand , highlighted the need to start restructuring the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets .
I support this , but would point out at the same time that we cannot , on the other hand , let a very restrictive approach in the next two years keep the remaining European fishing fleets at arms length and wasting away .
We must have discussions with the Commission about this .
Let me say quite explicitly that the 25 July communication from the Commission on the frontier regions was held by Parliament , in its resolution of 5 September , not to comply with the requirements laid down by the European Council .
For that reason , Commissioner , we call upon the Commission to produce definite proposals for a regulation on the frontier regions .
Let me now address one further point .
We made 400 posts available in the 2001 Budget .
We are now talking in terms of 317 , which are still being kept in reserve .
Commissioner , please just take a look at the posts in the Commission which have not yet been filled .
I will remind you , in addition to the points we have mentioned in connection with the release of the reserve , that we spent last year reiterating that reform includes the simplification of the acquis communautaire , without the Community patrimony being substantially affected thereby .
There is , in my judgment , a need for further negotiation on this point .
One final point , Mr President : We expect , before the second reading , to have a comprehensive report by the Commission on the re-examination of the fundamental concepts of foreign policy , so that we have , with reference to current demands , a conclusive plan for combining conflict prevention , decisive humanitarian aid and the alliance against terrorism in a rational Community package , which we will be able to adopt at second reading .
Mr President , I will start by focusing primarily on the Seppänen report .
This is a comprehensive report which addresses all the problems of the final stage of the ECSC ' s life , but it also takes into account the problems of the future , if it is true - which it is - that , although the ECSC is dying , the coal and steel industry must continue to develop in Europe .
The sum set aside for the ten remaining months of the ECSC budget is sufficient , and the increased appropriations for research are in line with the forecasts for after the Treaty ' s expiry .
Parliament wants to play a leading part in our endeavours to give a reassuring response to the 357 000 workers who are employed in the sector and to provide a secure future in terms of the growth and restructuring of the sector .
I would now like to focus , in the last part of my speech , on the Union ' s general budget .


As the members of my group have already said , starting with the coordinator , Mr Ralf Walter , our opinion of the work carried out by Mr Costa Neves and Mrs Buitenweg is positive .
There are many elements which deserve a mention here : the undertaking to improve the quality and speed of expenditure , and here I refer to the Structural Funds , which require an extraordinary measure from the European institutions to motivate , coordinate and carry out prospective and retrospective assessments so that European federalism does not fail this major test ; the attention given to the issue of border regions , mentioned by Commissioner Schreyer - I , too , agree with Mr Böge when he says that it is right to clarify the concept of a border region - not least in relation to the enlargement process : regions which must not be the only ones to benefit , Commissioner , and I would stress this point , for the pilot project approved last year does not and must not , as it progresses , just concern the border regions .
We have got off to a good start : the negotiations will take place and I feel that , ultimately , we will achieve a sound budget , but when I think of this great asset which is Europe , an asset which is ours and ours alone , a supranational political entity which others look to for guidance , as they will have to in the face of fresh challenges , I wonder whether we really ought not to review the financial mechanisms of the European budget if we want to consolidate a great supranational institution which is the envy of all and which needs more resources and a role that is more clearly defined .
Mr President , the 2002 budget for the European Union mirrors its anti-grass roots and arbitrary policy .
It is a budget for managing interests which presents no central objectives for resolving the problems being created by the recession , not even as a propaganda exercise .
The draft budget makes no serious or fundamental attempt whatsoever to redistribute income to the less developed areas or to the working classes hit by unemployment , underemployment and poverty .
The austerity imposed on the Member States and the European Union as a whole means that even the budget lines available in the past have been cut back .
Agricultural spending is being constantly eroded , with tragic consequences for farmers , in a bid to make national budgets pay for the anti-farming policy decided in Brussels .
On the contrary , following the terrorist attack on 11 September , the European Union is being called on to fund intergovernmental cooperation in the so-called area of justice , that is , to keep files on and prosecute citizens who go beyond the bounds of resistance and reaction tolerated by the system .
Finally , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece will vote against the budget because , instead of resolving the current problems , it will create new problems for workers , farmers and small enterprises , instead of contributing towards peace in the world , it promotes war and an imperialist hegemony , instead of protecting individual and collective democratic , political workers ' rights , it suppresses them .

Mr President , allow me to begin by thanking Mr Costa Neves for his very good work on next year ' s budget .
It is with satisfaction that I at least observe that , for the first time in quite a few years , there has been no serious talk about revising the budget ceiling .
That is , for me , the sign of a rapporteur who , in a real sense , chooses to respect and apply the budget as a ceiling of expenditure and not as a target for expenditure .
That is something I think bodes well for forthcoming negotiations .
In spite of this , there is nonetheless good cause for warning against an unduly expansive budget , especially when it comes to categories 3 and 4 .
The limited margin in both these categories is cause for concern , especially when , in the wake of the terrorist attacks on 11 September , we see an approaching need for measures of humanitarian aid for Afghanistan , as well as a need for measures in the area of justice and home affairs .
The European Union is already expensive for taxpayers .
I believe it to be obvious that we must ensure that it does not become still more expensive .
I see it as self-evident that , at this stage , Parliament should create room for negotiation in relation to the Council .
There is , however , reason for calling for a general tightening-up , on the parts of both the Council and Parliament , before the second reading so that , from a purely budgetary point of view , they are able to handle the situation that has arisen in the wake of the terrorist attacks in the United States .
Finally , just a few brief words about Mrs Buitenweg ' s report .
The rapporteur has made progress in the preparatory work before enlargement in 2004 .
That is good , and there is cause to thank her for this .
I must however note that a very great deal remains to be done in order to prepare and adapt the administration before an enlargement that will soon be only two years ahead of us .
Mr President , at this stage in the litany of speakers , I feel I should focus on and scrutinise a couple of items in the budget .
I will firstly mention an issue which I had not included in my notes : the Council is pleased that Parliament shares its concern about the backlogs , the RALs .
If I had not lived through 17 European budgets , I would be amazed .
In fact , it is the governments who have the greatest responsibility for the creation of RALs and the Council could make a more useful contribution to the reduction of the RALs by renouncing the systematic underbudgeting of payment appropriations , which do most damage to the pockets of the Finance Ministers .
What really concerns me most in this budget , however , is that , in real terms , in euros , aid to third countries has decreased since 1999 .
If one thing became clear after 11 September it was precisely that it is going to be necessary to maintain and develop humanitarian aid and our contribution to development aid .
And this is in no way guaranteed by the Community budget , despite the efforts of the rapporteur , and I salute those efforts .
The financial perspectives are clearly not sufficient and we have a TV-addicted Council of Ministers , that is to say that their external priorities are led by the latest TV headlines .
We have Kosovo : we have to help Kosovo .
We have Serbia : we have to help Serbia .
We have Afghanistan : we have to help Afghanistan .
And the next headline will become the priority .
And what price do we pay ?
The price of having to make cuts in previous policies .
We still have problems in the Balkans .
We still have a serious problem in Africa .
We still have problems of underdevelopment in Latin America and Asia .
But we have to make cuts .
The other question I wanted to raise , which is related to the last point , is whether there are first- and second-class European Councils .
Why is Berlin more important than Nice , in terms of expenditure ?
Why ?
In Berlin , financial perspectives were set which had to be agreed with Parliament , but in Nice , the same European Council , composed of almost the same people , said that we had to create a special programme for the restructuring of the fleet that fished in Morocco .
Why is that not budgeted for ?
Why has the Council , with a Commission proposal valued at EUR 197 million , not budgeted for it ?
It should have done so .
And I regret that Parliament has not fulfilled its obligation , because what we have to do on first reading is budget in the way we want .
The Council will then come in at the negotiation at second reading .
I regret that we have not been able to do this , but I trust that we will be able to resolve it between now and December .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to reiterate that I am speaking on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , and not on behalf of my political group , and that , consequently , I would like to know exactly what has happened and why I was not included on the list of draftsmen .
I apologise if I have made a mistake , but if not , I would like to receive an official explanation .
Having made my point , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank the Members of the Committee on Budgets and particularly the general rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves , for the attention he has given to the requests and concerns of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights .
We asked a great deal , Mr President , and we received a great deal in return , and this is something I welcome .
We only made legitimate requests .
We asked for an increase in the funding granted to the European Refugee Fund , and this was given .
We asked for an increase in the resources for measures to combat violence towards women , children and teenagers , and this was given .
We asked for an increase in the resources to combat child pornography on the Internet , and this was granted .
We asked for no less than six new budget lines , and these were given .
We have a new European Migration Monitoring Observatory to enable the European Union to anticipate the arrival of waves of migrants and to be better prepared for these .
We have a specific research and evaluation programme on respect for fundamental rights of the European Union , so that the Charter of Fundamental Rights becomes an operational reality and not just a reality in words alone .
We have a new budget line that should enable Eurojust to become operational .
We have funding for the Schengen line with a view to adapting the Schengen Information System to the realities of enlargement , and , lastly , we anticipated - and this , Mr President , is an urgent request to the President-in-Office of the Council - we anticipated , given the current situation , exceptional appropriations for use by Europol in the fight against terrorism .
We are well aware of the limits of Europol ' s actions , we also know that it is founded on conventions , and thus we could experience legal difficulties in using these appropriations .
However , we would like to address a formal appeal to the Council not to allow these appropriations to escheat , to create the legal basis , which will enable Europol to become fully operational and will allow Eurojust to develop to its full potential .
Thank you very much , Mr Deprez .
You did not appear on the list on behalf of the committee .
We will try to give you an answer when we can .
Mr President , I am going to follow Mr Colom i Naval ' s advice by speaking on the problem of reform , for which I am the permanent rapporteur .
This problem is quite fundamental , because we have to reiterate on a regular basis that the European Parliament is firmly in favour of administrative reform of the institutions .
The polemics that are currently raging between those with differing views should be less important than the fundamental problems , and the fundamental problem is to make the Union ' s action clearer and more effective in meeting the public ' s expectations , so that citizens start to trust the European Union again .
You know that , in this budget , we noted several delays in implementing this reform , particularly as regards the Commission ' s response - which we have yet to receive - on the rewriting of the financial regulation , and also with regard to setting up base management .
The report 's fundamental concern is with the reform of the status and organisation of a career in European civil service .
We had to take a precautionary measure and put funds into the reserve for creating the new positions that were requested .
This is nothing more than a precautionary measure , and I would like to reiterate that , for the time being , this is only at the first reading stage as we asked the Commission to provide clarification on the implementation of the single Statute , so that we could have very precise and realistic answers , particularly on the problem of early retirement schemes for civil servants and temporary staff , but also on the problems caused by absenteeism and vacancies .
We believe that the Commission will be able to provide us with the answers to all these issues , but , nevertheless , I wanted to draw your attention to the fact that hypothetical positions will not help this reform to move forward .
We have 15 countries and seven institutions , but we have only one European Union , for which only one statute is needed .
We must not take refuge behind the reports published last year , because the linearity is no longer what it was .
We therefore want a clear budgetary framework in order to adopt a position , and I shall repeat the request made by all the Committees of Parliament to the Council : the Council must start talking and give us answers on a regular basis so that all our procedures - and reform , in particular - progress within a framework that is efficient in terms of budget .
This reform is vital : it must not just look good on paper , but should also be realistic and applicable over time .
Nothing will stop when we reach 2004 .
Everything must continue .
The reform process must provide renewed motivation and must modernise the way we work , but it must retain a European civil service that has one objective : to implement the political plans of the European Union that restore citizens ' confidence .
Mr President , Mrs Schreyer , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market devoted a great deal of attention to market integration in connection with the eastward enlargement .
The effects that will be manifested by this integration must also be taken into account when planning the Budget .
We see , looking at the Four Freedoms , that there will be no difficulties in some areas , but problems with adaptation in others .
There will be no great changes to the movement of goods , because substantial liberalisation has occurred , nor in freedom of establishment , because the person or business is subject to the laws of the state in which they establish themselves .
We will , though , have problems with integration as regards the free movement of labour and the freedom to provide services , for the precise reason that there has been to date no competition in these areas , and these markets are only regionally oriented unless they choose to be otherwise .
The frontier regions will therefore come under particular pressure when the freedoms in question are introduced .
Specific aid measures are therefore needed .
The recommendations of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market make it clear that it advocates endowing the frontier regions programme that you , Commissioner , mentioned , with additional resources .
We are grateful to the Committee on Budgets and especially to the rapporteur for their accepting these suggestions and , in part , adding to them .
One point in particular is of importance to me : the instruments proposed by the Commission are not sufficient to strengthen competitiveness in the frontier regions , as they promote only cooperation between East and West rather than the specific situation of the frontier regions themselves .
A specific programme is therefore needed , and so we request the Commission to present a legal foundation for it ; I take their statements to mean that they are prepared to do this .
Mr President , to begin with , I should like to protest against the fact that the offices did not actually consider our opinion as such , for the reason that it mainly consists of amendments .
They apparently considered our opinion as individual amendments tabled by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
I hope that this kind of procedure will run more transparently in future .
With regard to the budget , thanks partly to a tremendous effort by our rapporteur , this has become a budget of consolidation .
There are , of course , always disagreements about all kinds of sections of the budget , but we have been through worse .
I also have to say that there are clearly fewer disagreements at the level of our committee , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Also , the Council has made far fewer attempts at scrapping sections than has previously been the case , so , as far as that is concerned , my congratulations to the Council .
In my view , the problems that remain are at the level of open coordination .
The Council is still tempted to say that that should be financed from the coffers of Parliament .
However , Parliament must rubber-stamp this budget , yet it is not allowed to let its voice be heard fully on that score .
We will need to hold extensive discussions on this matter once again in the years to come .
We have a number of differences of opinion on this , and I hope that those can be settled in the next couple of years .
There is another problem concerning EQUAL , one of the components of the Social Fund .
Once again , the Council has made some serious cutbacks in that area too .
Despite this , I hope that it is possible to restore the Commission ' s preliminary draft in this respect .
That seems extremely important to me .
I gather that the Commission has thought very carefully about how precisely that proposal should be structured .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , every year , in the context of public health provision , we consider tobacco subsidies , which are , basically , nothing other than direct income support for the interested parties .
It can be done another way .
So , as every year , we urge progressive reduction of tobacco subsidies and their replacement by increased aid for rural development with a view to alternative forms of income , which could benefit workers upstream and downstream in the regions .
The same thing happens every year , yet so far nothing has changed .
But we must always hope .
As regards the NGOs , we are always advocating support for them .
We want to know , though , what is done with the money that is granted to them , which is only right and proper .
We therefore demand that information on them be made accessible to the public on a regular basis .
Only then will we have a chance to check whether our financial support for them is justified .
Believe me , we already find it extraordinarily difficult to get any kind of overview on what organisations we are supporting .
Equally opaque , though , is the Commission 's decision to stop funding the environmental organisation ' Globe ' .
This is quite unjustifiable and so seems positively wilful .
It must be added that the funds accorded ' Globe ' in the current budget year were not paid out .
Yet even NGOs need to be able to plan ahead with certainty in order , for example , to be able to carry on paying their office staff .
The Commission 's action in this regard is anti-social .
Where there is political will , Commissioner , one can find a way , or another budget line for the future .
As regards the agencies , it does indeed appear as if some agencies had already developed active lives of their own a long time ago .
They simply exist .
So we finance them ; more money every year , irrespective of output .
That seems to be all that matters .
This cannot go on , for this money is needed elsewhere .
Our task is to ensure that the organisations we support work efficiently .
Efficiency and effectiveness are not achieved merely by blindly piling-up resources , but by regular observation and monitoring , on the basis of which any necessary adjustments can be made .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I have the honour to speak for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
I would like to start by thanking my colleagues in the Committee on Budgets for the fact that nearly all the amendments produced by this committee were adopted .
We have reinstated the substance of the budget estimates for regional and transport policy that you , Commissioner , proposed .
I really must appeal to the Council not to be such a two-faced split personality .
It is not tolerable for a great hullaballoo to have been made at the Göteborg Summit about our desire for a sustainable transport policy , only for the Council to cut resources in the area of sustainable mobility .
This sort of ambiguity cannot go on , and we hope that the Council will admit that .
If you want to have a rational , environmentally responsible transport policy , you cannot cut funds that are allocated for that purpose .
My main point , though , is to do with tourism , something which did not , unfortunately , meet with favour in the Committee on Budgets .
I would , though , just ask you to think again about it . We proposed estimates for funds to promote tourism in Europe .
You all know about the debate over many years about the ' Philoxenia ' programme to attract tourist from overseas , with its slogan ' tourists to Europe ' .
This topic has taken on a whole new dimension since 11 September .
Not only are the airlines getting 20 % -30 % fewer customers , but so are hotels in Brussels , Berlin and in all European cities .
The same is true of restaurants , souvenir shops and boutiques .
We are seeing a massive slump in tourism , specifically from the USA and Canada .
This situation is leading to major difficulties in the economy and putting jobs at risk .
I put it to the Council and the Commission that , if we are to discuss the consequences of 11 September next month , we should re-examine the question of what we are to do to promote tourism in Europe .
Mr President , at the very outset , I wish to thank Mr Costa Neves for being so understanding , as he has worked on the questions we are discussing with really great care and interest .
I am deputy chairman of the delegation to Slovakia , and we were in Slovakia last week .
Our programme included , among other things , a visit to the ' green frontier ' , the Ukrainian border near Kosice , where we saw that a very large number of refugees , especially from Afghanistan , were crossing the border , probably not with a peaceful purpose ; it is estimated that 10 % - 30 % could have other activities in mind - of a terrorist or military nature , for example .
So I wish to ask the Commission and the Council , as a matter of urgency , to do everything possible to secure our borders , in particular , by immediately using the pre-accession support framework to make available the necessary apparatus on the borders that candidate States share with States not in the EU .
We are talking here about basic equipment such as night vision devices and motor vehicles , so that these frontiers can be better watched with immediate effect .
Secondly , the Committee concerned itself intensively with problems in connection with the support provided by the PHARE programmes and with the Toth case .
The Committee decided , from both a Slovakian and a European standpoint , not to put funds in reserve .
In Slovakia , the inevitable conclusions were reached .
The deputy prime minister with responsibility for this has resigned , which represents the political outcome .
The director dealing with the case has also resigned - a replacement has been appointed - and , in addition , the Slovak parliament has just passed a new law on financial monitoring and internal auditing .
So we will , I am sure , be able to take these funds out of the reserve by Second Reading .
Mr President , I just want to raise two points this evening at the same time as praising the rapporteur for the very sensible and courteous manner in which he has run the budget in advance of next year .
My first point is addressed to the Commissioner and concerns B-1 items where the Commission pays an enormous amount of money for subsidies for growing rice , bananas and the distillation of wine .
These are items I would have thought we were by now starting to reduce the payments for .
I would ask her to look at them .
I tabled many amendments amounting to hundreds of millions of euros .
I hope that rather than compulsory expenditure like that , being left to grow year by year , it should be looked at very closely .
Perhaps I could ask her to do that in advance of future budgets .
The other matter is a perennial matter which comes up each year : the European women 's lobby and finance for women 's organisations generally .
We tabled an amendment , and so did Mrs Avilés Perea of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , to say that the money that is voted for lobby organisations for women following the Beijing conference should not all go , as it has for many years , to the European Women 's lobby .
I know many of my colleagues in the Chamber receive all sorts of letters and e-mails from around Europe saying it all must go to this one organisation .
This is wrong , we need to encourage new organisations in this very important field .
It is right and proper that the amendment that was put forward by the United Kingdom delegation was in fact passed .
This made it clear , in the remarks column , that one organisation , any single organisation within that spending line should not get more than 65 % .
I trust that the approved amendment will be held to when the budget comes out .
I thank the Commissioner for her consideration .
Mr President , I want to thank Mr Costa Neves for his efforts on behalf of all of us in this procedure and to say that it is a very technical and difficult task he took on : he has discharged it with great skill and shown much patience and kindness to all of us who wanted our ideas taken into consideration .
I have not known a Commissioner who has followed the proceedings so closely or who has spent so much time with the Committee on Budgets as the present Commissioner .
Of course , in many ways this is a highly technical exercise and , unlike national budgets , it does not have much effect on the course of economic development in the European Union .
It is too small for that , even in the area of Structural Funds , for even the most generous beneficiaries receive a very small percentage of GNP .
Ireland , at the best , was getting 2 % , Portugal and the poorer areas of Spain are getting between 1 % and 2 % of GNP .
It is not a very generous outlay of money , but if we can use it in order to guide their economic policies in the direction that we think is best , then the money can be usefully spent .
There is one idea and one hope that I have always entertained .
I believe I said some years ago that compared to national parliaments we were like children playing shop .
The amount of resources at our disposal is so small and there is so little we can do with them , but there is one area that I would like to see developed .
I do not want to see an expansion of public spending at European level .
But in the area of economic cooperation and development , if we could only pool at European level the resources which the countries of the European Union and the European Union itself devote to international cooperation and development cooperation , we could convert individual national efforts into a common European effort without increasing the sum of taxation .
This is essential if we are to develop a common foreign and security policy .
I believe we could have a much greater impact on the development of the poorer countries and redirect our foreign policy in a way that we could help the poor , help to establish peace and give us real influence in the world .
If there is one area in which we should demand subsidiarity from the national states to the European Union , it is here .
Mr President , as in previous years , this debate is characterised by two elements which we could describe as endemic .
One relates to the general amounts and the other to the deficiencies in the rules on budgetary management .
Our differences on each of the spending categories are clear and I am not going to go into the detail .
Commissioner , representatives of the Council , we need the budget to be an effective and credible tool which works for employment , for research , for support for small businesses and for the construction of a genuine area of justice and security .
Parliament has shown flexibility and austerity in this procedure and it is therefore in a position to ask the Council not to be politically autocratic and to show unequivocal signs that it is prepared to negotiate .
I trust that you will take advantage of the flexibility demonstrated by our rapporteur , Carlos Costa , whose work - as well as the efforts of the other two rapporteurs , Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Seppänen - deserves to be congratulated .
With regard to the resources intended for external Union action , we demand that this Parliament ' s undeniable political objectives are guaranteed , and these include providing resources for areas which are essential to world balance , such as the Mediterranean and Latin America .
In this procedure , the Commission proposes using the flexibility instrument to finance the restructuring of the Community fleets which fished in the area of the defunct fisheries agreement with Morocco .
This decision is fair , technically correct and necessary .
It deals with a very serious problem which affects employment and a key activity of many regions , and which arises in a context of crisis .
We must remember that we are about to implement a new common fisheries policy which has been dogged by intolerable discrimination for decades when compared to other economic activities , from the point of view of internal market rules .
As for budgetary management , this Parliament has repeatedly condemned the Commission ' s inability to put an end to the problem of the so-called anomalous RAL .
In this respect , we have produced a good strategy , which our rapporteur has mentioned , which is closely related to the reform of the Commission .
We must bear in mind that in the last three financial years very high payments were not used .
We must therefore find rules which work , methods which allow faster implementation and rules which shorten the cycle of projects .
As the last speaker , I hope that the Commission and the Council obey the evangelical maxim when it comes to paying attention and that the last are put first , not only in the Kingdom of Heaven , but also here in Parliament .
Mr President , I will pass on your answer to the chairman of the Committee on Budgets .
He had asked me to wait for it .
On a personal note , I wish to express my heartfelt thanks to our President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Vande Lanotte , above all , who has been here with us throughout the whole of the discussions on the Budget .
Things like that do not happen all the time .
So , without wishing to seem presumptuous , I would again like to express my most heartfelt thanks to you , not only for showing us so much respect , but also for demonstrating your interest in working with us .
Many thanks !
Thank you very much , Mr Walter , for such a constructive point of order .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 10.00 a.m.
EIB : Community guarantee against lending losses
. ( FI ) Mr President , the European Union has an easy way of helping other countries : the European Investment Bank receives guarantees for loans it grants to other countries .
The recipients of loans benefit from the EU guarantees in the form of interest rates that are lower than market rates .
This is also the case here as we are debating a loan guarantee in respect of loans granted by the EIB to Russia for environmental investments .
The maximum amount of credit is envisaged as 100 million euros .
The bank is imposing the criteria according to which the loans are to be granted .
If Russia fails to propose projects that fulfil the bank ' s criteria the loans will not have to be granted .
This is a new , positive initiative that will put new life into the notion of the EU ' s northern dimension , which has become rather anaemic .
The loans will be used to try to improve the state of the environment throughout the Baltic region and , eventually , therefore , the Member States of the EU also .
Parliament has not called into question the matter of loans to Russia .
The proposal has the broadest possible political support .
Problems have nonetheless been caused by the way in which the Council and the Commission are taking the matter further .
In the summer , the Commission submitted a proposal to Parliament that the loan guarantees should be issued in the same way as other EIB loans guaranteed by the EU , and that the guarantee in question should be 65 % .
That is still the only proposal that the Commission has submitted to Parliament .
The Council , however , decided later to take exceptional action and insisted on adopting a full 100 % guarantee in respect of the loan to Russia , rather than one of 65 % .
Russia has therefore been treated differently from other recipients of EU loan guarantees .
The Commission endorsed the Council ' s proposal , but it has not submitted a new proposal on the matter to Parliament .
Consequently , we , in Parliament , are debating the Commission ' s original proposal for a 65 % loan guarantee .
Parliament demanded a new round of consultations as a result of the revised proposal .
After all manner of talks with representatives of the Council and the Commission we have received a letter from the Council that may , with a little goodwill on our part , be interpreted as a rehearing of the Parliament .
The Commission also has indicated in writing that it has approved the 100 % guarantee .
As this is a deviation from the general rule , the Committee on Budgets would have liked to have an entirely new proposal from the Commission .
The Commission said it could not submit one in time .
In this case ' in time ' means it would be most beneficial to all parties if a decision could be taken on the issue this year .
There is a ceiling for EU loan guarantees , which is formed by a special Guarantee Fund .
Funds are gradually transferred to it from the Guarantee Reserves as guarantee commitments are made .
This year the ceiling is 208 million euros .
The guarantees in respect of the loans to Russia fit into this year ' s envelope even though the 100 % guarantee takes a larger part of it than a 65 % guarantee would .
A decision is needed this year , as there are so many commitments for next year that there will be no room then at all in the Guarantee Fund for new guarantees - not for loans for environmental investments in Russia either , which is the case here .
It would take consensus on the part of all the EU institutions to raise the ceiling for guarantees and it is not always a simple matter to achieve that .
If , therefore , we want to ensure that the EIB loans will be used for Russia ' s Baltic Sea basin environment , it is best to take the decision this year .
The Committee on Budgets has been ready for it , even though the action of the Council and the Commission cannot be deemed to be completely appropriate .
Thus , the committee is working on the principle that there should be no precedent set here and that similar matters should not be dealt with in this way in the future .
Parliament insists that account also be taken of the priorities it has set .
As the permanent rapporteur on loans and guarantees in the Committee on Budgets , I would like once more to draw attention to the fact that next year there will be no margin whatsoever in the Guarantee Funds for new and unexpected aid actions .
The Commission must take action accordingly .
Mr President , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy warmly supports the Council ' s decision to grant a Community guarantee to the European Investment Bank against losses under a lending action for environmental projects in the Baltic Sea basin of Russia .
We feel considerable unease faced with the environmental situation in that area , which is in immediate proximity to the European Union .
We believe that environmental investment in that area is required urgently and , in certain cases , even as an emergency measure .
We note that the European Investment Bank has already begun negotiations concerning participation in projects for dealing with waste water from St Petersburg and Kaliningrad .
It is important that the problems in these areas should be solved as soon as possible .
There is also reason for pointing out that environmental investment in this area can be more effective than many other investments within the Community and that major positive effects on health and the environment can be achieved for people in the European Union .
We , in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , can therefore warmly support the proposal tabled .
Mr President , I should like to thank the draftsman and express my support for Mr Seppänen ' s report .
In certain parts of the immediate surroundings of the European Union , the environmental problems are genuinely alarming , especially when it comes to the water in the Baltic .
EU countries are naturally affected just as much by these problems as large parts of Russia , Poland , Kaliningrad etc .
To obtain clear water in the Baltic , it is crucial for us to cooperate across borders .
I , myself , live in an administrative district on the Baltic , Norrköping , where one of the greatest problems we have when it comes to water quality is that we still receive so much untreated waste from the candidate countries and from Russia .
This is a very big problem for the EU Member States too .
We know , for example , that untreated waste water from 3-4 million people in the St Petersburg region is still being released and that the situation around Kaliningrad is much the same .
Such conditions affect us all .
In order to develop this region and to get to grips with the major problems , especially at a specifically environmental level , we have created the Northern Dimension , covering a very large area from Iceland in the west to Russia in the east .
Restoring the balance in the Baltic is a measure to which exceptional priority should be given .
The matter is urgent , and that is why I am pleased that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has also expressed its wishes .
For myself , coming as I do from the Committee on Budgets , it is also a question of presenting the financial aspects of this proposal .
From the Committee on Budgets , we should like to sound a warning note in this House .
The guarantee reserve that exists to cover possible credit losses is seriously stretched , both this year and next year .
The scope for this loan to Russia is really created simply through our not successfully implementing other commitments .
We have had to postpone other promised projects . Otherwise , we should not have managed to grant this loan within the framework that had been set .
If we are neither to renege on our promises in the future nor to give up our new ambitions , the Council and the Commission will therefore have to review the guarantee reserve ceiling relatively soon .
The situation is slightly reminiscent of the discussion we had in the budget debate earlier about the fact that the Council is happy to issue promises but then does not arrange satisfactory financing .
I should therefore like to ask Mr Solbes Mira what the Commission ' s plans are when it comes to tabling proposals concerning the future of the guarantee reserve .
I assume the Commissioner agrees that there is a lot of pressure upon the ceiling for this reserve .
Commissioner , Mr Arvidsson , I can agree with everything that you , Mr Arvidsson , said about the importance and environmental significance of this decision .
We also know that the decision we are now discussing probably concerns the most important individual position to emerge from the meeting of the European Council in Stockholm .
I would again point out that it is the north coast of the Bay of Finland that has to receive all the waste from St Petersburg , something which leads to a particularly high degree of algal bloom .
I therefore wish to declare that I have a major interest in this issue and that the waste water from 3.5 million people has a very profound effect upon the environment and archipelago in my native Finland .
We have set a ceiling of EUR 100 million .
These funds are to be used for selected projects which have clear environmental objectives and are also of considerable interest to the EU .
I believe that this is one of the critical points , if account is taken of what emerged from the discussion yesterday at the meeting of the Northern Dimension in Finland .
One Russian minister said that there is criticism of the selection criteria and wants international funding organisations to play a larger part in the project planning .
At the same time , we know that the budget of the North West Sewage Treatment Works has significantly exceeded Finland ' s and the Nordic Investment Bank ' s estimates .
I believe we must give a one hundred per cent guarantee .
I do not believe that EUR 100 million will solve the problem .
We know that the Russian Federation does not give guarantees and that the guarantees of the city of St Petersburg are completely used up .
I , therefore , appeal to my fellow MEPs to show solidarity on this issue .
Give a one hundred per cent guarantee for this project .
It would be in our interests , and we should be gradually paving the way for greater environmental awareness in St Petersburg , something to which we must always be attentive .
The situation is significantly more complicated than Mrs Wallström imagines .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank Parliament for its willingness to adopt a report on this special instrument within the Union ' s Northern Dimension .
This will provide a Community guarantee for EIB loans , to a value of EUR 100 million , for the purposes of environmental projects in Russia , as you have pointed out .
As you know , this decision was adopted in a very specific way .
This is the first time that financial operations in Russia have been accepted and the operation is not only of interest to Russia but also to the bordering Union countries .
The Commission had proposed the 65 % guarantee normally considered for this type of operation laid down in the general mandate of the European Investment Bank .
However , we know that the Council , for a series of reasons relating to the unique nature of this operation and the need for greater transparency , suggested that in this case a special Community guarantee of 100 % was required .
The urgency of the use of resources this year has led the Commission to accept this 100 % .
I do not exactly know the procedural problems which have led to the information reaching Parliament excessively late , but , according to my information , the Council informed Parliament on 20 September of the amendments under consideration , on 12 October the Belgian Presidency explained the changes in greater detail and , on the same day , the Commission sent the Committee on Budgets information on the reasons why we were accepting the Council ' s amendments .
With the unanimous decision of the Council and with the Commission ' s acceptance , there was no need for the Commission to present a new proposal .
We believe that it is urgent to approve this decision during 2001 for the same reasons you have raised .
A delay until 2002 would clearly hinder funding given the narrow margin for manoeuvre we have for next year .
However , this decision is not going to affect any other type of operation .
In his report , Mr Seppänen made references to other fundings : the Turkish case is the most obvious , coming from the 2000 contributions .
Actions in 2000 and 2001 have already been financed and problems of this nature do not arise .
However , another longer-term problem does arise : how are we going to handle the funding capacity of the European Investment Bank within our lending mechanism ?
Mr Färm also asked what we intended to do as a Commission .
I wanted to tell you firstly that the Commission is grateful to Parliament for raising this problem of the limited capacity for indebtedness that we have within the mechanism of the Guarantee Fund .
The Commission has already raised this problem in the Council and also here in Parliament on various occasions , and we believe that , if there are new initiatives in the context of 2002 , current problems will become more serious and it will be essential to take certain decisions .
The Commission is currently weighing up various options and we intend to approve an initiative relatively soon by means of a Communication which we will send to the Council and to Parliament .
I cannot respond to Mr Färm by indicating which option we are considering at the moment but I can point out that in the past we proposed a reduction in the level of coverage from 65 % to 60 % .
This could be one of the instruments , like any other which may be necessary , for creating a greater margin for manoeuvre in future actions .
This is what I can tell you at the moment and I would like to thank you for your cooperation in the debate on this report .
Thank you very much , Mr Solbes .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
EBRD : Community contribution to Chernobyl Shelter Fund
Mr President , as we all remember , the nuclear disaster at Chernobyl occurred on 16 April 1986 and it is still history ' s most serious nuclear accident .
Radioactive contamination affected people and nature over vast areas in Ukraine , Belarus and Russia , and , furthermore , some present EU countries also suffered .
Around the destroyed unit a nuclear shelter was constructed hastily , given the conditions , to halt the spread of the pollution .
Inside the deteriorating shelter there are still more than 200 tons of uranium and almost a ton of radionuclides , of which 80 % is plutonium .
The Chernobyl Shelter Fund was set up in December 1997 to finance the Shelter Implementation Plan , whose purpose it is to protect people and the environment from any new radioactive contamination .
The preliminary estimate of the cost of the project for the period 1998 - 2005 was around USD 758 million .
The first conference of the parties funding the project was held in New York in November 1997 .
A total of USD 400 million was obtained in the form of pledges from twenty-five countries , of which USD 50 million was payment in kind from Ukraine .
This sum was sufficient for the first stage of the Shelter Implementation Plan .
The European Union at the start financed the shelter work with a payment of USD 100 million , which was pledged at the Denver Summit in 1997 .
This amount came out of the general budget for 1998 - 1999 .
A second pledging conference was held in Berlin in July 2000 to organise a final contribution to the scheme .
At that conference 22 countries in all decided to pledge around USD 320 million and the European Union pledged a further EUR 100 million for the period 2001 - 2004 .
The report being discussed concerns a proposal for a Council decision on a second contribution by the European Community to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development for the Chernobyl Shelter Fund .
The matter before us is thus Parliament ' s opinion on the adoption of this regulation .
The current financial situation is as follows . In all , USD 716 million has been pledged to the Chernobyl Shelter Fund and this includes USD 50 million from Ukraine as an in-kind contribution .
Consequently , the fund still lacks money , as the estimate of costs is rather higher , totalling at least USD 720 - 750 million .
For this reason - as this issue is being taken forward - it must be assumed and expected that Ukraine will also be able to organise this second contribution of funds .
The problem here is that the budgetary authority in 1998 set a 13 % ceiling regarding the use of TACIS appropriations in respect of nuclear safety projects .
If this were to apply , the decisions could not be taken at present in the way the Commission and the Council have proposed .
However , I support the Commission ' s proposal to set aside EUR 100 million for the Chernobyl Shelter Fund as this project ' s implementation is of vital importance to the people of the European Union and their safety .
I also support the Commission ' s proposal that there should be a special budget heading created for it so that the way in which the funds are being used can be monitored .
Clearly , it will be difficult to use these funds as people will be working in difficult conditions in which there is a huge number of international players and where the situation is to some extent still vague in the administration of the Confederation of Independent States .
All in all , I would nevertheless support this Council proposal , with certain amendments .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the PSE Group in support of the Virrankoski report , which gives Parliament the go-ahead to grant a further contribution - as the rapporteur himself explained - to complete the Chernobyl Shelter .
I endorse Mr Virrankoski ' s reasons for his choice and , in particular , I endorse the European Union ' s decision to contribute practically to creating safe conditions in the wake of the 1986 disaster .
The European Union has been the largest donor by far , not just as regards Chernobyl but also with regard to safety and preventing the nuclear contamination of the Newly Independent States .
We were right to do this : none of us can forget the 1986 disaster and nobody is yet fully aware of the devastating effects it has caused and , I regret to say , may still cause .
As Mr Virrankoski pointed out , the tomb of Chernobyl still contains 200 tonnes of uranium and a tonne of plutonium , which represent a permanent danger which might - and I stress , might - also be a prime target for traffickers .
However , this was and is still a transparent , legitimate choice in legal terms : indeed , the new Tacis regulation states that the contribution to the initiatives supported by the European Union , such as the initiative on the closure of Chernobyl , will be one of the nuclear safety priorities .
In conclusion , this was and is , above all , something which the European Union has a duty towards the new generations to do .
Mr President , I wish to address two points - first the political dimension and , secondly , the issue of cost-effectiveness and control by Parliament .
As far as the political dimension is concerned , the Chernobyl disaster showed us that the use of nuclear energy involves risks beyond our control .
No national budget can cope with such a calamity .
At present , then , discussion is limited to the securing of the casing , which is urgently needed .
This is only a fraction of the money needed to deal with the disaster as a whole .
Neither the contamination of the soil and of the water underground , nor the harm done to the health of the population are capable of being dealt with within the Ukrainian budget , and it is in a situation like this that , for reasons beyond my understanding , aid from the EU runs out .
This means that these problems will remain unresolved for generations to come .
It might be added that no Western state budget - even that of a rich Western state - could cope with such a catastrophe without international aid .
This report therefore meets with the unreserved support of us Greens and regionalists .
We do not believe , though , that this will be the last contribution towards overcoming the after-effects of Chernobyl , which will be a financial burden on East and West for generations .
This report therefore invites the question : would it not be a practical preventive measure to at last bring in a European strategy for abandoning nuclear energy ?
The question also arises of whether the nuclear industry itself ought to be compelled to contribute to a fund to help deal with the disaster , for it , now as then , derives profit from East European nuclear energy .
My second point is that it seems to us that the solution for implementation is not the European Development Bank , which guarantees neither control by Parliament nor affordable solutions , for Ukrainian firms are not considered when it comes to applying the resources .
We therefore urge the Commission to avail itself of all sources of information , and not only the Development Bank , in order to supply Parliament with comprehensive and up to date information .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Virrankoski , and also Mr Pittella and Mrs Schroedter for their comments .

Given the threat to the environment throughout Europe posed by the current state of Chernobyl , it is clearly extremely important that the shelter project , or protection system , continues to be corrected , is completed and fulfils its objectives between now and 2007 , as was the intention with the initial project of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
To this end , the contribution of the European Union is essential .
You have said , quite rightly , that the scale of the disaster makes funding by a single country impossible .
According to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , the promised contribution now amounts to approximately USD 720 million , and therefore , also according to the Bank ' s assessments , the intended timetable and costs can be met , even though certain secondary activities may be delayed .
Furthermore , certain important steps have already been taken , such as the most urgent stabilisation work , which , undoubtedly , were a great concern .
The Commission is monitoring the application of the implementation programme for shelter and is attending the meetings of the assemblies of contributors .
We have already presented a second situation report , in accordance with Council Decision 98 / 381 / EC , and also in accordance with the guidelines contained in the report by Mr Gordon Adams on the first contribution .
In this respect , I would like to reassure Mrs Schroedter and point out that we will keep her informed .
We will keep Parliament informed .
It is true that the EBRD is not subject to Parliament ' s control , but the Commission will keep Parliament informed of all activities which are being carried out by means of Union funds .
With regard to the proposals of the Committee on Budgets , the Commission believes both proposals to be acceptable , and that they enrich the Commission ' s proposal .
I would , therefore , like to thank you for your contributions and for the work you have done on this issue , which is essential in preventing the risks that could have arisen in addition to the already serious effects we have suffered as a result of the Chernobyl disaster , that Mr Virrankoski has expressed so well in his initial presentation .
Thank you very much .
Thank you for your contribution , Commissioner .
We hope that you can re-gather your strength and be back with us at 11 p.m.
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 7.20 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

ESF ( 2000 - 2006 )
The next item is the report ( A5-0328 / 2001 ) by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Communication from the Commission on the implementation of innovative measures under Article 6 of the European Social Fund Regulation for the programming period 2000-2006 ( COM ( 2000 ) 894 - C5-0341 / 2001 - 2001 / 2141 ( COS ) ) .
rapporteur . ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the concept of innovation is increasingly present in our objectives and policies at European and national level .
However , we have a unique opportunity , within the framework of the Commission communication on innovative measures under Article 6 of the European Social Fund , to approach innovation in the strategy for employment , rather than solely within the bounds of the application of new technologies .
In fact , innovative measures under Article 6 of the European Social Fund can play a vital role in increasing employment and enhancing regional and social cohesion , the sine qua non to our strategic objectives , and we must not just make use of them , we must also take action to make up for lost time and lost resources , because the guidelines for innovative measures were only finally adopted a full year after the adoption of the structural fund regulations , which made delays in implementation unavoidable .
And , apart from limited funding , resources totalling EUR 104 million have been cut from innovative measures and technical assistance in order to cover old liabilities from the previous programming period .
Similarly , despite the swingeing cuts in these resources , the Commission failed to commit some EUR 31 million during the 2000 financial year and allowed these appropriations to be cancelled instead of transferring them to the following financial year .
Today , we wish to express our satisfaction at the fact that the European Commission has responded to the call by the European Parliament for a new plan on the content of innovation , how it is to be managed , how the measures implemented are to be evaluated and the strategy for disseminating the results .
However , we also wish to express our concern as to the efficiency of this proposal , which is vaguely worded and riddled with weaknesses .
We understand , Commissioner , that innovation is a multidimensional , composite concept and , as such , hard to define and confine to specific sectors or lines of action .
At the same time , we find that there has been no fundamental evaluation of previous innovative actions , which could have provided a basis for future planning .
We also find that social partners and social agencies are lacking in experience and face difficulties in their attempt to approach this concept and design innovative measures .
That is why we propose that the European Commission should adopt fixed criteria to be taken into account in fixing support priorities for and selecting projects and to state them clearly in calls for proposals .
These criteria are : the direct relevance of projects when it comes to increasing employment , really innovative features as regards the planning and implementation of the measure , the quality and viability of the measure and the potential for the circulation and dissemination of the results within the framework of the European Social Fund .
The European Commission is also vague on the question of complementarity .
Complementarity in European policy is extremely important to the sound management of resources and their multiplier effect .
The importance of complementarity is clear from this morning 's debate .
However , I believe , Commissioner , that complementarity should under no circumstances mean that innovative measures will lose their specific and distinctive character , nor should it mean the deletion of budget lines referring to related but separate sectors of activities .
The description of thematic fields is also vague , especially when it comes to the social partners .
The social partners have an important role to play .
We all support it but they themselves are ignorant of it .
They themselves are ignorant both of the potential which European policy affords them and of the extent of their responsibility for creating a real European job market and increasing employment at local level .
We need to help them , perhaps with some clearer guidelines and examples .
It would be more helpful as regards the substance of innovative measures if , when defining the thematic fields for 2002 and subsequent years , the European Commission consulted the European Parliament and the Committee on the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee before announcing the thematic sectors .
We particularly welcome your reference , Commissioner , to equal opportunities and believe that this principle should distinguish not just how men and women are treated but also access to the policy on innovative measures by regions which lack innovation and face particular structural problems , such as mountain and island regions .
If we believe that a quantum leap beyond our standard policies is needed in this sector of activity by the European Social Fund , then this also needs to be expressed in the policy for evaluating and disseminating results .
We believe that the European Commission should design pioneering methods which are more penetrating and efficient than those applied to date .
Setting up a special unit to manage innovative measures is a good move and we hope that it will be suitably staffed by officials who can help it carry out its duties .
Of course , your efforts alone will not suffice and the Member States must not be left out of this process .
The dissemination of information and technical assistance for interested parties need to be promoted through specially staffed units operating in an optimum manner at regional level .
Mr President , Commissioner , this report on the implementation of innovative measures laid down in the European Social Fund , which has been so well produced by the rapporteur , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , considers innovative measures and pilot projects on a European level relating to labour markets , professional employment and training , study , exchange of experience and also Community dialogue , which is an extremely important instrument for the creation of jobs and social cohesion .
The priority objective of the European Union , as laid down at the Lisbon Summit , is to turn the European Union into the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , capable of sustainable economic development , with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion .
This objective , which we all wish to achieve , demands innovative measures to integrate groups with special difficulties into the labour market .
Notable in this respect is the need to maintain the objective of equal opportunities , since the presence of women in the labour market is still insufficient .
The partnership between the different actors in the economy , as well as the choice of issues to be tackled , will help to achieve the proposed objective . Thank you very much .
Mr President , this Commission communication is for the most part disappointing , especially because it lacks a clear , concise description of the substance of the intended innovation .
Precisely this defect can prove detrimental to the effectiveness of the Regulation .
From the point of view of subsidiarity , these innovative actions are to be called into question .
What is the specific added value which these actions should yield ?
In this respect , the communication is bogged down in vague descriptions .
There is thus a major risk of the Commission backing useful actions which would also be implemented without ESF subsidy because national or local authorities have already recognised their usefulness .
The fact that there is still no assessment report on the innovative actions in the previous programming period ( 1994-1999 ) should ring alarm bells with the budgetary authority .
Furthermore , the Commission has planned considerable economy measures for the period 2000-2006 .
Can the Commissioner indicate the reason for these measures ?
And can the Commissioner also explain why the assessment report is still pending , and when it will be submitted to us ?
I share the critical tone of the report .
A weak area in the report is the pursuit of a European labour market .
This is still pie in the sky , given the language barriers , cultural differences and the different national systems for taxes , social security and pensions .
Europe ' s most important trait is its diversity , and that is why Europe cannot be compared to the United States of America .
Experiences with ESF subsidies in the Netherlands indicate that it has been unclear on more than one occasion as to what can and cannot be subsidised .
According to the Dutch Court of Auditors , this is partly due to the loose and opaque wording of EU legislation .
Even if a conflict of interest is unlikely in connection with support for innovative actions , I still wonder if the present communication has been tested sufficiently for the risk of exploitation and improper use .
I should like to congratulate Mrs Kratsa on her report on innovative measures under Article 6 and to agree , both with Mrs Kratsa and the other speakers , that there are two basic issues in which we share an interest .
The first is optimising the application of Article 6 and the second is having the best , most efficient relations between the European Parliament and the Commission .
As far as the application of Article 6 is concerned , the unit which deals solely with Article 6 was created , staffed and started operating in December 2000 .
This means that we were able to focus on implementing it and we have made satisfactory progress .
The first stage of the programme has already been announced with the call for proposals on the subject of adapting to the new economy within the framework of social dialogue .
This was announced in February 2001 .
A second call for proposals on the subject of local strategies for employment and innovation is also ready and is due to be published at the end of October .
The first call was a complete success .
A large number of transnational plans was received in which social partners , trades unions and employers , as well as local authorities and companies played a very important part .
The evaluation of these plans was strengthened at the European Parliament 's request and now we do not just evaluate each plan individually , we also evaluate the measures as a whole so that we can assess their complementarity .
I must say that particular account was taken in the calls for proposals of the 4 points on which Parliament also focused .
As far as working with Parliament is concerned , I can tell you that we are about to officially submit the first report on the implementation of the previous Article 6 period which is now ready - a copy has already been sent to Mrs Kratsa through official channels - and the communication makes provision for an annual report from the European Social Fund to the European Parliament on the application of Article 6 .
The first of these reports is being drafted and should be submitted to you within the next few months .
Of course , there are other ways of working together and exchanging more views .
I think that Article 6 and its implementation could be a special item for the joint parliamentary and Commission committee on the European Social Fund , but there are other fora in which views can be exchanged .
One of these is due to take place on 18 December and everyone in charge of the social dialogue plans selected will be invited . Naturally we hope Parliament will also attend .
Thank you very much , Mrs Diamantopoulou .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Equal treatment for men and women in employment
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0358 / 2001 ) , by Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , on a Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on amending Council Directive 76 / 207 / EEC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and working conditions ( 9848 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0387 / 2001 - 2000 / 0142 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , in this second reading I would like to present a legal report that is broad in scale .
Its purpose is to bring up to date the European Union ' s most important directive regarding equality at work , which was originally enacted in 1976 .
Society has changed a great deal in a quarter of a century , so the Committee has worked hard to bring all the issues being raised in modern times to this report .
I would like to thank my colleagues and the other political groups for the intensive , fruitful co-operation we have had prior to this second reading also .
Firstly , for the first time , the Commission has proposed binding action for the Member States to adopt in order to prevent sexual harassment in the workplace .
Up till now there have just been recommendations and there have been very different practices among the various Member States .
Now the European Parliament is repeating its demand , which the Council has not approved , that the Member States should oblige employers to prevent sexual harassment in the workplace .
The Committee has found that a certain system that may be very useful in preventing and remedying damage resulting from sexual harassment is that each workplace should have a confidential counsellor people can turn to in such cases .
Another important issue is that the directive seeks to strengthen rights associated with maternity , adoption and parenthood in general and to protect mothers in particular - but also fathers - from the sort of discrimination shown to young parents .
Every day we hear examples of how employers still ask young women whether they intend to have children in the next few years , and this is how a very large number of people seeking employment might become the victims of serious discrimination .
This has already been illegal in the past but this discrimination must still be absolutely prevented .
The European Parliament is proposing that this directive will serve to bring this about once and for all .
This also covers the issue whereby a person must have the right to return to the same job , or at least a similar one , and with the same terms and conditions of employment , after a period of maternity leave , for example .
As rapporteur , I have tabled an amendment in which I also want to emphasise that the unfavourable treatment of fathers must be declared to be discrimination forbidden under this directive .
It is absolutely vital that Parliament tomorrow adopts the amendments tabled by the rapporteur and some groups , in which both fathers and mothers are protected and which refer , for example , to exercising the right to parental leave , so that discrimination cannot take place . We all understand how important co-ordinating work and family life is for young families and our children too .
It is excellent to see that recently the Commission has also realised that day care is an important matter and that it will be possible in this way to raise the employment rate for women to that for men in order to increase the number of employees .
That obviously does not happen unless there is a good system of day care .
This directive does not lay down legal provision for new rights , but seeks to protect those who want to exercise their rights - both fathers and mothers - from discrimination at work .
Parliament is proposing that the plans for equality in the workplace be adopted .
This is a very strategic proposal , as equality must be actively and systematically promoted at grassroots level , in other words , where people work .
It has been a joy to see that employers ' organisations have also actually approved this idea .
I hope that we will get wide support for this proposal .
I would like to thank the Commission for its very constructive attitude .
I believe that , united , we will see a decision taken on this directive soon .
If the Council does not approve all Parliament ' s proposals legislative conciliation may be begun very swiftly .
Mr President , there is a German proverb that says good things are worth waiting for .
However , I remain to be convinced , especially now that I have heard what the rapporteur had to say , that everything will turn out for the best in tomorrow 's vote on the recommendation for a second reading on the directive amending the important 1976 directive .
I honestly have to say that the progressive Council common position came as a pleasant surprise after the botched first reading in this House , which my group had very little to do with .
I could even have lived with the text proposed by the Council .
We could have avoided the risks of having too many new amendments at this stage and wasting valuable time on laborious negotiations on resolutions .
But that was not to be , since the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities once again failed to recognise the truism that the better is the enemy of the good .
Because of our persistence , Mrs Ghilardotti and I , the spokespersons of the two major groups in this House , which are needed to muster 314 votes , have succeeded in persuading the rapporteur not to table yet more superfluous amendments which really give women out there very little except semantic self-opionatedness and confused ideology .
We now have before us a number of new amendments from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , to which the rapporteur belongs .
This directive is one of the EU 's most important pieces of legislation .
It needs to be clear and legally tenable .
Above all , it should not be overloaded with excessive verbiage that really has no place in a legal text which will have to be interpreted by the judges of the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
Those judges to whom I have read the newly tabled definitions of harassment and sexual harassment in the workplace are totally horrified .
In particular , I wish to emphasise that the Council has recognised men 's right to paternity leave .
We really had to use our powers of persuasion to convince the rapporteur not to include in the text the idea that not only any discrimination against women but also against men in connection with pregnancy or maternity should be regarded as discrimination in the context of this directive .
However , we ultimately succeeded in making it clear that men can still not become pregnant and accordingly cannot give birth !
At the last moment , the rapporteur - who tabled an amendment contrary to the agreement we had reached - wanted to reinsert a provision to the effect that discrimination against men and women in the context of reconciling family and career duties counts as discrimination for the purposes of the directive .
This would have no benefit at all , apart from encouraging litigation , and especially litigation advocated by people who exploit woolly provisions of this kind .
Many of us still have problems with legal actions taken by associations and the requirement for employers to produce complicated annual reports and statistics .
Then I would like to mention equal pay .
There is a directive dating from 1975 on equal pay for equal work or work of equal value .
That directive is certainly in need of improvement , but in its own context and not this one .
We are calling on the Member States to take measures to ensure that employers promote equal pay for equal work in a planned and systematic way .
That is mistaken for a number of reasons .
First of all , there is the autonomy of the two sides of industry - the employers and the unions .
In this context , any demand that employers should promote equal pay for equal work would fall short of the provisions of the 1975 equal pay directive .
There is a French proverb that says ' Superflue , chose très nécessaire ' .
However , that does not apply to legislative texts .
I hope that in the interests of equal treatment of men and women we will concentrate on the essentials and eliminate anything superfluous when we vote tomorrow .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Hautala , for her willingness to take into account the considerations and the work of all the political groups .
The report she is tabling today and upon which we are to vote tomorrow shows that Parliament has focused on the most important points , which will improve the common position , in order to achieve the adoption of the amendments to the directive with all speed .
Although the common position recognised Parliament ' s position at first reading on a precise definition of direct and indirect discrimination - which we welcome - we feel that it is necessary - and this is an important amendment - to provide precise definitions of harassment , sexual harassment and the procedures for combating it , including preventive measures .
We also feel that it is important to keep our amendment reducing the derogations provided for by the Commission and the Council in respect of the implementation of the directive , and that it is necessary to reinforce protection of maternity and paternity rights , including in cases of adoption , providing effective safeguards against discrimination against parents using the rights they are entitled to .
There is one point which I am sure will be discussed in conciliation , for the Commission too expressed reservations regarding this point in its amended position , and it is the provision for positive measures laying down specific advantages .
We felt that it was important to include them because that consolidates the provisions of the Treaty .
Another important point which we feel should still be included is the laying down of effective , proportionate and dissuasive sanctions , leaving it to the Member States to identify procedures , an issue which we have also addressed in other debates in this very Chamber and which we endorsed with the vote on the report on information and consultation .
Moreover , it is necessary to make clear , as we have done , the concept of protection for victims , the extension of this protection to trade union representatives and the need for the bodies created to apply the principle of equality to be provided with adequate resources so that they can lend appropriate legal and other assistance to the victims of gender discrimination .
We must also clarify the provision made for collective action to be brought in the event of breaches of the directive and the requirement for employees to draw up equal opportunities plans .
The Socialist Group will vote for all the amendments adopted in committee .
Regrettably , however , I have to tell the rapporteur that we do not support the two amendments she tabled together with the Liberals and the GUE , not so much as regards the content as because we feel they do not achieve anything substantial in legislative terms and , on the contrary , inappropriately go against the compromise reached , which I hope will be confirmed tomorrow with a very wide majority in this House to give us more power in conciliation .
Mr President , the rapporteur has made every effort to reach consensus .
She therefore deserves all credit for the emphatic result that is now before us .
Many necessary improvements have been made to the measures against sexual intimidation and in connection with adoption leave and a woman ' s right to return to her old job after maternity leave .
If the Commission and the Council are serious about the equal treatment of men and women , they would do well to adopt all these amendments .
I was astonished to find out from my Christian-Democratic counterparts that pregnancy is a purely female issue .
On the contrary : it is of the utmost importance for men to be given the opportunity to be more involved in the new life that they have helped create .
The joint amendment that is before us does not create new rights .
We simply do not want men who wish to make use of their existing national rights , for example , to three -days ' leave , to be prevented from doing so .
In the view of the liberal group , unlike that of the two major groups , it consequently seems hardly too much to ask for men and women to be able to make use of existing rights to combine work and care tasks without experiencing discrimination .
We do live , after all , in the twenty-first century .
Needless to say , the green-liberal-GUE amendment on mainstreaming is also an important addition .
I therefore hope that the others will also support us in this and that we indeed face a more equal future backed by a broad majority .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the original Commission proposal , with the exception of a few positive measures , has to be described as extremely weak , to put it mildly .
It contains a number of major failings .
There were hardly any innovative ideas in it , except for how to tackle sexual violence , something which , for a directive which is already 25 years old , is telling .
However , it is , of course , positive that sexual intimidation is recognised as a form of discrimination , particularly against women , but recognition is as far as it goes .
There is no regulation providing for a possible preventative policy , and the protection of witnesses is not regulated properly either .
In addition , there is no coherent regulation of sanctions in the event of this form of discrimination taking place .
It can be likened to driving through a set of red traffic lights .
You are allowed to drive , no one is stopping you from doing so , and no measures are taken .
Moreover , the penalty is extremely lenient .
In order to protect women better after pregnancy , in those countries where this is regulated , fathers should be given the same protection as mothers , so that work and family life can be combined .
Hence , also the green amendment to establish one regulation for both mothers and fathers so that fathers can look after their children more but are also protected in the same way .
There is a clear majority in this House in favour of regulating a number of more specific matters .
Most of these matters , however , belong in other and separate directives , such as the pregnancy directive and equal pay for equal work .
In recent years , the Commission has proved unable to draft a number of amendments to directives which are more tailored to the current needs of women .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance therefore urges the Commission once again to table amendments of this kind to existing directives , possibly in the form of a codification of the male and female equality acquis .
We are meanwhile awaiting the Commission proposal on male and female equality outside the employment process with bated breath .
Finally , I should like to express the hope that the Belgian Presidency , given its own progressive legislation in this respect , succeeds in convincing the Member States of the importance of approving the directive by 2 January and that it can approve this directive under the Presidency of Mrs Onkelinkx .
Mr President , Mrs Diamantopoulou , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank Mrs Hautala for her unstinting effort , prior to the summer and also today , in wanting to give the Commission ' s proposal some structure , whilst reiterating the need for specific directives , such as equal pay , protection during pregnancy and motherhood , and now the recognition of types of harassment , and that of the reconciliation of family and working life .
Thank you , Mrs Hautala , for having done so much work , which was not easy .
I would now like to explain why the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party and I support the amendment by Mrs Hautala .
The Commission is certainly willing to recognise the right of fathers to look after their children .
We have the recommendation on the protection of workers who look after their children .
Why stop , though , when things are going so well ?
We now need , and this is the purpose of our amendment , to acknowledge that inequality , or discrimination in other words , can exist , with regard to fathers , when they want to look after their children .
Why did the Committee on Women ' s Rights not go this far ?
Personally , I do not understand this and I would hope that we are a little more reasonable in the future .
What will happen if we are ?
Not only more quibbling , as Mrs Lulling believes , but , quite simply , better recognition of what is needed - not only by women , but by men as well - in order to be able to have both a family and a career .
If we do not do both , we are not living in the twenty-first century , as Mrs van der Laan said .
That is why I believe that this amendment simply provides the possibility of extending the right of fathers , something that we also hope for and want to acknowledge .
That is why I think it is important to support this amendment .
In addition , I would now like to highlight several points that are new in these proposals for amendments .
On the one hand , the introduction of adoption is very important , this is something new , which we must weigh up .
Next , I must say that my group supports the need to set out some positive measures .
We must not be satisfied with dealing with this at arm 's length , we must clearly define these measures and this is what has been done , as a solid legal instrument will be the result .
I feel that we must also support the possibility of associations and organisations commencing proceedings .
In doing this , we recognise that there will not just be individuals faced with a law or faced with proceedings , but also bodies which can support these individuals .
This may be the reason that , whilst it is worthwhile , and whilst we can welcome the protection of workers ' representatives who support complainants against discrimination , on the other hand , we have done away with the protection of possible witnesses , or of individuals who witness the harassment or discrimination that some individuals experience , and I think this is a real pity .
I personally deplore this , even though we did not table an amendment on this for tomorrow .
Mr President , Mrs Diamantopoulou , ladies and gentlemen , these are the points that I wanted to make , on behalf of my group .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur for her work .
Parliament has stressed on many occasions that equal opportunities for men and women must be more than just a principle .
Equal opportunities is a concept , a definition which must be translated into a genuine effort by the institutions to ensure , first and foremost , genuine equal treatment of men and women as regards access to work and professional training .
What is more , working women must also be able to choose whether to take the opportunity to have a family and bring up children without this jeopardising their professional careers through no fault of their own .
Indeed , society must be re-educated to see motherhood not just as a woman ' s right but also as an opportunity for society as a whole , considering , not least , that one of the causes of the falling birth rate is precisely the fact that many women are discouraged from having children by the rigid mechanisms of the employment world .
For precisely this reason , we need not just to ensure that a woman has the right to resume her job when maternity leave comes to an end but , in order to genuinely protect working mothers , we need to be able to provide them with more flexible legislation on parental leave , allowing fathers to benefit from paternity leave too so that they can attend to the child during its first few months of life .
In conclusion , Mr President , the European Union should increasingly promote all such instruments - social , legal and economic - which can provide strong , practical - as opposed to theoretical - support for women , especially working women , and thus provide strong support for families .
Mrs Lulling , I would like to thank you for livening up this evening ' s sitting . These sittings can sometimes be rather monotonous , but I would like to remind you of our Rules of Procedure .
You must , in principle , wait until the end of the debates if you wish to make a personal statement , and you have limited speaking time .
You spoke for more than two minutes .
I think , however , that your fellow Members now have a much clearer understanding of your position .
We shall now take the speakers who wish to make a personal statement , beginning with Mrs Avilés Perea .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are dealing with the second reading of a directive which is important for the application of the principle of equal treatment for men and women , in terms of access to employment , training , professional promotion and working conditions .
This directive has led to many hours of work , meetings and agreements between the different groups in order to achieve a text that is acceptable to the majority of the House , as well as the Council and the Commission .
It has not been easy , but foremost has been the desire for a legal text which is a good instrument for providing women with equal access to the labour market under equal conditions and for allowing them to reconcile family and professional lives , which still causes women enormous problems , especially young women .
Article 1 ( 2 ) , which guarantees that women retain their job after maternity leave , is of the greatest importance .
Not because it is an innovation , since it is included in most national legislations , but because , despite this , retaining jobs and continuing professional promotion after maternity are still creating enormous problems for women .
These problems principally affect women , but the directive lays down that , when a father has paternity leave , he can have the same guarantees as women , although this leave is after the specific leave for childbirth , which is exclusive to women .
Also included are positive measures which promote the presence of the least-represented sex in a specific working sector , in order to allow greater equality between men and women .
It is also important to stress that the directive deals with a work problem which unfortunately affects women more than men : sexual harassment , which will not only be prosecuted and punished , but prevention measures will also be adopted in companies .
Although we are aware that small companies may have problems complying with this directive , we believe that it is an important achievement for equality between men and women .
I hope that in the end it will help women and not create additional problems for them .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Hautala very sincerely for the enormous amount of work that we have achieved together here .
This proposal became necessary because appeals had been made to the European Court of Justice in over 40 cases .
The most prominent cases , which we in the European Parliament have also been very much involved in , a point I would like to reiterate , were the Kalanke and Marshall cases .
These cases have important ramifications not only in Germany , but have also led to a degree of legal uncertainty throughout the Union .
The anti-discrimination provisions of Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam and Articles 141 and 3 give us a clear legal basis for amending this directive now so as to improve the position of women .
Many of the extensive amendments at first reading are reflected in the common position .
That is our first achievement .
Direct and indirect discrimination , sexual harassment in the workplace , positive action - these are now all covered by the common position .
Nevertheless , we are now going a step further .
We want to protect not only mothers but also fathers , something that , as is reflected here , originally met with some resistance in this House .
But that is what we expect .
I think that we now need to find some clearer wording .
In the course of various extended working sessions , we have managed to achieve a broad consensus in this Parliament on 15 compromise proposals .
I accordingly wish to recommend that my group should stick to this compromise .
Our objective remains that of rapidly improving the position of both men and women who are committed to their family , and working towards reconciling professional and family commitments .
We want to create a clear legal framework .
That is why if it proves necessary we want to initiate the conciliation procedure as quickly as possible .
We hope that the compromise before us here will hold up and that the Commission and the Council will accordingly also display a willingness to agree , for the benefit of women .
The report by Mrs Hautala tackles the subject of equality between men and women as regards access to employment .
As far as access to the floor is concerned , this equality has not been respected this evening .
Rest assured , this is something that I regret , as we had 16 female speakers to just one male speaker .
We shall therefore listen even more closely to what he says over the next two minutes .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Hautala for a good piece of work .
If it had only depended upon herself , the result could certainly have been still better , but we have to be able to live with compromises , and these are important steps that are now being taken to move closer to equality in Europe .
The right to equal conditions at the workplace is a fundamental right and should go without saying .
That is unfortunately not the case .
The issue is one of human dignity and of avoiding harassment , something with which everyone ought to agree .
In spite of this , we know that many women in Europe are at present exposed to sexual harassment on a daily basis .
A genuine change in attitude is needed , but also clear and vigorous legislation if we are to create equal opportunities in working life .
The present values also lead to large discrepancies in salaries between men and women .
I nonetheless think it is important to say that equal opportunities for men and women are not in actual fact only a women ' s issue .
It is an issue that affects us all , irrespective of our gender .
Rights are needed which make it possible for both mothers and fathers to combine professional and family life .
Maternity and paternity leave must obviously be brought into line with each other .
My own experience teaches that equality must begin in the home .
I sometimes think that the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities does not do enough to include us men in its view of equality .
I think that that is a pity and is in danger of delaying more resolute work for equality within the European Union .
I should like to conclude by saying that I feel dissatisfied with Amendment 7 .
I do not think that the wording goes far enough .
Every mother and father must be entitled to return to her or his own work after parental leave .
I emphasise his or her own work . The wording , work of equal value is not enough , for there is then a risk of employers less conscious of their responsibilities exploiting this opportunity to create worse conditions for parental leave .
Unfortunately , there are many such examples in my own country , too .
I should therefore have liked to have seen clearer wording .
Allow me an additional ten seconds - given that Mrs Lulling was given an extra two minutes - and allow me to say to the latter that my marriage would never have survived if my wife and I had not shared the parental leave equally .
In view of the fact that Mrs Lulling spoke so clearly , all of us in this House understand that Amendment 17 will of course be supported by Mrs Lulling , and for that I am very grateful .
Thank you .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank Mrs Hautala but say at the same time that the best is often the enemy of the good .
The two amendments that were tabled subsequently by Mrs Hautala have caused a great deal of difficulty , for a large majority of people who are already unhappy about this directive have found in these amendments a reason to vote against a whole host of things .
And in the knowledge that 314 votes must be attained , you should have acted more wisely .
Approval of the present compromise is far more important than submission of your two additional amendments .
I should like to make this clear to you : it was a poor strategy .
For my second point , I should like to address the Commission .
Back in 1993 , I drafted a Royal Decree in which I made it compulsory for businesses to draw up an annual report about equal opportunities for men and women in their businesses .
That Royal Decree goes beyond what is stated in the present text , since the latter merely encourages them , whereas my piece of legislation was binding .
Commissioner , I have to say , if you want this to yield results , there will need to be consultation with the social partners - much more so than is now the case - and there will need to be agreement with them to apply the provisions of the laws and the directives .
For our big problem is not the legislator .
He will faithfully transpose what is in the European directives , sometimes too late , but it is done , anyway .
Our big problem is the application in the field , and that is in the hands of the social partners .
Equal pay and the equal treatment , and whatever else , of women is never a priority for trade unions and employers .
In my opinion , the Commission and the Member States would do well to emphasise this .
Mr President , imagine if men in Europe earned 25 per cent less than women .
Imagine if one in two men were subject to sexual harassment .
Imagine if European men were over-represented in precarious , low-skilled part-time jobs and were given their notice when they told their employers that they intended to have children .
Imagine if the proportion of men in Europe ' s national parliaments were only 20 per cent .
The mind boggles .
However , it is women , and not men , who are discriminated against in this way .
' A new way of thinking is required in order to solve the problems created by the old way of thinking , ' as Albert Einstein once said .
I want to congratulate Mrs Hautala who has worked to find a new way of solving the problems entailed in the EU ' s out-of-date Directive on Equal Treatment .
The proposal on which we are to vote tomorrow lays the foundation for clear and effective legislation in the Member States to protect women and men from gender discrimination at work .
Countries must take active measures to promote equality in practice .
What is perhaps most important is Mrs Hautala ' s demand that public and private employers in Europe must , in a planned and systematic way , prevent gender discrimination , harassment and unequal treatment .
It is no longer enough to react after the employee has complained .
Employers are encouraged to draw up annual equality plans with statistics concerning differences in salaries and the proportion of women and men at different levels and with proposed measures to combat this state of affairs .
Employers should be responsible for ensuring that their employees are not harassed and that they have equal wages for equal work and the opportunity to pursue careers and , especially , to combine work and family life .
I assume that the Council is prepared to approve our proposals .
Only then shall we have an instrument for removing the extensive discrimination against women in working life .
Mr President , the amendment to the 1976 directive is a very important move and illustrates the Commission 's sensitivity on the question of equal treatment for men and women .
For its part , the Committee on Women 's Rights , thanks to the sterling efforts of our rapporteur , Mrs Hautala , and other honourable Members , has helped to produce an improved text today which attracts a broader consensus .
That is why we expect it to be warmly supported by both the Commission and the Council .
The new directive certainly responds to the change in the situation which has taken place over the last twenty-five years as regards women 's employment and vocational training and replaces an outdated legislative framework which has done what it can to combat discrimination against women , serious infringements of the principle of equality , higher unemployment rates , the exclusion of women from numerous professions and the general division of the job market along gender lines .
I should like to inform the House that the Greek Parliament recently voted almost unanimously to replace a similar article in the Constitution allowing derogations from the principle of sexual equality on the labour market .
The Hautala report suggests a new , better , framework and introduces new types of measures , such as measures to prevent and combat sexual harassment in the workplace , efficient protection for workers from unequal treatment related to pregnancy and maternity , judicial protection , positive measures to apply equality in practice , as other Members have pointed out , and sanctions to punish infringements of the directive .
However , I feel that the directive could be clearer in defining purely objective selection criteria for all jobs and should not leave loopholes for gender-based exceptions and exclusions .
Mr President , this directive is tremendously important to the future of Europe because it regulates matters which concern the whole of society - men and women alike - and is a way of achieving fundamental strategic objectives of the European Union , as laid down in the EC Treaty , Articles 2 and 3 , and the European Social Agenda .
It absolutely must update this directive if it is to be an efficient means of achieving these objectives .
The reform of the directive has been a dogged and , at times , difficult procedure , as happens when we try to adopt a correct , binding and efficient text .
Both the rapporteur and all the political groups showed willing , although it was difficult to strike a balance between the ambitious objectives set by the European Union for women 's employment and the quality of jobs , the already high acquis communautaire on equal treatment for men and women and the exceptional , high-level performance by certain Member States which have gone beyond the proposals for the directive ( Mrs Karamanou and Mrs Smet referred to experiences in Greece and Belgium ) and the real need to maintain flexibility and the status of female employment during a downswing in the economy and on the labour market , help speed up cooperation with the Council and the European Commission and avoid overburdening the text with important women 's issues such as equal pay , which are dealt with elsewhere , and achieve the consensus and majority needed .
In my personal experience , this procedure has given all of us , European institutions , national governments , social partners and social agencies , a more responsible attitude to women 's problems and to the importance of female employment to our development objectives .
I think that this mature attitude will also find expression in tomorrow 's vote .
The views of my political group have been stated and I share them .
Personally , I support Amendment No 17 on the recognition of paternity as a factor in the strategy to promote new working conditions , as a factor in the balanced participation of men and women in family and professional life and as acknowledgement of the social values of family life and support for women in their multiple and simultaneous roles .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion is a stated objective that we all share .
The only disagreement is about how we should achieve this , and there is ultimately the question of how effective individual measures are , or whether such measures just mean more rules and regulations , and extra expenditure and bureaucracy , which we certainly do not need .
The Council has not taken all Parliament 's demands on board in its common position .
Nevertheless , it is true to say that the text of the original proposal has been considerably improved upon .
This means that we have taken an important step on the road to updating the Community legislative framework .
However , a number of issues and problem areas remain to be resolved .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities has closely examined all these unresolved questions , and a decision has been reached between the groups not to re-examine all the outstanding demands , but rather the most important .
The rapporteur , Mrs Hautala , has made enormous efforts in order to work out viable compromises .
We have the result before us .
It emerged from the first reading debate that paternity rights cannot be the same as maternity rights .
The compromise accordingly does not affect Member States ' freedom to recognise the right to paternity leave within their borders .
Both mothers and fathers should have the option of devoting themselves to family duties .
This - in contrast to the opinion that we have heard expressed here - is undeniably the stated objective of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats .
Furthermore , the formula whereby a woman on maternity leave should be entitled , after the end of her period of maternity leave , to return to her job or to an equivalent post must be taken on board .
However , we have problems with the definition of sexual harassment .
We seem to have ended up with a rather woolly form of words here that is not helpful for any judge or other person that has to make a decision on this .
Lastly , I would like to make one further brief comment opposing the annual reporting arrangements for employers on progress with equal treatment .
Bureaucracy alone will not promote equal treatment .
We also need to think about small and medium-sized enterprises so that they too accept women looking for jobs .
Mr President , Commissioner , this evening , we are discussing the equal treatment of men and women with regard to access to employment , occupational training and chances of promotion , and with regard to working conditions .
In actual fact , it is astonishing that we should still be discussing this topic , because we have been discussing it for so long , and virtually everyone is convinced , both men and women , that such equal treatment is fair and does not and should not have to be justified .
However , we are not yet that far advanced , unfortunately .
To this day , women are being treated as inferior and discriminated against , also in working situations .
The combination of work and care still poses problems in many cases .
That is why I am pleased with this report .
I am also pleased that we were able to find a compromise text concerning a number of important points .
I therefore hope that the voting tomorrow will be positive so that it can truly represent a step forward in the process of equal treatment .
The report encourages States and organisations involved to take measures in favour of equal treatment and to combat sexual intimidation .
Better legal protection is given and , for example , opportunities are given to return to work following pregnancy or in connection with adoption .
In addition , we will gain a better insight into the actual situation concerning participation of men and women and we shall have access to better , updated statistics .
That is why I should like to extend warm thanks to the Commission for the initiative .
I should also like to thank the rapporteur warmly for all her efforts to persuade us to sing from the same song sheet , but a special thanks goes to all those who have worked hard on this broadly-based text .
I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Hautala , and I would like to thank all the Members of the committee for their efforts and excellent contributions in this difficult and complex area .
I am aware of your concerns to improve the text of the common position on which there was unanimous agreement in the Council on 11 June 2001 .
As you know from the first reading , the Commission accepted in spirit the majority of your amendments - 49 amendments of a total of 70 - and consequently drew up an amended proposal which reflected this position .
In general it should be stressed that the common position considerably enhances the text of the initial proposal and responds to the desire to update the text of Directive 76 / 207 .
We must now focus on the most essential issues of the directive and make a concerted effort to find possible solutions to improve even further the common position .
As you know , the Council only reached an agreement after long discussions on issues such as the precise wording of the definitions and the article on maternity and paternity leave , on which it was very difficult to reach agreement in the Council .
The compromise therefore is extremely delicate .
On the other hand I feel that the Council could make further compromises in areas such as equality plans , the role of bodies for the promotion of equality and the introduction of preventive measures to combat sexual harassment .
In this context the Commission can accept the following amendments . On Amendments Nos 1 and 5 , on preventive measures against sexual harassment the Commission can accept in part the idea of introducing measures for preventing sexual harassment by reformulating the text .
Instead of obliging employers to introduce preventive measures , it would be preferable to encourage employers to do so .
On Amendment No 8 , on positive measures , the Commission can accept this amendment in part if a definition is contained in the recitals instead of the article of the directive .
On Amendment No 9 , on provisions in contracts and agreements , the Commission accepts that annulment should be obligatory but rejects the removal of the possibility for amendment of the contract .
Here there is the need for flexibility .
On Amendment No 13 , on the role of the independent budgets , the Commission can accept this amendment in part by reformulating the proposed text .
The text of the common position could be improved by strengthening the role of bodies for the promotion of equal treatment and by adding to their tasks the monitoring and follow-up of Community legislation in the field of equal treatment .
The Commission can also accept a reformulation of Article 6 ( 3 ) , by expressly mentioning that designated bodies acting on behalf of victims have an interest in ensuring that the provisions of the directive are complied with .
On Amendment No 14 , on equality plans and the company level , the Commission can accept this idea in part , but with a new formulation for Article 8 ( b ) .
On Amendment No 15 , on reporting on positive action measures , the Commission will propose an alternative text so as to report on positive measures only every three years .
On Amendment No 16 on gender mainstreaming , the Commission accepts this amendment partially and in spirit , but only to the extent that it respects the wording of the Treaty .
Now I should like to turn to those amendments which cannot be accepted by the Commission .
Amendment No 4 , rewording the common position 's definition of sexual harassment , in order to take into account Parliament 's definition of sexual harassment .
Amendments Nos 7 and 17 reformulating the text of the common position on maternity and paternity leave by reintroducing inter alia the idea of maternity and paternity leave where children are adopted .
The common position was hotly debated in the Council on this issue and a delicate compromise was reached .
It is unlikely therefore that any further change would be accepted .
Here I would just like to remind you that there is , of course , the paternity leave directive - the first to be adopted following an agreement between the social partners .
The Commission did not accept Amendment No 11 on group action in cases of discrimination - especially without the consent of the victim of discrimination .
On Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 6 , 10 and 12 , the Commission considers that the content of these amendments is already covered by the common position .
To sum up , the Commission can accept in part or in spirit Amendments Nos 1 , 5 , 8 , 9 , 13 , 14 , 15 and 16 .
It rejects Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 10 , 11 , 12 and 17 .
Thank you very much , Mrs Diamantopoulou .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
6th , 7th and 8th EDF discharge for 1999
The next item is the second report ( A5-0337 / 2001 ) by Mrs Rühle , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the discharge in respect of the financial management of the sixth , seventh and eighth European Development Funds for the 1999 financial year .
I shall now give the floor to Mrs Rühle , who has five minutes ' speaking time .
Mr President , I am today proposing that the Commission should be given discharge in respect of the financial management of the sixth , seventh and eighth European Development Funds for the 1999 financial year .
Unfortunately , we had to postpone the discharge in the spring , because I as rapporteur had received insufficient information from the Commission .
This information is now available and I would like to specifically thank the Commission for its cooperation .
I can recommend discharge today without any reservations .
Nevertheless , I hope and indeed expect that the fruitful cooperation which we have had with the Commission since the spring will continue when it comes to future reporting relating to the Development Fund , because such cooperation is needed to jointly solve problems in this area .
However , my report is still a very critical one .
It refers to 1999 , and 1999 was the first budget year for which the new Commission was fully responsible .
However , full responsibility does not mean that the Commission can be blamed for the mistakes of the past .
We all know that reforms take time and we can see that the necessary measures have been initiated .
Despite that , I would like to briefly reiterate my criticism .
It is implementation that is at stake here . For example , there was a gap between commitments at EUR 2.69 billion and payments actually made in 1999 at EUR 1.27 billion .
Unfortunately , the same also applies to the implementation of the debt relief initiative for the poorest countries in the world .
I am , of course , aware that this reflects the general crisis in development aid , and that this situation is not unique to the Development Fund or to the Commission 's work , and that all the Member States , together with the Commission and the Parliament , need to consider new approaches to development policy .
The problem is a failure of political will to provide aid on a generous scale , combined with a lack of instruments to effectively implement the available funds .
That is the problem in a nutshell .
In view of the lateness of the hour , I do not want to go into great detail , but I would like to emphasise that the Commission 's approach to solving this problem is a step in the right direction .
It involves strengthening local delegations , providing them with better equipment and preparation , in short , making local delegations more competent .
However , I would also like to make an appeal to Parliament in this context .
In the Committee on Budgets , we had protracted debates on the need for higher staffing levels , particularly for delegations , and the Committee on Budgets put pressure on the Committee on Budgetary Control to make these posts available and not to play spurious political games with a view to making the Commission deliver reforms before we approve staff changes .
This is absurd of course , because these posts in local delegations are needed above all else so that reforms can be made in the first place .
The further efforts at reform described in the Commission 's internal audit report are also important and need to be discussed in detail between the Commission and the Parliament .
I would like though to briefly mention a couple of expectations following on from the report of the Court of Auditors . I hope that in future these will be the hallmark of the discharge process and of cooperation between the Parliament and Commission .
One important point is that we need an ongoing assessment of progress in implementing measures to reform public administration in the ACP States .
We need to monitor progress achieved in the key sectors of health and education , using meaningful indicators such as the increase in the number of teachers or doctors , thus providing more qualitative checks instead of quantitative checks .
This would also mean the discharge process in the Parliament itself having to change .
In order words , we would have to shift our examination towards quality control and refrain from making a great hue and cry about points of detail .
We would also have to carry out an annual audit of accounting and sound management of resources on the basis of samples and , lastly , apply clearly defined sanctions - such as the reduction or suspension of payments - in cases where the agreed reform measures are not complied with .
If we implement these measures together , then I believe that we will be jointly taking an important step towards enhancing the structure of development aid , and that we will be better placed to convince the EU 's taxpayers and to secure approval for the necessary expenditure .
I say this because the situation prevailing since 11 September has demonstrated how important development aid is .
It will be a pivotal factor .
Furthermore , the EU has now become the world 's largest provider of development aid .
That is why we urgently need this joint reform .
draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation . ( ES ) Mr President , the difficult circumstances which have accompanied the management of the 1999 budget , of which we are all well aware , have especially affected funds for external relations and , even more , aid to third countries , including the European Development Fund .
For the Socialist Group , the good management of the European Development Fund is not only essential for reasons of correct and transparent accounting , but because this fund and all Community aid resources are essential if we are to contribute to reducing poverty , which is one of our priorities .
We are therefore closely monitoring the Commission ' s action in this area .
The eventful journey of this report through the competent committees , leading to its approval , is a testimony to this interest .
Last year we made our 1998 discharge conditional upon the orientation of Community spending towards reducing poverty and we improved the structure of the budget in this respect , in order to reduce the risks of dispersal of aid funds .
This year we have delayed , on one occasion , the discharge , while awaiting a series of reports from the Court of Auditors .
We are now in a position to approve it , now that the Commission has adopted a series of measures to improve the effectiveness of aid , in particular the creation of Europe Aid , but at the same time certain data leads to some reservations : in 1999 the level of payments from the EDF was disappointing when compared to the level of commitment appropriations and payments achieved in previous years , as Mrs Rühle has said .
Initiatives such as the reduction of the debt of the least-developed countries are not being complied with in accordance with the commitments the Commission has made .
Contracts funded by the EDF essentially benefit companies in the Member States , to the detriment of local companies and organisations .
The Commission is not yet sufficiently directing its aid towards reducing poverty .
We want simplification of procedures , integration of the cycle of cooperation , transparency in management , assessment in such important sectors as health and education .
We will monitor compliance with the recommendations of the resolution we are debating today .
The Commission knows that it has the support of the Socialist Group in its efforts to improve the management of the EDF and the Socialist Group trusts that we will see these improvements during the coming financial years , so that we are able to discharge the budget with fewer problems and conditions than has been the case so far .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Rühle 's report on the discharge for the European Development Funds presents an honest picture of the contradictions in our development policy .
On the one hand , there are complaints that we are not willing enough to make generous development aid available , and , on the other hand , it is undeniable that the money actually made available is often only disbursed very slowly .
There must be something wrong with a system under which at the end of 1999 resources of almost EUR 10 billion had been promised and made available without any specific deadlines , but had not been taken up .
The Commission will , of course , say that since then there have been signs of improvement here and there .
Nevertheless , it is a fact that we need to fundamentally review our approach .
The aid we offer through the Development Funds is reaching its limits , because it is geared towards supporting states that in some cases only exist on paper .
There is often a lack of an even semi-functioning public administration , there is a lack of democratic control of those in power , and many countries are in a state of open civil war or on the verge of it .
In a civil war situation , we first need to concentrate aid on conflict resolution and on humanitarian aid .
In other cases , we should concentrate our efforts to a greater extent than before on establishing properly functioning public administrations , which are a prerequisite for meaningfully applying aid from the EU or other donors in the international community .
Such administrations are also a prerequisite for ensuring that countries use their own tax revenue responsibly and in the interests of their citizens .
Our aid must therefore always be linked to reform programmes for public administration .
If these reforms make progress , aid is given , but if they do not progress or if there are setbacks we should not be afraid to turn off the tap .
I know that is a difficult thing to do , but it is precisely in such circumstances that the Commission needs to stand firm and adhere to its principles .
Finally , I would like to say one more thing about this discharge procedure .
The discharge had to be postponed because the Commission did not initially provide the necessary information .
Furthermore , there was again the problem that certain confidential information was only forwarded to the committee chair and to the rapporteur .
As I have often said before , and I shall say it again now , this leads to two classes of Member of the European Parliament - those with and those without access to information .
The committee made it patently clear in its report that this situation should not be allowed to recur , and that the provisions of our Rules of Procedure in respect of the discharge procedure should be fully implemented in future .
In other words , all Members of this House should have access to all confidential information .
Mr President , the Commission is now to be granted discharge for 1999 , but Parliament has , in actual fact , achieved a lot by postponing the discharge first time around .
The Commission has been pressed to take initiatives it would not otherwise have wished to take .
I think the rapporteur has delivered a splendid piece of work , but I also think the Commission deserves to be warmly congratulated when it makes progress - as , I believe , it has in fact done .
I would therefore recommend , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , that we grant discharge for the development fund . At the same time , I want to assure the Commission that all the outstanding problems will be followed up in the discharge for the year 2000 .
The Commission has carried out a major investigation of the counterpart funds and of the roles and responsibilities of the delegations .
An investigation has been carried out into whether the delegations have complied with their responsibilities , and it would appear that they have done so , for disciplinary enquiries are not to be carried out .
I can , of course , ask Mr Nielson if the Commission will confirm that disciplinary enquiries will not be carried out on the basis of its investigations .
I can also - perhaps rather teasingly - ask if the Commission will confirm this report , which will not be sent to Parliament .
The internal audit service has done good work from the start with its investigations of the counterpart funds .
It is a good report which is critical about the way in which the system operates .
The counterpart funds amount to direct budgetary support , and neither the Commission nor the delegations in the beneficiary countries have any direct control over the money .
The report emphasises that direct budgetary support is risky , irrespective of what is done .
Mr Nielson has said that that form of subsidy should nonetheless be maintained .
How , though , does he think that control over the funds can be improved ?
The Commission must also be praised for sending this report to Parliament immediately .
It shows it has learned something from this whole course of events .
Discharge was postponed primarily because there were problems with the supply of information . Reports were sent to the wrong people , were seriously delayed or never arrived .
I think , however , that it is a good result we have achieved , and I therefore recommend discharge for the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to pay Mrs Rühle a compliment .
It is clear that her instincts were good when she postponed the discharge for the European Development Funds back in spring .
We in the Committee for Budgetary Control had at that point not received any substantial information at all on follow-up measures in connection with cases of fraud discovered in 1999 .
However , we now very definitely know what we could only assume at that point , and that is that both the Commission and the European Anti-Fraud Office , OLAF , have had to lower their sights .
For example , fraud in the health sector in the Ivory Coast was discovered in 1998 / 1999 .
Medical equipment including disposable syringes and baby scales had for years been claimed at many times their actual value .
The loss was estimated at around EUR 27.4 million .
When this case came to light , the , at that time , newly appointed Commission said that this money would of course have to be repaid .
We now know that this money has not been returned to the European Development Fund .
According to the Commission the reason for this is that it was legally impossible to demand the money back !
I do not want to go into any further detail here , but this demonstrates how difficult it is to take corrective action once money has been transferred .
Furthermore , in the ACP States , OLAF does not have the same powers of control as it has in the EU Member States , not to mention the fact that it purely and simply does not have the staff to run a comprehensive anti-fraud operation out of Brussels .
It is therefore vital for us to exert pressure to ensure that there is a general improvement in the way public money is looked after in the recipient countries .
Countries that cannot protect their own tax revenue against fraud , corruption and waste are unlikely to be able to provide effective protection for EU funds .
However , for the Commission this also means that it should step up its presence in the recipient countries - and on this point I am in agreement with the rapporteur - but not only by increasing the number of officials in the delegations , but , also , by giving those local delegations more authority .
It should not , after all , be possible to circumvent local delegations in practice by coming to special arrangements direct with Brussels .
Once again , my heartfelt congratulations on your report , Mrs Rühle . We are very happy to vote for it .
Mr President , the closure and the reduction of the status and the staff of twenty-odd delegations in ACP countries , recently decided by the Commission , deals a harsh blow to the commitments to development given in the Cotonou Agreements .
If there is one lesson that we have learnt about monitoring the Community ' s external action for development , it is that the key to its success is the existence of a strong , responsible , independent and credible presence in the recipient countries .
The arguments of budgetary neutrality used by the Commission are fallacious , because opening a delegation in countries such as Saudi Arabia cannot be compared with the overall costs of maintaining a European presence in those countries in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific .
Furthermore this is not only a question of looking at the cost of a delegation , but of looking at the very real damage done to the effectiveness of public spending as a result of not monitoring such spending .
The European Union cannot do without an autonomous and meaningful policy for the less developed world and replace it with a form of regionalisation undertaken in agreement with some of the former colonial powers .
I hope that the Commission rethinks this course of action and treats the ACP countries and the management of the EDF with the importance that they deserve .
Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her excellent and very serious work on this discharge exercise covering EDF 1999 which was the year in which this Commission took office .
This means that I feel especially responsible for the last four months of that year .
Mr Blak mentioned that Parliament has gained much by having this discharge delayed .
I think this is true , but it should be noted that the Commission feels equally pleased with the outcome .
This is like a good love story - it is always worth waiting for .
But it was wrong that the delay had to do specifically with information being held back in contradiction to the agreement between the Commission and Parliament .
The main reason for the delay was that the report from the internal auditor service was not finished and could not be finished because we , on both sides , found it necessary and a good idea to broaden its scope in order to get a serious and deep study of how to handle this method of development cooperation .
So we have solved problems that went beyond what is normally dealt with in the discharge process and this is what we can congratulate each other on tonight .
One remark to Mr Bösch concerning the Ivory Coast - we did get full recovery even though they had a military coup !
We grilled them .
We stuck to what I told Parliament : that we wanted to maintain a position of zero tolerance , and the new military dictators in the Ivory Coast accepted their obligations within the deadline .
We have not , in my time as Commissioner , experienced any case so far where we did not manage to get full recovery when the audit results indicated the need for that .
Our cooperation through the EDF has kept growing , while the support of other major donors for developing countries and especially for the least-developed countries has been declining .
The Funds constitute an increasingly important source of finance for these countries and so , of course , we owe it to them , and to our European taxpayers , to use these resources as effectively as possible .
By the same token , the Commission should be concerned to verify that the beneficiary countries are doing all they can to improve their own capacity for effective budgetary and financial management .
This has been a major theme of this discharge exercise , and it has succeeded in focusing attention on an important area of development cooperation .
The question of sound financial management of budgetary support is , I think , better understood , as a result of the work carried out by the Court of Auditors and the Commission ' s internal audit service , in cooperation with the various Commission services responsible .
I do not see any need to amend the Cotonou Agreement to reflect this .
I am confident that there is a clear consensus between the Commission , the Court of Auditors and Parliament on the right way ahead , and in particular on the importance of budgetary support .
This is a key tool to enhance stability and economic governance .
By doing this in cooperation with other main donors and in a manner that emphasises the responsibility of the recipient government , we are playing a very important role .
I am deeply grateful to Parliament that this perspective has been understood for this budget period .
We need to continue to do this .
No other donor is able and willing to meet this challenge as we are .
Of course , we cannot turn a blind eye to the cases of corruption or of negligence in the management of public funds , and I can reassure you that we will continue this policy of zero tolerance towards fraud and corruption .
But we have to be aware , as you must , that the strengthening of financial control systems in these countries is a long-term process . It has to be tackled with realism .
We have to make an assessment of the risks involved in each action that we consider for EDF finance , and go into action with a clear understanding of those risks .
It has to be based on a common approach with other donors .
An isolated approach by the Commission would be unrealistic .
It must rely on the development of internal accountability .
Cooperation with other donors in this field is better than ever .
We all need improvement , and this is definitely being pursued in good cooperation .
This covers the discharge for 1999 , and the performance for 2000 is in several ways somewhat more encouraging .
One of the main objectives of the reform of the management of the Community ' s external assistance programmes is , of course , drastically to reduce the gap between commitments and payments .
The Commission has been implementing measures since May of last year to tackle this problem .
For instance , we pressed ahead with the closure , wherever possible , of old and dormant commitments , and we proposed also the introduction of a so-called ' sunset clause ' to limit the time during which funds allocated to an action can be used for contracts .
We , therefore , have reason to hope that the situation will gradually improve .
In relation to the slow rate of payments , the figures already available indicate that payments in 2000 increased from EUR 1.27 billion to EUR 1.55 billion .
We still have incredible inertia in the pipeline , in the way in which these figures move .
We have been increasing the total volume of what we do in this area and this is something that will gradually occur as a result of more and more activity year by year .
This is , of course , the challenge we are facing .
I have said , on several occasions , that the lack of comprehensive data about our operations is a real embarrassment .
We have made some progress towards more effective management information systems .
I know that Parliament , and particularly the Development Committee , is anxious to see us make progress in this area , and we are doing our best .
Nevertheless , there is still much to do and we are very conscious of the need to press on with reforming the management of our programmes .
In particular , we are concerned that the process of deconcentration , or delegating to delegations as I prefer to call it , should move ahead smoothly .
The Commission has been asking for additional staff , but the numbers required have been assessed on a very conservative basis and we need every single post .
I therefore hope that Parliament in its decisions on the budget for 2002 will support us in this effort .
It was encouraging to listen to Mr Casaca in this respect .
I thank you for your enthusiastic support and hope you can deliver .
We are determined that the deconcentration exercise should not end by simply exporting from Brussels to the delegations the problems caused by inadequate staffing .
This is serious .
Concern is expressed in the resolution about the percentage of EDF contracts going to companies from the ACP countries , and it requires the Commission to increase this from some 25 % to 40 % in five years .
The ACP countries win a much higher percentage of contracts under the EDF than from almost any other major donor .
This should not be forgotten .
ACP companies already benefit from a substantial preference margin in cases where offers are technically equivalent .
If it is to operate a transparent and fair tendering system , the Commission cannot envisage any kind of fixed quotas which would discriminate against European companies , and which would be contrary to WTO rules .
Nevertheless , we share the political intention of Parliament to maximise the benefits of our aid for local economies , particularly where there is a technically competent and well-structured private sector .
I would point to the new investment facility , part of the Cotonou Agreement , EUR 2.2 billion , which is architectured in order to stimulate the emergence of this activity in our partner countries . This is a way in which they may improve their position in exactly this respect .
We have already identified this as an area where we should push forward .
I am anxious to reassure Parliament that the Commission is strengthening its monitoring procedures on the follow-up of audit .
This is an important part of the reform of the Commission ' s financial management and control .
We also plan improvements to the presentation of the accounts , in response to the comments from the Court of Auditors .
We are ready to enter into a direct dialogue to find out how this is best done .
I will say a few words on the points in the resolution which refer to the transmission of confidential documents .
The respect of confidentiality and the application of correct transmission procedures remain crucial .
The 1999 discharge procedure showed that the framework agreement provides an effective and satisfactory framework for cooperation between the Commission and Parliament .
What we are discussing tonight has been following that set of rules .
I want to make that perfectly clear .
The 1999 discharge procedure was the first to which this framework agreement was applied .
The Commission sought to apply the agreement fully and loyally throughout that procedure .
In the Commission 's view the framework agreement has proved to be an effective mechanism , one benefit being that it allows Parliament to receive confidential and similar information .
The understanding of the importance of development aid seems to be growing as we understand more and more about globalisation . And in the light of recent events we have come to better understand the reality and urgency of interdependency in this world .
We cannot act alone . The challenge of reducing poverty is one in which the whole international community is involved and we share with others the framework for providing aid and for assessing the results .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Mr President , I was rather surprised to hear the Commissioner state that we have recovered the money from the Ivory Coast .
I would be very grateful to the Commissioner if , within or without the framework agreement , he could inform me - in writing if necessary - where all this has been recorded , so that we can understand this .
Ladies and gentlemen , I can see that Mr Nielson is in agreement .
You will without doubt receive all these details as soon as possible .
Classification of Territorial Units for Statistics ( NUTS )
The next item is the report ( A5-0335 / 2001 ) by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the establishment of a common classification of Territorial Units for Statistics ( NUTS ) ( COM ( 2001 ) 83 - C5-0065 / 2001 - 2001 / 0046 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur .
On the basis of a Commission proposal with the best of intentions and leading us in the right direction , I believe that the rapporteur presented the committee with a good draft report and that the result achieved by that committee , as the rapporteur pointed out , is highly satisfactory .
It would be a good thing if the Commission and , subsequently , the Council could take up the proposals of this Parliament ' s Committee on Regional Policy .
Europe is constructed on the basis of agreements and consensus .
We are dealing here with an example of what , in many cases , this way of operating has consisted of : gentlemen ' s agreements .
But from now on many of these agreements must be reflected in the Treaties , with a relevant legal basis .
This is an extremely important issue , as the rapporteur has pointed out very effectively .
We are dealing with European territorial construction .
For this we need clear , homogenous and geographic criteria .
These criteria must be based on politico-administrative criteria - forgive my repetition .
We must not create fictitious units which , in the end , only lead to a lack of confidence in European construction on the part of the different States , the different regions and the citizens .
I am therefore pleased with the proposal from the committee .
I would lastly like to point out an amendment which rather reflects what we are talking about : the amendment by Mrs Cerdeira on the division of the cities of Ceuta and Melilla , which are politico-administrative units , each with its own status .
In this specific case I would like to point out how Mr Hernández Mollar , from my group , also fought for this recognition for a long time , and I believe that tomorrow , when the report presented by the Committee on Regional Policy is approved , we will have achieved a satisfactory result .
This is an example and a reflection of what we want in terms of the division and structuring of Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the classification of territorial units for statistics is not a formality , as might appear at first sight , it is not a technical debate about statistical terms , it is a material question because adopting any classification has direct repercussions on how the development of each territorial unit is supported .
With the forthcoming enlargement , or to be more precise , enlargements , given that candidate countries will integrate in groups , we need to move towards objective criteria for classifying territorial units , so that new members know the rules of play .
The simplest way would be to adopt fully unified criteria for each classification level and for all the Member States .
However , the many and varied specific characteristics of the countries in the Union make this idea unfeasible and impracticable .
So we must agree with the rapporteur and endorse her satisfaction with the Commission initiative which , with the proposed regulation , creates the legal basis for classifying territorial units for statistics .
We should also congratulate the rapporteur who , with her sense of moderation and what I would call female perspicacity , has proposed and accepted feasible improvements to the Commission opinion in order to achieve a better approach to the basic objective , which cannot be but to formulate truly comparable territorial units , in every sense of the word , so that we can establish a universal European statistics system .
Given past injustices , the reasonable doubts of European citizens should not be brushed aside with replies along the lines of " this area is supported , even though it is better off than yours because it is a NUTS II territorial unit , whereas yours isn 't " .
Rationalisation at all operational levels in the Union should be our basic and fixed aspiration .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Miguélez Ramos , for this excellent report .
She has raised important questions and also taken the proposals of others into account .
Our group supports the Commission ' s proposal and , furthermore , the rapporteur ' s view regarding the creation of a proper legal basis for verifying nomenclature .
The issue is also a timely one , as the applicant countries are receiving guidelines for verifying territorial classification in their own countries .
With the present NUTS classification system one problem is that classifications by country have shaped themselves according to each country ' s own needs and traditions .
One cause for criticism is the fact that the land area of regions has not been used as a basis for statistics .
Units vary in size and , for example , a low population density or gradual depopulation are overlooked .
The aims of the regulation regarding clear rules , comparability and impartiality deserve support .
It is also important to determine rules for dealing with amendments and to ensure that the NUTS classification does not change too often .
We would ask you to support our group ' s amendment , whereby islands and the outermost regions are added to the Subparagraph of Article 3 ( 4 ) in order to avoid unnecessary reclassification .
Our group stresses the importance of also having flexibility in classification so that administrative factors and , for example , geographical , social and economic circumstances will be taken into consideration as appropriate .
Our group supports the rapporteur ' s opinion that the Commission should investigate the inclusion of a new level NUTS 4 in the regulation .
The goal relating to the comparative classification of territories will be difficult to achieve , and will take time .
It is essential , however , that we establish a fair classification , which will help to allocate the right actions to the right areas .
Mr President , it is a great pity that Mr Barnier is not here himself , because the NUTS classification is not just a purely technical or statistical question , it is one of the most important political issues for our future cohesion policy .
It is about whom will receive European funding in future , how much they will receive , and about who decides how it will be spent .
These are pivotal issues for the future of the European Union and of the cohesion policy , and that is why this subject , which we are now discussing at the midnight hour , is more important than has been evident hitherto .
The Commission has always adhered purely to statistical criteria for the classification of territorial units and has not taken such political issues into account .
So there was ultimately always a tendency to distribute resources from the structural funds using a scattergun approach , rather than concentrating these resources in any efficient way on the regions in greatest need .
Looking at the candidate countries , the Objective 1 areas have been extended to include high-income regions and centres such as Warsaw and Riga , and these regions receive just as much by way of funding as the poorest regions of the enlarged European Union , Latgale and Masuria .
I am sure that cannot be right .
This runs counter to a credible cohesion policy and I regard it as being totally absurd !
That is why I would like to ask whether the same agency that grants the authority aid funding should also be the control agency .
As I see it , the proposal before us does not adopt a bottom-up approach .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I regard the proposal for a regulation on the establishment of a common classification of Territorial Units for Statistics , NUTS , as being sensible and clear in terms of both statistics and administration .
However , we must ensure that any amendment to the classification also requires the prior approval of the Member States .
We must also ensure that the definition of employment market regions under the ' shared-task ' mechanism can also deviate from NUTS level III in future .
The two-year period provided for between an amendment to NUTS being accepted and coming into force should either be significantly reduced or else totally dropped , as Commission financial support for the Member States can depend on the regional structure .
Otherwise , I am completely satisfied with the Commission proposal , and would in fact be happier without the rapporteur 's amendments that were adopted by a majority of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
Although I said ' by a majority ' , they were in fact adopted unanimously with one abstention , and that abstention was mine .
I voted against certain amendments in committee .
This was because the report repeatedly referred to the adoption of additional criteria for the definition of regions as an objective .
I regard that as a problem , as taking account of , say , economic , geographical and social criteria in the case of non-administrative units will lead to a blurring of these clear criteria .
I believe that a key criterion for the definition of regions should be the number of people living in a region , as in the final analysis they are affected by any decisions regarding the NUTS classification .
When the rapporteur says in one recital that there should be at least three hierarchical levels , the use of that little phrase ' at least ' implies that further levels ought to be created for classifying territorial units .
However , it needs to be borne in mind that the introduction of new statistics for the areas affected would involve a significant additional administrative burden , something that I believe should if anything be limited .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Miguélez and everyone who has spoken in this debate .
I would like to start by clarifying two points that seem essential to me .
It is up to you to interpret whether statistical classification can have a political impact or not ; but I can assure you that that is not the objective of this document , nor was it the Commission ' s intention .
The document is based on a Eurostat proposal which intends to achieve the most equitable treatment possible for all the countries and regions of the European Union .
Nor does this document in any way prejudice regional policy : we do not know who will be objective 1 , who will be objective 2 or whether the current regional policy system will be the same in the future .

We are talking about statistics here ; and we are talking about making the statistics better and as equitable as possible for all the countries of the Union .
What is our intention ?
Our intention is that a practice we have been applying up until now should become a rule .
And we want to do this because it seems essential to us to give a legal character to something which so far has been a consensus between the Member States and the Commission .
But it also seems essential to us as a means of establishing principles for enlargement and in order to continue applying the same criteria that have been applied up to this point .
Until now , the NUTS had no legal basis , now they are acquiring it : this is the objective of the present regulation .
What criteria have we used for the definition of the NUTS ?
Our document is essentially based on three principles .
The first is that the NUTS are legislative regions ; we have therefore tried to define their territory in accordance with existing legislative political definitions : a good definition , recognised by the Member States , of units which in many cases already have governmental structures and comparable statistics , which makes them sufficiently reliable .
The second principle is that we propose three hierarchical levels of NUTS .
In your amendments you have gone further and asked for at least three levels .
With our current room for manoeuvre , from the point of view of producing statistics , to work with more than three levels would create financial problems for Eurostat .
This is one reason , but , furthermore , we believe that three levels will provide us with sufficient and valid information .
The third principle is to try to make the regional statistics comparable .
This is why the size of the NUTS has to be as homogenous as possible .
But we are also aware that there are historic realities and legal situations in each of the countries which mean that this principle cannot be applied in an automatic or mechanical way , and that specific situations have to be taken into account .
There is a consensus between Member States that these principles we have been using until now should also form the ideas behind the new regulation , as I have already mentioned , not only for application in our countries as they stand , but also in the countries which are going to join us in the coming years .
That is why the regulation responds to a series of objectives which you have been able to debate in depth and for which you have made some corrections .
We are heading towards having NUTS that are classified in accordance with the current regional systems , because we believe that this is the most effective instrument we have today for the collection , calculation and diffusion of regional statistics .
Furthermore , in the regulation we set criteria for defining regions in such a way that the candidate countries will have guidelines for regional classification within their own territory .
This objective is essential at this time .
I would also like to stress the need for statistics to be as comparable and as impartial as possible .
These statistics must not be produced and used for political ends , whatever they may be .
It would be very difficult to establish political interests which undoubtedly would lead us to clear contradictions .
This issue is essential for the Union ' s regional policy , but , as I said before , statistical classification must not prejudice the nature of the Union ' s future regional policy .
We intend to create clear rules for future modifications to the classification of NUTS because this will prevent future disputes , which have arisen in the past .
Modifications are inevitable .
We cannot speak of absolutely permanent situations , but NUTS must not be modified too often and of course we must have a system which is based on certain rules and certain pre-established principles .
We therefore believe it to be appropriate that modifications would not take place within a time period of three years , or else we will be faced with monitoring problems .
The regulation , as it is drawn up , allows us to move forward and improve on what we have at the moment .
You have contributed 11 amendments which , in our opinion , help to clarify and improve the regulation .
The Commission can therefore accept the 11 amendments presented by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
I would like to end by stressing that the NUTS Regulation will be an important instrument for achieving comparable and impartial regional statistics in the European Union , on which we will be able to base the regional policy which we will decide on , politically , at the appropriate time .
Thank you very much .
Thank you so much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.09 p.m. )


Madam President , I want to raise an issue on the floor of the House which I am sure will be welcomed . I do so as the Labour Party spokesperson on Northern Ireland .
The House would surely like to welcome the news on the peace process in Northern Ireland and the decommissioning of weapons .
It serves as an example of what can be achieved through peaceful negotiation .
Tribute must be given to those involved in the difficult times of the peace process and the ongoing negotiations .
Mention must be made at the determination of those involved , including David Trimble , and not least a Member of this House , John Hume , who has fought for peace for over three decades .
Mr Cashman , I am even more pleased to hear this good news because I was on an official visit to Ireland last week , and , naturally , we were all waiting for this announcement .
Thank you for your comments .
Madam President , as you were informed earlier this week , I was in Scotland protesting against the Trident nuclear submarine base there and I was arrested .
What is the situation concerning our immunity in other Member States ?
I understood that we could not be arrested in such circumstances .
I have nothing against the Scottish Police .
They were extremely courteous .
They were aware of the concept of peaceful demonstration .
Maybe they should train the police in places like Genoa and show them how to react to peaceful protests .
What is the situation regarding our immunity ?
I was not breaking the peace , but trying to keep the peace by helping to rid the world of nuclear weapons .
Secondly , in relation to my immunity : Does that not count when I am in another country ?
Mrs McKenna , I had , of course , been informed of the situation that you were in and I am pleased to see that you are back with us .
We shall thoroughly examine the issue regarding protocol .
I shall of course take the appropriate steps to ensure that Members are properly protected , if this is necessary .
Madam President , after that intervention inspired by naked self-interest , may I come back to more important matters of the day .
I would like to support my colleague , Mr Cashman , and in particular point out that this Parliament has been a very active supporter of the peace and reconciliation process in Northern Ireland .
It has been a long , and at times faltering , road to achieving peace and no one knows that better than our own Nobel Peace Prizewinner , John Hume .
I grew up in Northern Ireland in the shadow of violence , terrorism and intimidation .
We are now witnessing another milestone in the return to peace for future generations .
May I ask you therefore to write on behalf of the European Parliament to all those involved and congratulate them on this major initiative ?
I would also hope that the Belgium presidency would do the same on behalf of the Council for the 15 Member States .
Mrs McCarthy , I shall certainly do what you ask .
I can tell you that all those I met were more than aware of the European Parliament ' s long-standing contribution to the peace process in Northern Ireland .
Madam President , I do not wish to delay proceedings , but just to follow up on the point , which has been made on a number of occasions , about parliamentary immunity .
I could be wrong , but my understanding is that the purpose of parliamentary immunity for Members of Parliament acting in the Parliament - not outside the Parliament - is to allow you to represent the people who elected you .
It is not so that you can necessarily represent your own views in whatever manner you choose .
In other words , when you are outside this House , you are just the same as anyone else .
You are on your own .
Mr Beazley , questions of immunity are always very delicate , as you know , and Mr Duff has been appointed to draft a report on the issue .
I suggest that he also take account of all the very interesting points that you have both brought up , so that the document written on this is as comprehensive as possible .
I would like to thank Mr Duff for doing this .
Madam President , as an Italian , I would like to thank Mrs McKenna for urging the Italian police to follow the example of the Scottish police .
I would also like to express my sorrow at her unfortunate experience and my appreciation of her commitment to social concerns .
I would like to thank her on behalf of the Italian police , which , however , I feel is no worse than any other police force in Europe .
In all probability , the Scottish police were polite and courteous because , if one police force should imitate another , it may be that protesters should imitate other protesters too .
What I mean is the Scottish police were polite and courteous because the protesters who were with Mrs McKenna did not follow the example of the protesters in Genoa .
Thank you , Mr Santini .
European Council meeting ( Ghent , 19 October 2001 )
The next item is the European Council report and the Commission statement on the meeting of 19 October 2001 in Ghent .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , honourable Members of the European Parliament , true to tradition , I have come here today , a few days after the meeting of the European Council in Ghent , to report on the discussions we held there .
And rest assured : I shall be brief and to the point .
This European Council in Ghent was , in fact , already the second meeting under Belgian Presidency , and was , like the previous meeting on 21 September in Brussels , overshadowed by the effects of the attacks in New York and Washington . That was , of course , to be expected .
The events of 11 September will be etched on our minds forever , and the international community and the international alliance have meanwhile taken concrete action against terrorism .
Originally , as you know , the Ghent Summit was conceived as an informal platform for exchanging ideas about the Union ' s enlargement and particularly the Laeken Declaration , which is to structure and launch the debate on the future of Europe later on in the year .
In addition , it was our initial intention to carry out a final assessment of the introduction of the euro .
Indeed , in my opinion , it was up to the Council , as a kind of benign father figure , to carry out a final check to ensure that all preparations were in place for a successful introduction of the European single currency .
However , as is often the case - that is , in any case , what I have gleaned from people who have far more experience as Presidents of the Council - the news has somewhat played havoc with that agenda , and with good reason , in my view .
The events of 11 September are of unprecedented and immense significance , and I think that as the days go by , it is becoming increasingly clear that the world after 11 September will never be the same .
A new , global order is upon us . It is a new , multipolar world within which the European Union will need to play a more prominent role .
Yesterday , I was able to give my initial views on this in Poland to mark the start of the academic year of the Europe College .
However , to have major views on something is , of course , one thing , yet to involve the Union in this crisis as a united front , is quite another .
A month ago , on 21 September exactly , we managed to persuade the Union to adopt one clear , unambiguous and common position .
At the same time , we rubberstamped a far-reaching and detailed action plan against terrorism .
From the Council ' s final declaration last Friday in Ghent , it appears that we have managed to sustain this unanimous approach fully .
Three elements are essential in this unanimous approach and I should like to outline them briefly .
The military action which started on 7 October receives our unqualified support .
The action is justified by resolution 1368 of the UN Security Council and we attach the greatest importance to protecting the life of civilians in the process .
After the conflict , we also want a normal government to be established in Afghanistan , a stable government , a representative government that respects human rights .
A government of this kind will be able to count on extensive European aid for the reconstruction of that country .
Meanwhile , we , along with the Union , will - more than ever before - commit to granting humanitarian aid to the many millions of Afghan refugees .
Our commitment in this respect is to ensure that no country in the region becomes the victim of this conflict as a result of the influx of displaced .
In fact , the presidency received from the Council the mandate to visit that region to obtain political support for the replacement of the Taliban regime .
The prompt and comprehensive implementation of the action plan against terrorism is the second element that I wish to underline briefly .
With regard to the creation of a European arrest warrant , I believe it is safe to say that we have reached a break-through .
The abolition of dual criminality was now accepted by everyone in the Council , not only for terrorist acts , but also for other serious crimes .
As far as the list of terrorist organisations is concerned , it was decided that that should be completed and laid down by the end of the year .
In addition , we discussed the proposals submitted by our American partners in the Council , and it was agreed in the Council to reinforce our action plan , if necessary .
At the end , the Commission and the Council were also commissioned to draw up a programme of cooperation among the Member States to fight terrorism involving biological and chemical weapons .
In that programme , a European coordinator for civilian protection will be appointed , among other things .
Thirdly , the Union has a more active role to play in the prevention of , and fight against , hotbeds and conflicts .
Mr Javier Solana , Mr Louis Michel , myself and the Commission , of course , will try to crank up a new dialogue in the countries of the Middle East or at least try to create the conditions for resuming the peace process .
In this connection , the Council sent a clear message on Friday that it takes at least two States for peace to be possible .
Moreover , we , along with the Council , have once again warned against the risk of the Islamic world embracing terrorism .
We should instead intensify the dialogue between Europe and the Arab and Islamic world .
Allow me to say , Madam President , that last Friday ' s clear-cut decisions immediately put the ' incident ' surrounding the preliminary meeting of the French President , the British Prime Minister and the German Chancellor into perspective .
The impression of a triumvirate in the making , one which would probably not have been around if the meeting had taken place elsewhere or at a different time - was reduced to its true proportions after the three people involved assured me that the consultation was one about purely technical-military matters .
I have accepted that explanation , partly to prevent this issue from dominating the European Council in Ghent , and I have repeated in the Council that it is the fifteen Member States who establish the positions jointly in the European Union .
( FR ) Madam President , last Friday ' s discussions were not restricted to current international events .
The work session on Friday afternoon also dealt with the economic situation and the imminent introduction of euro notes and coins .
The slowdown in growth , which , we must reiterate , had already started before 11 September , and the longer-term uncertainty tell us that we must be careful .
The foundations of the economy , however , remain healthy , which inspired both myself and the Council to be cautiously optimistic .
It is essential that Europe - which has no budgetary surplus - observes the Stability and Growth Pact .
Low inflation and permanent wage moderation are enabling the EU to make room for manoeuvre on monetary policy .
We must , however , intensify our efforts in terms of structural reform and accelerate the Lisbon process in order to strengthen the growth potential of the European Union .
With regard to the physical introduction of euro notes and coins , preparations are well underway .
We have , however , identified a few problems , particularly concerning preparations by local authorities and small businesses .
We do not want consumers to experience any negative effects .
The introduction of euro notes and coins must not bring about price increases .
The European Council additionally asked the ECOFIN Council to adopt a regulation before the Laeken Summit to ensure that the costs of cross-border financial transactions are reduced and brought into line with national rates .
During the second part of our meeting , we discussed the issues relating to the future of the European Union and the Laeken Declaration .
I think it is true to say that we made significant progress .
There is now broad consensus , also at the specific request of the European Parliament , on the principle of a convention .
This Convention will be able to begin its work in March of next year .
I believe that we have agreed on this approach .
We also agreed that the candidate countries would fully participate in this Convention . However , they will be unable - and I think this goes without saying - to question the proposals on which the Fifteen have already unanimously agreed .
I also believe that the key to the success of this Convention lies in it having a very small leadership and a limited number of delegations .
Furthermore , in the near future , I plan to invite the chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the rapporteurs of the European Parliament , in order to have a frank and detailed exchange of views with them on the future of the European Union .
Madam President , I do not believe that the Laeken Declaration must be a conventional declaration , and it must , above all , be a source of inspiration .
First of all , it must be based on a critical analysis , in order to reveal the true challenges facing an enlarged and competent Union , which include the redistribution of competences in both directions - in other words , towards the European Union as well as towards the Member States - a solution to the proliferation of instruments in the European Union , institutions that are more democratic and which ensure , amongst others , a full co-decision procedure involving the European Parliament , the first steps of a process that leads to the treaties being divided into one fundamental treaty and several executing treaties and , lastly , a new position and a new role for the European Union on the world stage .
In my view , there are no taboo subjects as far as this Convention is concerned and no stone can remain unturned .
At Ghent , we also - and lastly , because this was the final topic we dealt with - gave an update on the progress made in the negotiations with the candidate countries .
The President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , presented a positive report to us on this issue .
There is no reason to fear , in my view , that the proposed schedule will not be observed .
In any case , I intend to send an additional message to the candidate countries in my speech at the Laeken Summit .
I met the new Polish prime minister yesterday and urged him to step up efforts so that Poland can once again take up its rightful place in the negotiations , because , following the events of 11 September , enlargement is needed now more than ever before .
I would now like to give a general report on the Council meeting .
The streets were calm .
Ghent has , however - this is the truth , and I know as I live there - a rather turbulent history .
The reason for this may be because Charles the Fifth was born there !
Whatever the reason , my overriding desire is to continue dialogue with the anti-globalisation protesters .
I think it is true to say that the term ' anti-globalisation ' is , in fact , inaccurate .
We must take a different approach - not towards blind globalisation or anti-globalisation , but rather towards a well-defined globalisation .
This is a different kind of globalisation ; it is an ethical globalisation .
Madam President , I am organising a debate on this subject at the University of Ghent on 30 October 2001 .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the next European Council will meet in exactly 50 days .
Ghent was an informal Council in the true sense of the word , which will certainly help us to make great progress in Laeken , in other words , to develop a common policy on asylum , immigration and justice , to declare operational the common foreign and security policy , to move closer towards enlargement and - which I think the most important thing - to adopt an ambitious declaration on the future of Europe .
Madam President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by saying that the Commission welcomes with great satisfaction some good news , at last , which has come in recent days , namely that the Irish Republican Army has started to decommission its arms in accordance with the Good Friday agreement .
The Commission will follow the consolidation of the reconciliation process in Northern Ireland closely , not least through our Peace programme .
Following the attacks on 11 September against the United States - our longstanding allies - the European Union has publicly committed itself to doing all it can to help bring the perpetrators , organisers and sponsors of these acts to justice , and to holding accountable those hiding , supporting or harbouring them .
We thus pledged our complete solidarity with the government and people of the United States .
Over the days that followed , I was very pleased to see this declaration of solidarity translated into swift , concerted action at European level .
Mr Patten , the Belgian foreign minister , Mr Michel , and Mr Solana went first to Washington and then on to Pakistan , Iran , Saudi Arabia , Egypt and Syria to help build a global alliance against terrorism .
European authorities began rapidly stepping up intelligence and police cooperation , both within the EU and with third countries , especially the US .
On the basis of emergency legislation agreed at Community level , the European Union froze over EUR 100 million of assets of people suspected of terrorism .
It drew up uniform , Union-wide standards to improve security for air travellers .
It tabled proposals for a common definition of terrorism , for a system of EU-wide penalties for terrorist offences and for a European arrest warrant .
These proposals were firmly supported by the European Council at its extraordinary meeting on 21 September .
On that occasion , the Council called upon each European Union country to ' contribute according to its means ' to the new global campaign against terrorism , and this is , indeed , what has been happening , with some countries mobilising or offering troops and others providing intelligence or making available air bases .

Despite the importance and success of this joint action , the fact is that media attention has largely been focused on what individual countries have been doing .
This has somewhat obscured and tainted the ongoing debate on the specific role Europe as a whole should be playing on the international stage .
That is precisely the issue I want to focus on today .
From the very start of my term of office , one of my Commission ' s objectives has been to consolidate Europe ' s influence in the world .
This has become even more urgent in the light of the new world situation .
If the European Union is to be a leading actor on the world stage , it must speak with a single , clear , dynamic voice and it must support its words with unified action .
The Union has made progress in this direction , it cannot be denied .
You only have to compare , for example , the disparate attitudes of our Member States to the Gulf War , a decade ago , with our recent united stance on the situation in the FYROM and our present coherent response to terrorism .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Belgian Presidency for the excellent work it has done to promote this process and for the courageous and intelligent way in which it has maintained support for the Union ' s common , shared goals .
However , we are still a very long way from achieving the genuinely common foreign and security policy we so badly need .
I am therefore very glad that , in the Union ' s declaration of 14 September , we publicly committed ourselves to developing our common foreign and security policy and to ensuring that the Union really can speak out clearly and with one voice .
A common policy is not , of course , the same thing as a single policy uniformly adopted by every Member State .
No , a common policy pools the different strengths of the individual countries , enabling them to pursue shared goals using shared instruments .
Has Europe been ' absent ' , as some people allege ?
My answer is ' No ' although we need to make a certain distinction here .
Europe is taking very specific , effective action in those fields where integration is a possibility or a practical reality .
This is not at all surprising , since the Community method has , for the last fifty years , ensured that Europe can act effectively , rapidly and visibly in all the fields in which this is possible .
It is in areas where Europe is less integrated , where the Community method is virtually or wholly absent , that the European Union seriously lacks effectiveness .
This hard fact should make us even more resolute in our preparations for the major future political developments in the Union .
A common policy ensures that the different national policies are co-ordinated within a Community framework according to the Community method so that they serve the interests of the Union as a whole .
In the field of the common foreign and security policy we have not yet reached that point because the necessary consensus has not yet been achieved .
We are in a transition period , so to speak .
However , that must be our objective . We must lose no time in establishing a policy that builds on our experience of Community action and makes full use of the tools available to us .
Our first priority must be to be united in our action .
In my view , individual action taken by only a few countries is in the interests neither of the Union as a whole nor of its individual Member States , be they large or small .
At Ghent , I noted that no Member State wants to move in that direction , but the Commission will remain vigilant , on behalf of us all .
Secondly , we need specific institutional mechanisms for taking policy decisions .
That is the kind of common foreign and security policy we must develop , building on the progress we have already made , and we need to develop it fast if we are to make any useful impact on the world now emerging after the tragedy of September 11 .
I am pleased to note that Parliament 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs has discussed at length and with great care the implications of the common foreign and security policy for the functioning of the institutions and , in particular , of the Council .
I welcome the proposals put forward in the Poos report and I commend Mr Poos for his achievements in addressing these so very delicate and sensitive issues .
I call upon this House to endorse them fully today and upon the Council to undertake to implement them as soon as possible .
The Commission is ready to play its full part in this necessary process .
The statements issued on 14 September have important implications for the Union ' s foreign policy priorities .
In the short to medium term , we must focus even more on our dialogue with the Arab and Islamic worlds , on the Middle East peace process , for the Middle East is at the centre of the current world events , and on exploiting the full potential of the Barcelona process - and this is where our task lies .
The time has come to make new moves in our Mediterranean policy .
The results we have achieved so far have not been altogether satisfactory , though this has not always - or rather has often not - been our fault .
We must now take full advantage of all the opportunities open to us to ensure genuine progress .
The Euro-Mediterranean region must aim at genuine economic integration and at setting up institutional mechanisms for taking common decisions .
We are also widely expected to play a new role in the Middle East .
We must take practical , joint action to respond to this challenge which , although tough , is within our capabilities .
Further afield , we need to review our policies on trade and co-operation with Pakistan , India and Iran as well as with Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States .
Tangible progress has been made with regard to Pakistan in recent days .
I also believe we should be ready to respond to the renewed signs of interest in joint action on shared goals - such as the fight against AIDS - coming from countries like Libya .
This is a completely new development .
Once again , Europe is in an excellent position to respond to these political signals and to help such countries join our alliance .
We also need to work energetically to develop a consistent , active policy in relations between the Union and all its neighbours . Partnerships with specific goals , institutions and resources , particularly in our relations with Russia and the Ukraine .
Partnerships that will ensure lasting stability in our continent . This time of change is also the right time to boost these policies .
Lastly , world wide , we have to build fresh confidence , and one key way we can do so in the immediate future is to successfully launch a new round of world trade talks .
At the same time , we must work harder to offer the world ' s poorest regions a genuine chance of sustainable development .
I have said it before , and I will say it again : we must guide the process of globalisation so that it works for the good of all , poor as well as rich .
We Europeans must be proud of the policies we have been pursuing as we prepare for enlargement , for they are the only democratic globalisation policies thus far developed in the world , and I would stress that : the European Union project is the only democratic globalisation process in existence .
We therefore have to tackle , energetically , boldly and imaginatively , the global issues that breed resentment and discontent such as poverty , widening gaps in income and the now intolerable economic and social imbalances .
These are the things that sow frustration and tension in relations between the developing world and the West .
The anti-terrorism alliance must advance hand in hand with a development alliance , with the Union leading by example .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Extraordinary European Council Meeting of 21 September asked the Commission to analyse the economic impact of the terrorist attacks .
We did so immediately , and the Commission presented its report to the Ghent European Council .
The European economy was clearly slowing down even before 11 September .
The immediate consequence of the terrorist attacks was a further loss of consumer confidence and a widespread sense of uncertainty .
However , there are several positive factors to bear in mind , factors that enable us to face the current shock much more calmly than in similar circumstances in the past .
Firstly , the fundamental aspects of our economy .
The European economy , unlike that of the United States , is free of trade imbalances and Europeans still have a very strong tendency to save .
Moreover , unlike in previous crises , the Union has been largely protected from possible shockwaves of devaluations and counter-devaluations of currencies by the existence of a solid , reliable single currency , the euro .
Just think what would have happened if we had not had the euro !
The events of recent weeks should make us even more proud of the quantum leap forward that the euro has allowed us to take .
Secondly , our programme .
We are undertaking structural reforms , following a strategy carefully defined at Lisbon .
The reforms are far from complete , but the present crisis should strengthen our political resolve to see them through .
I therefore call upon this House and the Council to stop hesitating and to speed up the approval of all the decisions taken at and after Lisbon to make the European economy more efficient .
Only if we meet the Lisbon objectives and targets will we be able to minimise the extent and duration of unemployment and maximise growth potential in the medium and long term .
Thirdly , our instruments .
We have achieved significant control of taxes that will still give us some room for manoeuvre during the slowdown .
However , the problem of coordinating our economic policies arises at this stage in all its severity , and it arises because , in this sector too , we continue to have difficulty in applying the Community method .
On the basis of this , I conveyed to the European Council two messages .
Firstly , the information currently available shows that our economy is genuinely resilient .
If not an optimistic message , this at least gives no cause for concern .
Secondly , however , we need to continue to monitor economic trends closely , not only in the Union and the euro zone but also worldwide .
If the situation changes we must be ready to act using the instruments available to us .
Once again , let me stress the importance of co-ordinated action .
With the current degree of integration , all action must be properly co-ordinated at Eurozone and European Union level .
In the present uncertain situation , we must show that we are acting in a co-ordinated manner and that we have the will to use all the available instruments .
Madam President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , this is a time for the greatest possible unity , determination and resolution .
We must ensure that lasting hope comes out of the evil of 11 September .
Our peoples ' reactions to the recent events show that Europe needs to be more , not less present .
If Europe is to fully live up to its pledge of solidarity - solidarity with the United States but also the safeguarding of global solidarity - the Member States of the European Union must genuinely act as one Community .
The Commission will continue to work tirelessly to achieve this .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President Prodi , ladies and gentlemen , our group supports the Ghent statement on terrorism , but , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we also say that words must now be backed up by deeds .
It is not acceptable that this is the second time that the Heads of State and Government have made recommendations which are then not promptly put into effect by the Ministers of the Interior and of Justice .
We call upon the Ministers of the Interior and of Justice to act with speed .
We also say , above all , that cooperation merely between States cannot continue as at present .
Important issues of home affairs and justice policy must also be dealt with on the basis of Community law , and the Commission must have a central role in observing the situation and implementing Community law .
Continuity is not achieved by the Presidency of the Council rotating every six months .
Continuity must also be ensured by the European Commission and the European institutions .
I ask you also , in your capacity as Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Belgium , to resolve the issue of the security of the European institutions , including the European Parliament in Brussels , with a solution that will be satisfactory both in principle and in practice .
We have to make Europe 's voice heard more .
It was surely right for prominent individuals from the European Union to go to visit the American President , but I find it no longer acceptable that , for example , the situation arises where the American Secretary of State appears before the television cameras with three prominent Europeans alongside him .
We will have to learn lessons for the future from this ; a crisis is always also an opportunity . We need one European face to represent us to the world !
( Applause )
We now have a coalition against terrorism .
Our group supports it unreservedly .
We now , though , also need a coalition to rebuild Afghanistan .
I welcome the position you have taken on this , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
Afghanistan has been suffering for twenty years .
We must make an effort as a Community , also at an international level , to give Afghanistan a good future .
You and the President of the Commission have spoken rightly about the Middle East .
Our group rejects the deliberate killing of people , be it in Palestine or in Israel .
We call on the parties involved to at last give a signal for peace .
We want there to be cooperation , we want there to be a Palestinian state and we want Israel to be able to live within recognised and secure borders .
We urge all those involved to take a step away from the policy of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth and towards one of cooperation , peace and mutual understanding .
( Applause )
We see the Mediterranean dialogue as an important challenge .
It is for that reason that we have proposed the Euro-Mediterranean Meeting in Brussels on 8 November .
I wish to thank Mrs Fontaine for promptly implementing our joint decision in the Conference of Presidents .
We hope that this will send a message about cooperation with the Arab and Islamic world .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we are in broad agreement with you as regards Laeken , but please ensure that the Convention does not only have the task of enumerating options .
Its task will be , rather , to present a majority proposal .
There may of course also be a minority vote .
This must not lead to negotiations without binding effect .
That is not what we expect of the Convention , but rather a proposal which can then go to the Heads of State and Government for discussion .
We also expect this Convention not to have too large a bureau .
It is crucial that five persons should be represented in it : the chairman / chairwoman and the representatives of the four institutions involved .
This body must exercise real leadership , taking the Convention into a better future .
We would like to see this Convention 's work timetabled in such a way that it can conclude a Treaty in 2003 under the Italian Presidency , a Treaty that we hope will lead to the fundamental treaty of which you have spoken .
Let me make another observation , a very practical one .
In Ghent , you discussed transfers between bank accounts in different countries of the European Union , a question which one might think not to be so important .
Our Parliament , though , has put forward a proposal by means of Mrs Peijs ' report .
We have made clear that the high costs incurred in bank transfers are not acceptable .
I think that the Heads of State and Government have done the right thing in taking this issue on board .
Please permit me one final observation : there has been a certain amount of friction between the Presidency of the Council and the Commission , which is very regrettable in view of the Presidency of the Council being held by Belgium .
At issue was our common presentation of ourselves to the public - who said what , and when .
There was a certain annoyance because three Member States had met together .
I want neither to play that up nor to ignore it .
I would , though , like to point out to all the European institutions that our Europe is so complicated that it must not be a Europe of vanities or a Europe of dominance , but all the institutions must meet each other halfway .
It is important that we understand each other and work together , for our common European future is at stake .
I hope that the crisis in which the world currently finds itself will bring the European institutions together and lead them to common action for Europe .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , following the European Council in Ghent , my group feels both hope and concern .
Hope , because in Northern Ireland arms are being entombed in concrete , and concern , because we are facing a long fight against global terrorism , which we must pursue with conviction , perseverance and courage .
This fight is not limited to what appears in the television pictures , whether they be from Al Jazeera or from CNN .
We must deal with the response measures authorised by the United Nations , but we must also make a significant effort in the humanitarian field and in terms of reconstruction and stabilisation , both in Afghanistan and in many other parts of the world .
The European Union can play an important role in this context .
With regard to what the President-in-Office of the Council said about the Ghent meeting , I would like to point out that in Helsinki the European Council decided to create a rapid intervention force which is still not operational .
The prior meeting of certain Member States was inappropriate .
I also believe - and I address this to both the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission - that we must show unity at all times and it is highly significant that , after a European Council , the President of the Commission should appear shoulder to shoulder with the President-in-Office of the Council to announce the decisions adopted .
With regard to the relationship between the European Council and the specific Councils , I would point out that the European Parliament is making an effort to speed up the negotiation of the measures you have proposed , but this is not being treated in a corresponding fashion by the Justice and Home Affairs Council .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would recommend that , before the meeting of the European Council in Laeken , you read in detail the report by my group colleague , Mr Poos , who is the person with the most historical experience of the Council .
It may help you to present interesting proposals .
With regard to our relations with the Islamic countries and the Arab world , we believe that the forum we are going to relaunch at the beginning of November may be positive .
My political family is also trying to re-establish links and the new tour of the Middle East which you have announced is very important , with an active approach by the Union to the resolution of this absolutely key conflict .
As for the economy , please allow me to make a brief point : inflation is decreasing , there are margins , but the European Union ' s policy must be active and anti-cyclic , and we still have a Central Bank which takes decisions and a Council which makes recommendations .
The Union needs economic leadership .
And since you have said that you are going to the University of Ghent for a debate on globalisation , I would also ask you to take the European Parliament ' s report on the reform of the international financial system .
With regard to the Tobin tax , your political friends have voted against what was proposed in ECOFIN and what my group presented as an amendment .
As for the future of Europe , I would like to point out that the Convention is not a war of opposing positions , but must be a joint effort .
We are making progress and you are gradually retracting , and that is not good .
I am grateful that the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the rapporteurs have been convened .
On behalf of my group , I can tell you that we have two concerns : one , that there should be balanced representation between European parliamentarians and those of the Member States , both in the Convention and in the Presidency ; secondly , that the Convention should make a difference and not just be a talking shop or a debating club , and should make coherent proposals .
Lastly , the proposals should lead to a decision by the Intergovernmental Conference before the 2004 elections in order to honour our commitments in the field of enlargement .
And in relation to enlargement , I must say , Mr President-in-Office of the Council - and here there have also been some interpretation problems - that the final exam will be taken at the end of 2002 .
I am pleased that you were in Poland yesterday .
I was there on Saturday and I would like to say that I am surprised that the conservatives of the Union are beginning to say that Poland is becoming a problem because a party of the Left has won .
Poland was a much bigger problem before , because it did not have a solvent government and I believe that , although there always has to be a degree of political competition , we must support Poland , which now has a strong government with a clear desire to take part in the future of Europe .
Madam President , I should like to begin - as other colleagues have done today - with a reference to the milestone event in Northern Ireland .
The verified decommissioning of IRA weapons has been a necessary and required act for a considerable period of time .
It was long overdue , but now that it has happened , it is hugely welcome .
Particularly since 11 September it has been increasingly inevitable that such an act should take place .
I hope it represents a new dawn , a rebirth , a renaissance for the peace process in Northern Ireland and that all the political actors will now seize this moment to ground and root the peace in the institutions of that agreement .
I add my voice to those who have asked all the institutions today , in the clearest terms , to welcome what has happened on behalf of the European Union .
I want to say to Prime Minister Verhofstadt , with regard to the Ghent Council , that my group totally supports the clearest and most unequivocal assurances you have given of total solidarity with the United States .
That is an important act of solidarity , and an important point of departure .
I reiterate , for my group , that we totally support this .
If I do not dwell on this , it is simply because there are one or two questions I should like to raise with you , Mr President-in-Office .
In particular , we have had rather a long debate about the potential humanitarian crisis .
Clearly for areas within control of the Taliban , we cannot blame the world community for Taliban unwillingness to engage with the United Nations , NGOs and others .
But I would like to know what specific initiatives we , as the European Union , with our commitment of resources in this area , are now taking to urge Pakistan to open more space for refugees .
I appreciate the enormous difficulties .
I appreciate they already have two million or more Afghanis within their territory , but can we not , with our financial and organisational capacity , reassure those authorities that if the borders are opened to cope with this crisis they will not be left alone or have to pick up the tab on their own ?
I should like to turn to the question of the role of the Council of Ministers in following up on the action plan to fight terrorism .
In particular , I note the strategic leadership which you offered through the Council at the extraordinary meeting on 21 September .
There you made a clear plea to the institutions to seize that moment and act .
Here I congratulate the Commission for taking the European Council at its word and bringing forward with extraordinary speed a comprehensive measure to freeze the assets of terrorist organisations .
I can tell you in this Parliament that within 24 hours of receiving that , and with the proviso that we should review it in the lifetime of this Parliament , we too seized the moment .
That had no precedent ever in European law making .
It was with some regret then that one noticed that , if there was a delay , it was among your ' line managers ' from the European Council down to the Council of Ministers .
I have a number of questions : What is the Council doing on the freezing of assets ?
But I have an important question around it .
Can you explain to me , Prime Minister , what does this mean about the quality of governance in the European Union ?
After all , the Council is there to give a strategic lead .
You gave it , the Commission followed ; this House followed .
The question is : Why did the Council of Ministers not follow with the same alacrity ?
I would like to pose one other question in relation to the Convention .
The Prime Minister has explained to us that the candidate states will participate .
I very much welcome that .
I ask the Prime Minister to clarify , in the light of the agreement at Helsinki , that all candidate countries will be treated on an equal basis .
Does that invitation extend to Turkey ?
It is important that Turkey should be included , based on the principles clarified at Helsinki .
I know it is not a negotiating state , but Helsinki established a clear principle of equality of treatment for candidate states .
To summarise : What will we do with Pakistan and humanitarian aid ?
What does the example of the freezing of assets tell us about the rather dysfunctional quality of governance ?
Will Turkey be a participant in the process ?
Finally , I am glad to see that the President of the Commission and the President-in-Office , today at least , are sharing a platform in the European Parliament .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Prodi , we know that when all European Councils draw to a close , they either give us grounds for satisfaction or grounds for disappointment .
One of the grounds for satisfaction is always the number of well-intentioned declarations , and one of the grounds for disappointment is usually the way these are implemented .
I shall restrict my comments to the chapter on the follow-up to the 11 September attacks and the fight against terrorism and I would like to give my views on this on behalf of my group .
We welcome the statement that humanitarian aid for Afghanistan and neighbouring countries is an absolute priority , but unfortunately , we do not welcome the specific actions taken .
If we want to take specific action and provide vital and essential food aid to the civilian population at risk , we must respond to the appeals by numerous key figures and NGOs and suspend the bombings .
We have had enough indications and warnings , spelling out that a humanitarian catastrophe is imminent , as winter in Afghanistan is approaching , which is usually extremely harsh .
We now know that the civilian population is paying a high price for the war , and the Council , in declaring its staunchest support for the military operations , is turning a blind eye to this situation .
The pre-summit meeting between the Heads of State and Government in Ghent , other than the fact that , to my mind , it is a failure compared to the real summit , demonstrated that the Heads of State and Government give military cooperation with the United States priority over a concerted political approach at European Union level . It also relegates the humanitarian , diplomatic and all other types of initiatives to the background .
With regard to the commitment to fight against terrorism and to protect the population against these acts of terrorism , it goes without saying that the commitment made by the Council is to be welcomed , but an unambiguous definition of terrorism is clearly needed as far as legislative initiatives are concerned in order to avoid any confusion and the criminalisation of any anti-establishment behaviour or activities , which are , however , political in nature and legitimate nonetheless .
Our group has a number of concerns regarding the declaration in which the European Union states that it is willing to undertake reciprocal initiatives with the United States , particularly to facilitate judicial assistance and extradition .
Regarding extradition , we are aware that the death penalty is still in force in the United States and therefore this poses a huge problem for the European Union .
Regarding judicial assistance , we are concerned about ensuring that civil liberties are protected and that personal data protection is not diminished as a result of this cooperation with the United States .
One of the important chapters concerns the protection of the population , and we welcome the joint efforts made with regard to non-proliferation and export controls on weapons and chemical , bacteriological and nuclear substances capable of being used for terrorist purposes .
Therefore , intensifying our joint efforts is a very positive move , but we may wonder why the important question of industrial activities has not been mentioned at all , particularly with regard to nuclear power stations and re-processing plants , where large quantities of radioactive and fissile substances are stored , which could cause an ecological and social catastrophe in the event of an aircraft crash , intentional or otherwise .
The Council statement does not contain a single reference to this issue , and I think that this is a serious oversight .
To sum up , Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Prodi , I think that it is true to say that we are particularly disappointed by the outcome of this Summit .
I do not wish to have to relive this disappointment at the Laeken Summit , and I am pleased to note that Mr Verhofstadt is determined to give the European Union a new role and to open up genuine dialogue on a topic that has been slightly overworked in recent weeks , in other words , globalisation .
I am pleased that he has changed the vocabulary he was using to refer to this matter , since he has rejected the term ' anti-globalisation , ' which was essentially inappropriate .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , President Prodi , firstly , I would like to express my very sincere thanks for the comments that have been made by colleagues here this morning and by you , Madam President and President Prodi on the good news from Ireland on the decommissioning of arms .
I very much want to put on record once again the important part Parliament and the Commission played in helping the peace process at a time when this help was very much needed .
We have had a dramatic breakthrough in the last 24 hours , but let nobody here take it for granted that the road to peace - a just and lasting peace - is going to be easy .
Of course , the great majority of people on the island of Ireland are genuinely in search of this just and lasting peace , but , regrettably , a small minority will do their best to try and derail the process .
We must all be on the watch for that .
I very much welcome the fact that the European Union leaders unequivocally stated their full support for the action that has been taken in the fight against terrorism in all its aspects and reaffirmed their solidarity with the American government .
They have agreed that the fight against terrorism must continue within a United Nations framework .
I believe that the United Nations has a very important and leading role to play in this regard .
Present and future actions in the fight against international terrorism should and must emanate from the membership of the United Nations .
We are all concerned that civilian populations must be shielded from the attacks which are taking place in Afghanistan at this time and , in a war situation , there is nothing more sickening than one hearing commentators refer to civilian deaths as ' collateral damage ' .
We are dealing with lives here and human lives must always be protected .
Humanitarian aid for the Afghan people must be a priority and such aid must cover the needs of the Afghan population and Afghan refugees , EU governments are fully committed to ensuring that such aid reaches these people in need .
We want to ensure that this is done .
Winter is due to start very shortly in Afghanistan , and these winters are exceptionally cold and difficult .
I believe that the international community , including the European Union and the United Nations , must estimate the humanitarian needs of the Afghan people over the next few months and ensure that all the necessary humanitarian aid is delivered .
We must also , remember that the war against terrorism is being fought on many different fronts .
Within the Union , there must be formal adoption of the EU directive on money laundering .
We must be able to confiscate the financial proceeds of terrorism so as to help cut off the money supply which is the financial oxygen for its evil operations .
We can confiscate the financial proceeds of drug barons in Europe and we must be able to extend these powers of confiscation to other financial proceeds of crime .
There must be a speedy ratification by the Union 's Member States of the United Nations Convention for the suppressing of the financing of terrorism .
EU governments at Ghent supported the implementation of a common European arrest warrant , and our EU Justice Ministers are due to meet on 7 December 2001 to put in place the final terms governing the operation of this warrant .
It is very important , in my view , that there is a clear definition of terrorist acts , as a national cannot and should not be extradited from one country in Europe to another unless the specified crime is a crime in his or her host Member State .
Finally , we live in challenging and uncertain times and the political situation in the Middle East is very volatile .
The present instability and violence cannot and must not continue indefinitely .
I believe that the Israeli troops must withdraw from the territories of the Palestinian Authority .
I would appeal to the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to do everything possible to negotiate a settlement based on the recommendations of the Mitchell report .
Madam President , Prime Minister and President of the Commission , at the Ghent Summit we saw the trinity , or ' dictorium ' , of the big three countries make an appearance .
The preliminary meeting between Great Britain , France and Germany suggests a model that is as far from the federalists ' vision , or illusion , of a democratic federal State as it is from the Eurosceptics ' more realistic desire for a Europe of democracies .
Cooperation between the big three is engaged in on an intergovernmental basis , behind closed doors and without democratic control .
In this way , the big three decide what the others are to think .
For the small countries , intergovernmental cooperation between the big countries may come across as supranational dictates .
The summits are also conducted behind closed doors and without democratic control .
European integration is now modelled on the way in which private holding companies operate .
A minority of the largest shareholders is able to make decisions on behalf of the majority .
Cooperation can thus be intergovernmental and supranational at one and the same time and combine the defects of these arrangements with the maximum lack of openness , democracy and proximity to the people .
The summits must be transformed into well-prepared meetings in which small and large countries and all parliaments have an equal part to play in the preparations .
Summits must be opened up to elected representatives so that representatives of the national parliaments are able to exercise democratic control by being present there .
Summits should also be opened up to the press whenever prime ministers discuss legislation and other issues which , in our Member States , are dealt with openly .
Mr Verhofstadt is still a young prime minister from a country that has traditionally opposed the big countries ' dictatorial way of thinking .
Have nothing to do with this , Prime Minister !
Invite elected representatives to the next summit in Laeken .
Do not make a decision to begin a constitutional process without its first having been discussed with the electorate in our countries .
Let the next treaty be formulated through the input of grassroots contributions instead of its coming like a thief in the night to limit our democracy .
Make sure , too , that the 49 % of the electorate that voted against Maastricht in France and the majority of the electorate who recently voted ' no ' in Ireland and Denmark can feel they are properly represented in the forthcoming convention .
Promise , above all , that the next treaty will be subject to referendums in all the countries . In that way , you will be obliged to design a treaty that can be adopted , that is to say , a treaty characterised by openness , democracy and proximity to the people .
President of the Commission , I am speaking on behalf of the European radical Members of the Bonino List .
We welcome the European government ' s support of the United States institutions , although we hope that they will manage to continue to resist the anti-American , anti-capitalist and anti-imperialist instincts which are so powerful within the political groupings in Europe .
However , we would criticise the delays in presenting a humanitarian aid plan and its lack of practical content in the face of a potential humanitarian disaster .
On a more general note , it is not right to focus on the difficult nature of the European Union ' s political role without addressing the issue of the democratic nature of the institutions themselves .
We have talked about how important it is for the Fifteen to act in unity and with all speed and to assume a common position .
In our opinion , unity between the Fifteen is valuable when it is achieved through public - and therefore accountable , democratic - debate .
It is of much less value when it is reached in closed meetings held in secret meeting rooms which are inaccessible to democratic scrutiny .
An example of this is cooperation in justice and home affairs .
We are all in favour of the European area of justice and police cooperation , but these are extremely sensitive areas which involve fundamental rights and freedoms and the 15 penal codes of our Member States .
It is unacceptable for any democratic debate to be dispensed with , either in the national parliaments or the European Parliament , on issues relating to rights guaranteed by constitutions , in the name of the need for rapid action .
That is the real obstacle : the real obstacle is the democratic nature of the European Union !
We would make this clear , in particular , to Mr Schröder and Mr Chirac , who publicly lamented the lack of rapid action .
Be careful : fundamental rights and freedoms are involved !
The democratic nature of the institutions of the European Union is at stake .
Madam President , as someone who was born and bred in Ghent , I should first of all like to express my satisfaction at the peaceful process of the demonstrations during the European Council in Ghent .
What went wrong in Gothenburg and Genoa did not in Ghent .
That is undoubtedly linked to the changes since 11 September , but also to the sound preparation , the sensible approach by the police and certainly also to the open dialogue that has led to a different atmosphere .
As Mr Verhofstadt has already underlined , the original intention of this informal summit was to prepare for the Laeken Declaration .
The Fifteen defined the parameters and the timeframe for the convention .
As the European Parliament , we should be able to recognise that this was a true tour de force . Six months ago , this would have been absolutely unthinkable .
Another positive development is the fact that the Union has taken a unanimous and firm stand in the fight against terrorism , has emphatically confirmed its solidarity with the US , but at the same time , has highlighted its own political role .
Strictly speaking , Ghent has thus fulfilled the expectations . But the way in which European unanimity was brought about has once again exposed the cracks in the European edifice .
Ghent has also painfully accentuated the fact that Nice ' s two areas of tension , namely that between the large and small countries , and that between the intergovernmental and community approach , is still heavily mortgaging the European Union ' s future .
This applies first and foremost to the CFSP .
The French President is right , strictly speaking , when he states that the European Union is not authorised to deal with military matters . However , the question is whether we are prepared at all to change this .
The three largest Member States should realise that they cannot continue to be only half-committed to the cause .
This ambiguity cannot remain concealed behind fine sounding final declarations in which attempts are made to keep up appearances of European unanimity .
Let us hope that 11 September and the need to reform the institutions prior to enlargement will encourage Member State governments to look beyond their own national policies and return to the roots of the European Union , namely to promote peace and security in Europe and in the world by intense cooperation between the Fifteen , rather than just three , Member States .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to congratulate the Belgian Presidency , as I think that the excellent way in which the Ghent European Council fulfilled its duties and its responsibilities is a positive and hopeful sign that our institutions are working well .
I believe that this European Council was worthwhile , and was acting perfectly within its powers , in other words , in the role of providing guidance .
I would like to make three points in relation to this .
The first point concerns the issues that are called JHA in our jargon .
These issues involve a great deal of intense and difficult work , and the Ministers for Home Affairs and Ministers for Justice of each of our Member States will not be able to make progress on these , unless they have before them bold proposals such as those that Commissioner Vitorino made , and unless they are constantly reminded of the political direction favoured by the European Council .
These are difficult subjects , which require will and political determination in order to make progress .
Thank you , Mr President , for giving these conclusions .
As for the economic situation , I think that the European Council worked hard to point out where the room for discussion between the economic and monetary authorities must be .
If we really want to put in place a policy to support growth , and this is , without doubt , necessary for the European Union , we need everyone to shoulder their responsibilities , to fully utilise the room for manoeuvre in the Stability and Growth Pact and in the monetary policy , to mobilise the European Investment Bank , so that we finally get across the idea that this is a major undertaking , even if it means going back to square one .
This is also the direction that you described , in relation to the launch of the WTO negotiations .
We must not , however , forget our responsibilities , the contribution we can make , for example , to a subject as important as that of cancelling the debts of developing countries .
The third area on which you gave some guidelines , and I would like to thank you for doing so , is that of cross-border payments .
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the delicate issue of cheques .
At a time when we are changing over to the euro , we know that these cheques are used primarily by vulnerable sectors of society .
So , let us stop creating obstacles and let things take their course , as , for once , we are not in a great rush .
Lastly , Mr President , you stated that you hope the question of Europe ' s position on the world stage will be discussed openly at Laeken .
And Mr Prodi , you asked if Europe was absent from the world stage .
No , Europe is not absent !
Europe did everything it could do and everything it should have done .
The only difficulty is that Europe is not always heard that is the problem .
At Durban , we made ourselves heard , but when it comes to having a real influence on the political , diplomatic and military situation , we still lack the support from the European Union .
We are expecting a great deal from the Convention in this respect .
Mr President , when the two planes crashed into the World Trade Center they demolished more than the twin towers .
We also saw the destruction of the European Union 's three pillars contrived at the Treaty of Maastricht and our response today requires a fully integrated approach involving trade , finance and security .
The Ghent European Council showed that the Union enjoys both the capacity , and the will , to provide an increased sense of European security , solid in support of American self-defence , and sharing in the campaign to combat terrorism .
This is a European Union increasingly active in its civilian role and far more present in the Middle East peace process .
For us to succeed , we need to put aside our petty squabbles and the interinstitutional rivalries .
The Commission and Council should reflect the impressive cross-party consensus that we have created in Parliament .
In that context I would like strongly to congratulate the Belgian presidency on brokering such a successful deal on the setting up of the convention .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President of this House , ladies and gentlemen , the President-in-Office was right to express with some pride that , fortunately , after Gothenburg and Genoa , Ghent was a different G.
We were able to catch our breath in peace for a while .
In fact , Ghent was a ghost town .
When I protested there along with the so-called anti-globalists , Ghent had been totally stripped of its character of a bustling city .
Nevertheless , I am pleased with your statement about the dialogue with the world of the anti-globalists , which is an incorrect way of saying that a growing number of people are concerned about the direction that the world is taking .
We want to move away from the privatisations and liberalisations which are plunging large parts of the world into de facto exclusion .
What action will the Belgian Presidency be taking in order to reform the WTO , for example ?
We are looking forward to your efforts , for the introduction of the Tobin tax is a promise which I may have heard in Belgium , but of which I have seen little evidence on the international forum .
However , the spectacle involving the European institutions was not a pretty sight , and I am very disappointed about this .
The Council was overshadowed by the triumvirate of the United Kingdom , France and Germany .
Is that what other countries can expect from a Council ?
The Big Three running the show - is that the kind of Europe we want ?
The Commission is failing to get a grip on events and the frustration in that respect is culminating in a row about speaking times and the threat of an empty seat in Laeken .
Does the President of the Commission fear that Laeken will be a failure ?
The European Parliament is still feeling marginalised , and I am uncertain as to whether a convention can have any real effect in this .
Many people have witnessed the start of the war in Afghanistan , but we do not know where it will take us or how it will end .
We are facing an economic crisis .
We cannot afford failure at Laeken .
Europe simply has to succeed , and the three large institutions must cooperate with that goal in mind .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President Prodi , I have noted with satisfaction that preparations in Ghent for the Laeken Summit also included a debate on the complex subject of ' The Future of Europe ' .
You , Prime Minister , announced that the Laeken statement on this theme would not be a classic statement but an ambitious one that would acknowledge the EU 's weaknesses and its citizens ' fears and would clearly point out the way to be taken by the enlarged EU in the world of the future .
I am convinced that the Belgian Presidency will do everything possible to bring about a resolution in December that really will live up to this high aspiration .
In my judgment , there is an absolute need for the following to be taken into account when calling a Convention to prepare the next Inter-Governmental Conference : First , the balanced proportional composition of the Convention with representatives of the national parliaments and of the European Parliament analogous with the Convention to draft the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Secondly , members of the national parliaments and representatives of the acceding countries ' governments must be involved to the full in the Convention 's work and have at least observer status .
Thirdly , the composition of the Convention must ensure that the principle of political pluralism is guaranteed .
Political debates need arguments on both sides which alone ensure that the debates come alive and are interesting , and only if the most diverse political forces from the Member States really work together can a politically sustainable result be achieved which will then enjoy popular support .
Fourthly , there must be complete transparency in the Convention 's work , both as regards the conduct of its debates and discussions and also public access to its documentation , which must be guaranteed by all means available .
There is , fifthly , a need for a purposeful and structured dialogue with civil society , and I hope that the Presidency 's proposals in this regard will find support among the various governments .
Mr President , I must say that the Ghent Summit was very revealing , both in terms of the process and of the content .
It was revealing in the sense that it , to a fault , confirms the objections on grounds of principle which we Eurosceptics and opponents of the EU have been entertaining .
The very procedure is , of course , based upon its being the big countries that decide .
A secret summit is held in which an agenda is set , effectively preventing the small countries from independently making known their opinions of the political decisions , and that naturally applies first and foremost to the decisions made in the light of the events of 11 September .
Unconditional support is declared , a total acceptance of the United States ' s arrangements .
In that way , the objections and reservations that are undoubtedly entertained among the small countries and that find expression in growing opposition to the American strategy are successfully stifled .
The summit ' s reference to resolution 1368 is absurd .
As if it legitimised anything !
We are concerned here with a war of aggression contrary to international law .
That is something to which the United States ' s allies should be alerting people .
The resolution does not legitimise any intervention or any armed attack upon a foreign state .
As for the crucial issue here , namely the interventions and follow-up provisions where policing and the law are concerned , we are being faced with a demand to implement the most far-reaching infringements of legal rights we have seen in the history of the EU , and they are to take place almost overnight without any preparation .
I would thank the architects of the summit . It has been an eye-opener .
Mr President , we approve the approach of the informal Ghent Council , which reaffirmed its solidarity with the United States , and confirmed and strengthened the implementation of an action plan containing 79 measures to combat terrorism .
On this issue , I can only reiterate what I said on 3 October 2001 in this Chamber , when I called on the Council to give priority , from now on , to security , to review the former strategies that have become inappropriate , to recognise that the controls do not restrict freedom of movement , that they restrict criminals and protect the freedom of our citizens .
At the time , I called for a review of the disastrous Article 62 ( 1 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community , introduced by the Treaty of Amsterdam , which demands the systematic abolition of controls on third country nationals , when crossing the internal borders of the European Union .
In response , Mr Michel told me that my ideas - and I quote ' would lead straight to a society which restricts freedoms ' .
In my view , this unjustified accusation - which I naturally refute - illustrates the reservations and the obstacles we can encounter in our fight against terrorism .
Fortunately , the Council appears to have overcome these obstacles , at least partly , since in the road map published by the last Justice and Home Affairs Council , there is a discreet proposal for the Council to study ' arrangements for coordinated recourse [ ... ] to Article 2 ( 2 ) ' of the Schengen Convention .
So , ladies and gentlemen , what is Article 2 ( 2 ) of the Schengen Convention ?
It is , as you may have guessed , the safeguard clause that my friends and I defended so staunchly , which will be so useful in the future and which enables internal border controls to be re-introduced .
Mentalities are now changing , so all is not lost .
Obviously , we must differentiate between withdrawing freedoms and controls , particularly at borders , which , within the framework of our democratic values , seek to preserve our freedoms .
This distinction is essential .
I hope , and I want to believe , Mr President , that the Council understands this .
Mr President , we evidently need major disasters to illustrate how much a too fragmented Europe is still failing in its ability to shoulder responsibility .
The coalition against terrorism will not function properly if the central player , the United States , is surrounded by only fifteen satellites .
Unfortunately , the European Union has in certain ways still not outgrown the satellite stage .
That particularly applies to the second and third pillars , which are precisely pertinent when we consider international terrorism .
Wherever matters are regulated well at community level ( the first pillar ) , things are much better .
In other words : Europe is good at paying , but not good at making decisions .
That was evident in Bosnia and is now again evident in the fight against international terrorism .
The Union is often not very visible , and I am also delighted that Mr Verhofstadt has explained how seriously he has taken the irregularities that have taken place on this score in Ghent .
That is why we are happy to encourage the Council to give Europe a clear profile in terms of foreign and security policy as soon as possible .
Moreover , the willingness to make the necessary Community changes in terms of justice and internal affairs is also leaving something to be desired .
I am pleased to hear from the President-in-Office of the Council that there is wide agreement among the Heads of Government about the fact that measures must be taken .
Reprehensible , however , are the improper objections which are being lodged by some Ministers for Justice , for example , the Minister in the Netherlands , about Europe ' s interference in major issues at national political level , such as , in respect of , the policy of tolerance with regard to drugs , the policy on euthanasia and such like .
That is not at issue at all .
Mr Vitorino , too , has made it abundantly clear that he is closely monitoring subsidiarity on this score .
If the aim of the Ministers is to protect their own official or ministerial scope , then the public will not be served by that .
I would therefore like to warmly congratulate the Council with its statement that our policy to the outside world , also in the framework of globalisation , must be ensconced in ethical , social and ecological standards and must take account of Third World interests .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I should like to make a few observations on three external points , starting with the Middle East .
We have experienced the murder of Israel ' s Minister for Tourism as a new low .
Subsequently , Israel invaded the autonomous Palestinian regions , which was , of course , an unacceptable violation .
We are all justified in asking for immediate withdrawal .
At the same time , the spokesmen for Mr Sharon , on the one hand , and the Palestinian Authority , on the other , mete out relentless and draining rhetoric of black and white thinking .
The others are 100 % responsible , they are to blame for everything .
The representative of Mr Sharon has almost stated that the tanks which enter the Palestinian regions are a kind of peace dove .
Conversely , Hanan Ashrawi lays all the blame with Israel .
Neither of them leave room for concern or take any steps towards bringing the conflict to an end .
It appears that , for the time being , there is no chance of returning to the Oslo Agreements or the Mitchell report which is before us .
Needless to say , the neighbouring states play their part too .
Countries such as Jordan , Egypt , Syria and Saudi-Arabia are all very important players who have often used the Palestinian issue to their advantage to keep enemies out , but not to do anything of any consequence at home .
There is now scope for Europe , the Commission and the Council , in tandem with the US , to take a very unusual new step and simply to combine our economic and diplomatic power , and our UN responsibility and military power and to say : we are tabling a firm , fresh peace proposal .
For we as the world community , in the light of 11 September , can no longer afford to be dragged down in this continual downward spiral .
As we are well placed in Europe , we can also use intense diplomacy to persuade the countries in the Middle East to take part in the peace accord . We have money .
We have trade . We have the UN .
We have resources in that region .
We can be of real significance there . In this respect , my suggestion would be to adopt a reasonably hard-handed approach towards both parties , for we need to table such a proposal now .
That is my first plea .
My second plea concerns Afghanistan .
The Socialist Group gives the UN resolution , which is very clear , its 100 % backing .
The aim of the resolution is to trace both the perpetrators and the sponsors , as well as the countries harbouring them , and to bring them to justice , but also to ensure that we come out alive .
The EU has no military presence in Afghanistan .
That falls within the remit of other bodies : the UN and NATO .
However , we are the body that has the diplomatic power to unite the surrounding countries in that region that play a key role , namely India , Pakistan and Iran , so that they , together with us and the US , give the different parties in Afghanistan plenty of room .
Afghanistan ' s key problem is that we will not reach a solution with the Northern Alliance , nor with anyone else .
History has taught us that .
What we need is a conference , wherever that may be in the region , involving the different forces - and I particularly refer to the social forces , such as the women ' s organisations - which , together , will shape a new broad government , in exile and only as a first step , if necessary .
However , we must take that political direction . It is the only way to get rid of the Taliban .
It is the only way to catch Bin Laden .
Prime Minister , your presidency , which was already reasonably complex , is certainly being tested by the attacks in the United States .
Do not , therefore , take any notice of people who say that a meeting of three of your colleagues immediately before the summit was a put-down .
Such a meeting is , of course , never pleasant for a presidency , but it proves at the same time how desperately we need a European framework within which external security , conflict prevention , our diplomacy , but also our internal security , legal and police cooperation can be regulated .
That is important for small Member States such as ours .
However , it is apparently difficult for everyone to understand that if one considers the Union after 11 September , it is , in fact , only small EU Member States that have taken any individual action .
You did not get sidetracked in Ghent .
I would ask you to ensure that this convention - the mere fact that we now have an agreement on this is already quite an achievement for the presidency - is given the appropriate assignments in Laeken .
I should like to say this about Afghanistan : humanitarian aid is only possible if the Taliban regime is removed from power and unfortunately , we need war for this .
And finally , thousands of people were able to protest in Ghent without any incidents . It has not always been like that .
In my opinion , we should draw attention to this for a change .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President Prodi , the decision of the Council at Ghent to give immediate humanitarian aid totalling EUR 320 million is unusually welcome .
The same applies to European solidarity in the campaign against international terrorism .
The next thing to do is to achieve a speedy halt to the fighting , above all to protect the population of Afghanistan .
The world is still in shock from the attacks on New York and Washington .
Two things strike me as being of particular importance , quite independently of the steps taken to date .
The first is the complete explanation of the background to these crimes and the publication of the results .
Without these , there is the risk that the attacks will give rise to legends which could poison many people 's minds .
This would represent an enduring victory for terrorism .
What strikes me , secondly , is that the future reconstruction of Afghanistan presupposes , importantly , knowledge of the events in that country over the past twenty-five years .
As we know relatively little about this period , I propose that this Parliament should set up a group to look into the region and comprehensively document the past three decades in that country .
We could perhaps thereby take the first step towards a peaceful solution and a forward-looking outlook for Afghanistan .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has become clear , particularly in these last weeks and months , that common action by the Member States of the European Union as the European Union brings added value for every one of the EU 's members .
When I see , for example , that the troika not only made a very successful contribution to the creation of the coalition against terror in the Middle East but is also responsible for this happening at all , this is important evidence for the truth of this .
So I regret all the more that individual Member States have an ever-increasing tendency towards bilateralism .
For example , the troika was in Washington at the same time as the President of France , the German Foreign Minister , and the Prime Minister of Great Britain .
I do not find that the right way to go about presenting a clear picture of the European Union as a whole .
I also think that the meeting of the three Heads of Government in the run-up to the summit can only give rise to suspicions that we are moving towards an outcome managed from the top downwards .
All the European Union 's Member States are basically equal .
The European Union can only exist as it does now in so far as competencies reside in the supranational institutions and the smaller countries do not feel that they are controlled by the larger ones .
We will get into serious difficulties if this principle is not accepted .
Let me raise another point .
As the Chairman of my group has already observed , there is the danger that , in the realm of internal security , good decisions by the Council will be ground down in the mills of national bureaucracies .
I would like to suggest that the Belgian Presidency , which has done such excellent work in the past few weeks , should take a look at the Treaty of Amsterdam and tell the Council that , if the Council of Ministers so decides , decisions on legal and home affairs policy may be reached by majority voting - a legal possibility provided for in the Treaty of Amsterdam - so that we can come to the necessary decisions at a European level and can meet the challenge of combating terrorism , a phenomenon that knows no frontiers .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , please permit me one more observation and a request .
I wish to put on the record my thanks to you that the Convention will be possible .
If possible , though , Laeken should be founded on a procedure that offers the possibility of the Convention coming up with a unitary proposal .
It must be a Convention which can serve as the basis for the consultation of Heads of State and Government .
There is still a lot of concern about it , and I ask you to bear that in mind .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the results of the Ghent Council are without a doubt positive and encouraging , not least - although not exclusively - in terms of the fight against terrorism .
The Convention ' s decision is extremely important and mention must be made of the Belgian Presidency ' s firm undertaking to achieve these results .
However , in a world political and economic climate which is changing rapidly in the wake of the tragedy of 11 September , and in the face of the new demands from democratic States - primarily for terrorism to be combated , of course , but also for an area of peace and respect for human rights to be created in Asia and the Middle East and , moreover , for economic growth and employment to be boosted - we would like to make quite clear the need for a better coordinated European Union initiative which can speed up the institutional reforms , which are still far from completion , and thus empower the European Union to enter the field as a world political entity , an initiative which is able , that is , to speak with a single voice in Washington and Islamabad alike , as President Prodi advocated .
To give some concrete examples rather than limiting myself to describing vague needs , we would point out the urgency , in particular , for an incisive , coordinated action from the Commission and the High Representative laying the foundations for an - economic and social as well as political - agreement which will lead to the creation of a reunified , coherent , manageable State of Palestine while fully safeguarding the security of the State of Israel , together with an explicit international guarantee , as Mr Van den Berg said just now .
Secondly , we would point out the urgent need for a Commission and Eurogroup initiative to reach long-term agreements with the oil-producing countries in the Middle East in order to secure the continuity of oil supplies and the stability of oil prices in Europe with a guarantee in euro .
This would be a huge political boost to consolidation of peace in that area .
Thirdly , we feel there should be a Commission and Eurogroup initiative to create the conditions for revitalising economic growth and employment in the Union , both by promoting forms of open coordination in the research and development and training sectors , thus setting the Lisbon project in motion , and by transparently inviting the Central Bank to join this effort , using the room for manoeuvre for monetary policy rightly recommended at Ghent , and further reducing interest rates .
After that , Mr President , everyone will be able to assume their responsibilities transparently , in full respect for the independence of the Central Bank .
Mr President , there are two messages coming from this House today .
Firstly , the rather modest compromise resolution drafted by an all-party group which , if I were a member of the forces serving currently in Afghanistan - and I think particularly of the British forces - would give me very scant comfort .
The other message comes from the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Verhofstadt , and deals with a rather more robust approach to the current operations in that area and also his more forward thinking approach towards the future of Afghanistan .
Of course this House must have compromise resolutions and must , so far as possible , be united .
Europe must not act at the level of the lowest common denominator but accept that in politics , as in war , there must be room for leadership .
Today , our resolution does not reflect the sort of leadership which is available for the people of Afghanistan through their exiled king .
Our resolution does not reflect the fact that in Peshawar today there is an enormous meeting taking place of those seeking - including the moderate Taliban - the restoration of democracy in that country .
I believe - as do many of my colleagues - that the king , whom I had the pleasure of meeting on 21 September and whom Mr Solana met only last weekend , does have a role in the future of Afghanistan .
He introduced democracy to that country in 1964 : free elections , a free media , universities , hospitals ; he introduced women into politics .
It is that hope of the restoration of democracy in Afghanistan and the ending of international terrorism which must be the focus of our attention .
Mr President , I would firstly like to welcome the information from the President-in-Office of the Council on the progress made in relation to measures for combating terrorism and the arrest warrant .
Mr President , justice is a key word on the European and international stages following 11 September .
The creation of a European area of justice is the best contribution the Union could offer at this time .
We are not talking about a European criminal code ; that is not what we want .
Neither are we talking about establishing emergency laws .
We are talking about something more fundamental : mutual trust between Member States and between their legitimate judicial systems .
Mr Cappato , I sincerely believe that the proposals which the Commissioner , Mr Vitorino , produced calmly and at the request of this House , and which are of the high quality we normally expect from the Commissioner , deserve our support and must be approved by the Justice and Home Affairs Council .
In no way will they violate the freedom and rights of the citizens .
On the contrary , they protect them , making justice more efficient and putting judicial cooperation in the hands of judges , and not of governments , within the European Union .
I am grateful for the information on the elimination of double incrimination , because - as the Chairman of my group , Mr Barón , said - this House feels that the effort we make to keep up with circumstances is not always reflected in the Council .
We would also be grateful for more precise information on the debates in the Justice and Home Affairs Council and for broader involvement by Parliament .
In this respect , given the speeding up of certain procedures , I wonder , Mr President , if this is not the moment to move cooperation in the criminal field to the first pillar .
I am slightly more sceptical about what has been said about progress on immigration and asylum in the Union .
I believe that not even the greatest will in the world would allow a positive assessment of this issue at Laeken .
There is just one proposal approved by the Council which may be of use today .
Why do we not implement the measures laid down in that one measure adopted in the Directive on the temporary protection of displaced persons ?
It seems to me that the situation of the borders of Afghanistan and support for the refugees and the neighbouring countries , issues which the European Union has to deal with , provide us with a perfect opportunity to test this directive , to test the solidarity between the Member States in the European Refugee Fund and to implement what is laid down in it .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , there is no doubt that Europe must play an increasingly influential role in securing world peace .
Little has been achieved thus far and more needs to be done , and here I endorse what President Prodi said regarding the common foreign and security policy .
In the fight against terrorism , a great deal has already been done .
Europe has decided to take action but the political support and military support too from many of the States of the Union - Italy announced yesterday the amount of troops and resources it is making available for anti-terrorist actions - will not alone suffice : the crisis in the Middle East needs to be defused .
It may be that what has been termed the Marshall Plan for Palestine has not received enough attention - although it was certainly discussed at the Council .
The population of Palestine has a per capita income of USD 800 per year , whereas the per capita income of the Israeli people is USD 18 000 per year .
There is therefore a substantial difference and I feel that capital and enterprise investments are a way of ensuring lasting peace .
The economic growth of the Palestinian people , who must have a State , will certainly contribute to calming a volatile situation .
We will never win the war against terrorism if we do not first resolve the Middle East question .
I feel that the course embarked upon by the Commission and the Council is the right one .
We are also concerned - as President Prodi himself said - by the economic crisis .
I regret to say that the United States has had to invest USD 150 billion to revitalise the economy .
Europe appears to be concerned but is not doing enough , in our opinion , to support the economy and enterprise : this is not a question of State aid , it is a question of enabling many firms to stay in business , of preventing redundancies , particularly in the airlines sector .
In the case of Alitalia , there is talk of around 5000 redundancies but all the airlines have been affected .
From this point of view , if we are to safeguard employment and make it possible for a large number of firms to stay in business and grow , I feel that Europe , the Council and the Commission must increase their efforts even more .
Mr President , I very much welcome the Belgian Presidency 's use of the summit as an opportunity to put euro notes and coins at the top of the agenda .
Monetary union is , after all , not only for large businesses but also for every citizen .
I very much hope that this will be taken as a positive signal .
I would like to underline again that the position taken by the Heads of State and Government with regard to the Commission 's proposal on charges for trans-frontier money transfers is surely a step in the right direction .
We , the European Parliament , will , no doubt , also take this step in the next plenary session .
The current situation as regards employment and the economy , that is , the state of the labour market , as well as consumer confidence , should surely be seen in a very critical light .
I welcome the Commission 's report to the Council on the appraisal of the economic consequences of the terrible events of 11 September .
It is , I believe , important that we agree on a Community-wide approach .
Not everywhere is there evidence of one .
I believe that , in this situation , we must , now as in the past , stick with structural reforms and the advances they have achieved , particularly in the financial markets but also in the markets for goods and services and that we at the same time must not only underline the need for sound finances in the European Union and adherence to the Stability and Growth Pact , but should also make use of the flexibility for which this Pact provides , for we need more investments in the European Union .
Now as before , the Lisbon way is the right one , relying as it does on growth that is supported by investment and creates jobs and , above all , on mutual support in economic , employment and social policy .
Only when all the macro-economic actors have played their parts can our policy in the European Union be successful .
In these times of crisis we must hold fast to this , and the European Investment Bank , too , must be strengthened even more than previously in its task of helping public investments towards breakthroughs in the area of infrastructure .
By this I mean trans-frontier infrastructure measures in the EU itself , but also such as will connect our European Union with the states of Central and Eastern Europe .
Mr President , the fight against terrorism is clearly the current major concern of the European citizens and it therefore also has to be the main priority of our political action .
Mr President , I am talking about terrorism in all its forms , because there is no legal or moral basis for distinguishing between forms of terrorism , just as there is no such thing as a good murder or a bad murder .
In this respect , the action plan against terrorism , which the Belgian Presidency and the Commission are promoting vigorously , includes measures which we had argued for before 11 September .
In fact we must remember that the proposals in this area presented by the Commission are not the result of improvisation , but they conform to a mandate received at the European Council in Tampere , whose implementation had suffered considerable delay , which was condemned by the European Parliament on several occasions .
We are still awaiting the final approval of the Regulation on the freezing of assets , incorporating , it is true , as the European Parliament argued for , a list of European terrorist organisations , taking into account the financial operative support and propaganda framework of the terrorists .
I therefore believe that we must welcome the Council ' s commitment to approve a package of measures at the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 6 and 7 December .
I am sure that the European Parliament will rise to the occasion and approve its consultative opinion before that .
Mr President , I will end by saying that none of these instruments being provided to the judicial administration of the Member States imply the least restriction of the civil liberties of European citizens , but quite the opposite : they provide additional means for protecting the freedom which those who use terrorism to try to impose their ideas take away from the individual .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the impression which our citizens have gleaned from the European Council of Ghent is rather chaotic : a closed down city , three major countries making prior arrangements , an angry Belgian President , disparate final declarations by Heads of Government and , to finish off , an angry Commission President .
At a time when unity of action is vital , Europe is divided .
I should like to make three observations .
The United Kingdom , Germany and France have lent their full support to the United States . In fact , the UK is even granting active military support .
I welcome this .
Other EU countries that are also members of NATO are providing more passive support .
The EU countries that are not NATO members lend political support via diplomatic channels .
These are three different kinds of support without any clear interrelation for the citizen . And then the EU President asked for an evaluation .
So you , in fact , put a seed of doubt into our minds as to whether that support would last .
Against this backdrop , it is hardly surprising that the United States is seeking support from countries outside the European Union , including Canada , Australia and the Pacific Association .
I would call for more coordination in Europe ' s support for the actions against terrorism in the coming months , so that the image of division will soon be one of the past .
Secondly , I should like to comment on cooperation in the field of internal security .
Commissioner Vitorino has tabled the proposals extremely promptly , and these include one about a European regulation against money laundering , one concerning arrest warrants and one harmonising penalties .
In fact , those proposals had already partly been tabled .
Last week , the Council of Ministers for Internal Affairs failed to reach agreement . That was also the case for the European Council in Ghent .
Why did the Heads of Government fail to make those executive decisions ?
Surely it is hardly justifiable vis-à-vis the citizens for the EU to be undecided about anti-terrorism measures at home .
Then there is the convention , which receives my support , because the Council has adopted the wish of the European Parliament and my group for a convention with a broad parliamentary basis .
We are less happy about the proposal to ask the convention to supply options .
That is the type of question you might ask a consultancy bureau , but not a parliamentary body .
Let the convention determine its own working method and submit its own proposals .
That worked for the Charter and , in my opinion , will work again now .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President Prodi , the informal summit in Ghent has shown two positive aspects , namely fundamental agreement on a Convention to prepare a constitutional treaty and the final technical adjustments to the euro .
Under other circumstances , without the shadow cast by terrorism , this would be an occasion for looking optimistically towards Europe 's future .
We are , however , concerned with a situation in which we ask ourselves whether , with the euro , Europe 's capacity for integration has already been exhausted .
A common currency , a common foreign policy and a common defence policy would give the EU that credibility in the eyes of its citizens and create that identification with it , whose absence we often regret .
It has been , above all , in respect of foreign and security policy , that the Ghent Summit has brought us down to earth .
Bilateralism , if you want to call it that , or undeclared intensified cooperation , laid bare the weaknesses that still handicap the European Union 's effectiveness vis-à-vis the rest of the world .
Reviewing the international analyses following the Ghent meeting shows how the shock at the terrorist attacks on the USA has revealed the divisiveness within the European Union .
It is not only a reaction to the behaviour of the USA , which prefers to deal and negotiate with governments direct , but also the consequence of the inherent military weakness of the European security and defence policy , in which there is a yawning gulf between ambition and reality .
It is no secret that there are doubts as to whether the training of the European Rapid Reaction Force of 60 000 men is actually going to be completed by the 2003 deadline .
The European Union needs an energy boost , not only to unite it more closely with its citizens but , above all , in order that it might fully meet its responsibilities within Europe itself and as a partner of the USA .
The process of enlargement must be seen from this point of view , as must the post-Nice order , involving a Convention which should not be content to fritter away its time but , as the European Parliament has recommended , should work out a coherent basis for a decision on a constitutional treaty .
Mr President , the European Council confirmed and reinforced Europe ' s decision to stand shoulder to shoulder with the United States to combat terrorism and ensure internal security , and also its commitment to avoiding a humanitarian disaster in Afghanistan .
After 11 September , the political geography of the world has changed radically .
However , the Shanghai Summit will be more important than the restricted summit at Ghent .
What is the European Union ' s role ?
Is a single foreign and security policy possible ?
Will we be able to reinvigorate the Mediterranean initiative and work for peace in the Middle East ?
In reality , good intentions are often contradicted by the behaviour of certain governments , who delay integration and endeavour to take away the political influence of a Convention which should be developing the method and objectives .
This is what we expect from Laeken and from an Intergovernmental Conference which needs to reform the Union before the European elections .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over and above all the constitutional issues , the present situation sees Europeans being asked the question : What is your capacity to act ?
Is the European Union perceived as being able to act in the context of efforts to deal with this international crisis , or is it not ?
To ask the question is to answer it in the negative , because the ones taking action are the Americans and , alongside them , partly the British and their allies , but not the European Union as such .
Nor should the British allow themselves to be deceived .
They too are only a small junior partner in the business and have nothing like the weight that Europeans could have if they acted together .
Only as a community will Europeans acquire capacity to act - they will not do it bilaterally , trilaterally or multilaterally .
So it was a gross error for the ruling Big Three to set off before Ghent .
Far from demonstrating European capacity to act , that is a trip down a one-way street , showing considerable lack of awareness of how Europe works .
Those who have acted in this way had better take good note of that .
We need capacity to act as a Community .
So we need the European Rapid Reaction Force .
Without such an instrument , Europeans will not be taken seriously in the world .
That is why it is ridiculous for us still to be arguing about how this instrument should be financed .
In this respect , the Community must prove its strength .
We also , however , need an instrument at home .
We need the capacity to combat terrorism across national frontiers .
Police work goes on in the Member States , but it must be clear to all that international terrorism can only be combated with any prospect of success by units that are in a position to operate without regard to national boundaries .
Action as a Community is what Europe lacks , and it is on that that we must concentrate .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank the various interlocutors and groups for their observations .
I think that , except for two or three speeches , a predominantly positive evaluation has been made of the outcome of Ghent .
Such a positive evaluation from the various groups encourages us , of course , to continue our hard work in the coming weeks , for we have another important summit coming up , namely the Summit of Laeken .
I would also like to respond , as follows , to a few oblique remarks that have been made about the cooperation between myself and Mr Romano Prodi : our cooperation is excellent .
In fact , we have just decided to come to the next press conference on a tandem , so as to rule out any further misunderstandings .
Since we both are accomplished cyclists , this will undoubtedly be appreciated by Parliament .
I should in any event like to react to three points .
First of all , a few times , the question has been asked : so where exactly is the Union ' s foreign policy now ?
I think that Mr Romano Prodi has already entered into more detail on this and has , actually , made very valid points .
Last time we had an international crisis , the Gulf War , Europe had fifteen different opinions on the stance the Union should adopt .
Each Member State had its own opinion on the matter .
In today ' s international crisis , we have , for the first time , displayed a united front on two occasions , on 21 September and last Friday in Ghent , in a matter which is , actually , very complex .
Firstly , to what does the stance of the fifteen Member States regarding the attacks in Washington and New York bear witness ?
A joint vision and a joint approach .
Secondly , what is the stance now after 7 October ?
After all , things changed on 7 October , since the reaction from the United States and the international coalition .
Again , we have a joint stance .
It is important in my view to underline this , for there was a time in the European Union when this was different .
Mr Romano Prodi reminded us that each time there was an international conflict , there was not one stance , but fifteen stances within the Council .
Now this no longer holds true .
However much I am of the personal view - which I share with many of you - that we should take things further still , for example that , certainly in the field of European defence , we should have made much more progress by now , I still believe that we should underline this positive development .
At long last , little by little , piece by piece , a common foreign policy of the European Union is forming , something which , say fifteen years ago , was almost unthinkable .
From that point of view , I believe , in fact , that Mr Van den Berg is more than right in emphasising the role we are to play now . For our role is different from that of the United States .
The EU ' s role is mainly one of political , logistical support , and diplomatic action to be undertaken .
He is right in highlighting the importance of the mandate which we have received from the Council with regard to the Middle East .
We , that is , Mr Romano Prodi , Mr Javier Solana and myself , are considering a date when we could undertake this important mission . Possibly the third week of November .
For I believe that it is up to the European Union , especially the European Union , to take an initiative in this respect .
However , we must be realistic and not foster any illusions .
We cannot solve matters with just one visit - there have been many already - but perhaps by gaining momentum in one particular area , this could ultimately lead to an initiative .
The second point I would like to make relates to what several Members have said and particularly concerns Mr Poettering ' s comments .
Mr Poettering said that the Presidency was doing a good job .
He mentions the work on the single European arrest and extradition warrant by the ministers of the specialised Councils , amongst others .
But when will this come about ?
It is obvious .
This very specific task was given to the Justice and Home Affairs Ministers and they must finalise the practical details before 6 and 7 December 2001 .
Mr Poettering , I have already said - not today , not on 19 October but on 21 September - on behalf of the European Council , that the specialised ministers were given the task of finalising the details .
The only thing that I have done , with the help of the Commission and all the Member States of the European Union and the European Council , is to go further at the Ghent Council and to obtain approval of the principle of abolishing the double criminality system .
( NL ) At the most recent Council , we at least managed to reach agreement on this , for that is the most important point .
It is easy to proclaim that a European mandate must be obtained , also for extradition .
The most important point had not yet been reached , namely an agreement on the principle of the abolition of dual criminality , not only for terrorist acts but also for other serious crimes .
We must indeed challenge a reductionist attempt to render the provision only applicable to terrorist acts .
That was not the conclusion reached in Tampere .
The Tampere conclusions were in favour of broadening the scope , in other words for other , serious crimes to fall within its scope .
I am therefore personally optimistic with regard to 6 and 7 December .
I am addressing Mr Poettering and also Mr Cox , in particular .
But have no fear , if the Ministers for Internal Affairs and Justice fail to come up with the goods , then I will be taking the dossier to the European Council of Laeken on 15 December where the Heads of State and Government will decide .
However , I am convinced that the Ministers for Justice will not let things get so far that ultimately , the Heads of Government will have to solve a technical problem which is predominantly concerned with modality .
Finally , I also should like to briefly comment on the third point , namely the Union ' s future .
I believe that we are all agreed that 11 September has shown that a more integrated , more progressive Union is needed , a Union with greater ability to act , which has better instruments at its disposal , and which - certainly as far as the foreign and defence policy is concerned - has greater powers .
To pave the way for this is exactly the intention of the Laeken Declaration .
Therefore , I can already give very concrete answers to the generally positive evaluation based on that convention .
The convention is a fact .
Yes , Mr Poettering , the presidency is a limited presidency in line with the request of all groups , comprising five people including the president of the convention .
Yes , the Member States and MEPs are proportionately represented , although exact numbers will need to be discussed in due course .
Yes , civil society is involved , not by setting up a new body but by creating a network around the convention whereby groups in society can refer to the convention and whereby , conversely , the convention can also seek advice from European affairs study centres , trade unions , any other organisations which exist in our society , as well as civil society .
A flexible network around the convention therefore seems preferable to the organisation of a special forum .
Finally , I should like to respond to the most fundamental question which has been repeatedly raised here . Indeed , it is related to that text .
If that text originates from that convention , how will the Council then relate to it ?
Will it be considered a report that can be dismissed and need not be taken into consideration ?
A discussion has therefore arisen as to the question of whether that is now a consensus text or a text providing options .
The answer is very simple .
That will , at any rate , be my reply in a few weeks ' time when we are all meeting in Laeken .
If everyone is agreed , then we will have a consensus text . In other words , it will then be quite clear that this is an important - if not the most important - contribution to the Intergovernmental Conference .
If no consensus is reached at the convention , then I obviously believe that options should be given , not in a neutral manner , but in such a way that the majority and minority options are clearly indicated , as well as the individual option of one member of the convention , if applicable .
It was also my intention to talk this over with the chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , Mr Napolitano , and the two draftsmen of opinion on the future of Europe .
I cannot see the sense of unleashing a holy war among ourselves as to the exact significance of that text .
If consensus is reached , then we have a consensus text .
If we cannot have a consensus text because we failed to reach consensus , options must be indicated , but not in a neutral manner , not in a way as if we were supplying a list without any significance . Instead , we should highlight the majority and minority options , in other words , the wishes and trends which originated at the convention and which have been brought forward .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make a few comments on this debate , which has revealed great unity , not just between Council and Commission but also between these institutions and Parliament .
I would just like to focus on a few issues which appear to have remained unresolved .
Firstly , the issue has been raised , starting with Chairman Poettering , of the amount of aid granted to refugees .
I would like to say that the immediate appropriation has been decided of EUR 315 million , but the problem is not now , at this time , I regret to say , financial , but the enormous practical difficulties of getting the aid to the people concerned .
We are working through the NGOs and many other organisations .
I would stress that , as things stand now , sufficient funds have been transferred in practical terms .
When further funds are needed , then we will come back here to request them and discuss the matter together : the present problem is the difficulty of implementing these operations .


I will now turn to another debate , taken up by a number of speakers , including Mr Tajani and several others , who linked this major phenomenon of the world being divided into two parts to peace in Palestine .
This is an issue of fundamental importance , in which regard I would point out to Mr Tajani and the other speakers that what has been termed the ' reconstruction plan for Palestine ' is something which is very much on our minds : I have discussed it many times with Mr Peres and we are well aware that we should concentrate on taking action in certain sectors such as water , energy , infrastructure and revitalising industry .
This is our duty and the Palestinian and Israeli citizens know that the Commission is focusing its efforts in that direction .
As soon as the political conditions allow , we will be here , requesting the necessary resources .
However , I believe that the knowledge that we are taking practical action and are all ready to work together is in itself conducive to peace .
Then , Prime Minister Verhofstadt spoke about the decisions adopted in the field of justice and the fight against financial crime .
I agree with what he said , but we must be careful . We have adopted decisions here : if we do not implement them we will lose all credibility .
Therefore , the ministers responsible must speed up the implementation of these decisions or else they will be taken again at the summit .
A further point related to the Convention .
A general agreement has been adopted on the board , the executive structure and so forth .
I would , however , like to focus on one point , touched upon by Prime Minister Verhofstadt , which is the duration of the Convention .
Parliament and the Commission have guided and supported the Convention ' s creation : they must support its work and they must support its conclusion , and so the work must reach its conclusion before the start of the electoral campaign for the European elections .
This is a genuine deadline , not a theoretical one .
Many speakers have brought up the issue of the Community method in this debate .
Well then , on this matter I would simply like to borrow a vivid picture painted by Mr Duff .
He said : " When the two planes crashed into the World Trade Centre they demolished more than the twin towers . We also saw the destruction of the European Union 's three pillars contrived at the Treaty of Maastricht . "
This is , in my opinion , a correct , responsible , practical observation .
Mr Duff has fully understood the political meaning of the Commission ' s efforts to achieve unified Union action by applying the Community method , which is the only effective way of ensuring success .
A further point , mentioned by all the speakers , is the issue of the institutional reforms .
The Commission and Parliament are working on the practical aspects of this matter : we have argued and helped each other , and I think we are making progress - painstaking progress - in our joint work .
We have not yet finished but we are working , so to speak , on the bricks and mortar , on the concrete facts .
At this point , although I do not wish to interfere with the internal organisation of the Council , I would point out that our reform will not be sufficiently effective if it is not accompanied by a reform of the Council ' s working procedures .
( Applause )
My intention in saying this is not to interfere in other people ' s business but to stress the need for effectiveness .
We need to bring all our work out into the open and achieve more transparency , accountability and democracy in our governance .
The Commission has already addressed this point in its White Paper and we and Parliament expect to debate it with the Council .
With regard to the economy , everyone has stressed the difficulty of implementing the Lisbon decisions .
However , this is an area in which there has been a vast difference between the general decisions taken and the implementation of the decisions in subsequent individual Councils , with regard to liberalisation and market reform , speeding up innovation , and projects ranging from the creation of the single air space to the establishing of the Community patent , areas in which we are still extremely behind schedule .
Our economy will only become dynamic if we rectify these shortcomings .
Lastly - and , in this respect , more great progress has been made - we have undertaken to support the introduction of the euro with the indispensable backup measures such as the single market in cross-border bank transfers .
We have committed ourselves to this and it is an absolutely crucial point .
Finally , one last point on the subject of the Convention .
I will go back to Mrs Maij-Weggen ' s comment on the actual definition of the Convention : we cannot consider it to be a consultative body , as some have described it .
It cannot be a body which just gives advice and is then disbanded and no longer involved .
We are making the Convention as transparent as possible but also giving it as much democratic authority as possible , and we therefore expect it to produce major , incisive results .
I would add , moreover , that the presence of the Convention is a breath of fresh air amongst the closed doors of secretive diplomacy .
The air of democracy is nourished by the oxygen of transparency and accountability , and the Commission therefore fully supports the commencement of the Convention ' s work so that dialogue will , at last , be opened between the institutions and between the institutions and the European citizens .
( Applause )
Thank you , President Prodi .
As you heard , during the last part of your speech there was a buzz of voices which made it difficult for all the Members who were listening attentively to your speech to hear properly .
I apologise for this .
Steps must be taken to avoid such disturbance once and for all .
As you and my fellow Members can see , all those who were not paying attention to your speech are continuing to chat in the corridors and will only sit down when the next President opens voting time .
I have received six motions for resolution pursuant to Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 10 a.m.
Mr President , the confusion in the House before voting time is in danger of becoming a moral issue .
It is a political issue and is the result of the way our work is organised , with the debates taking place separately from the votes .
Parliament is becoming a voting parlour , and this is the inevitable consequence .
If we want to avoid this confusion , then we must allow a 15-minute pause between the debate and the votes . That way there will be less people attending the debates and we will be able to become a voting parlour pure and simple and increasingly less a Parliament !
Thank you for your comment .
We shall now proceed to the votes .
Mr President , I should like to draw your attention to the deluge of e-mails which we are currently receiving , as a result of which my computer refuses to work and I can no longer locate the actual e-mails that I should like to read .
Could you see to it that something is done about this by the offices ?
We will certainly take note of this .
VOTE
The Commission can accept in part or in spirit Amendments Nos 1 , 5 , 8 , 9 , 13 , 14 , 15 and 16 .
The Commission rejects Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 10 , 11 , 12 and 17 .
Before the vote on Amendment No 17 : Gröner ( PSE ) .
( DE ) Mr President , we had reached a compromise with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and they are now departing from it .
So we too will not now abide by this compromise , and I call on my group to vote in favour of Amendment No 17 .
Mr President , I believe Mrs Gröner has made a mistake .
We have not deviated from the compromise .
On the contrary , we are sticking to what we agreed .
We are not , though , voting in favour of the amendments that have been tabled after the compromise and with which we do not agree .
We have not deviated from the compromise at all , quite the opposite !
( The President declared the amended common position approved )
Report ( A5-0335 / 2001 ) by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the establishment of a common classification of Territorial Units for Statistics ( NUTS ) [ COM ( 2001 ) 83 - C5-0065 / 2001 - 2001 / 0046 ( COD ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Voting time will now be suspended and resumed after the formal sitting on the occasion of the visit of his Holiness the XIVth Dalai-Lama .

( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.30 p.m. )

Mr President , I should like to mention that the Greens and the Liberals have kindly invited everyone to their joint meeting this afternoon to meet His Holiness , the Dalaï Lama , at 3 p.m. in Room 100 in WIC - that means everybody who was not included in the invitation of the PSE and the PPE-DE .
Welcome
I would like to welcome the Prime Minister of Bulgaria , Mr Simeon Saxe-Coburg , who has taken a seat in the visitors ' gallery . He is visiting the European institutions .
Prime Minister , on behalf of President Fontaine , welcome to the European Parliament . I hope that the accession of your country , which we hope will happen as soon as possible , will lead to the consolidation of the democratic process which has been set in motion and enable the Bulgarian people to take its rightful place in the Community of the peoples of the European Union .
( Applause )
VOTE ( continuation )
The pursuit of the second wave of the feminist movement in the 60s and 70s was strongly focused on enabling women to get on in paid jobs .
On average , women were not as highly trained as men , and even if they were , due to male domination , they often got the jobs with the lowest status and the lowest income .
Moreover , many women were financially dependent on their husbands .
Highly trained women were right to claim access to jobs from which , in those days , they were almost automatically excluded .
For women who were less highly trained , the situation was often different . Cleaning offices or stacking shelves in supermarkets are not demanding jobs , and , in many cases , not to be preferred to the role of housewife .
That group of women experienced it , in many cases , as liberating if the income of their husbands obviated the need for them to work .
Most women now have a paid job , while men do not work fewer hours to look after and raise the children .
Feminism has become the employers ' accidental instrument to solve staff shortages and to limit government spending .
Certainly under those circumstances , it is even more important to actively fight any form of discrimination and intimidation at work .
Miguélez Ramos report ( A5-0335 / 2001 )
Mr President , it was with great pleasure that I read Mr Ramos ' rather technical document , which also has great political meaning for me .
As you are aware , I have been a regional councillor of the Lombardy region for five years .
My daughter , Elisabetta , has been a regional councillor of the Liguria region for five years and is currently a regional councillor of the Lombardy region , for the Pensioners ' Party of course .
I say this with pleasure in order to stress my personal hope - in addition to what is , I believe , the hope of all of us - that the regions in Europe will gain increasingly in political and decision-making importance and that they will be allowed to participate more fully in the production of the European directives and regulations which concern them .
. ( EL ) The debate on territorial units for statistics ( NUTS ) is not a technical debate about statistics because regional statistics and the classification of regions on the basis of NUTS provide a constant line of reference for analysing social and economic developments in the regions and determining which areas are eligible for structural support .
One of the most serious problems is that completely different political and economic units are used as a basis for collating and processing statistics .
This is no accident and arouses even greater suspicion in conjunction with the fact , as the report quite rightly points out , that the Commission exercises ' a great deal of flexibility ' when applying the criteria for classifying an area in NUTS É , ÉÉ , or ÉÉÉ , using them as it pleases , depending on the ' needs ' of the case .
For example , a NUTS III type administrative division is used to allocate funds to Objective 2 , thereby subsidising half the population of the Union and drastically reducing the funds available for the less developed areas for which they are supposedly intended .
Between 1994 and 1999 ( Delors II package ) 51 % of the population of the ÅU received support , of which only 25 % corresponded to Objective 1 , which funds NUTS II type regions .
Lastly , of this 25 % , only 16.4 % related to Objective 2 .
In other words , because a small administrative division was used ( NUTS ÉÉÉ ) , the rich countries received considerable support , thereby blatantly distorting regional policy in practice .
Finally , it is again the rich countries which benefit , gobbling up a large slice of what are already miserly and insufficient appropriations from the Structural Funds .
Some countries benefit even more because the NUTS III type administrative divisions are very small compared with other countries .
For example , this sort of administrative division ( prefecture ) has a surface area of 2,950 square metres in Greece , 3,162 square metres in Portugal and a mere 758 square metres in Germany .
All this illustrates , yet again , the malfunctions , inequalities , irregularities and hypocrisy of ÅU regional policy , in that a large chunk of the appropriations distributed in structural aid is ' recycled ' and finds its way back to the more developed Member States , thereby seriously curtailing the potential for any national development policy , which is forced to remain within the confines of the poorly tailored Community ' straitjacket ' .
As a result , not only do we fail to achieve the much-vaunted objective of convergence between the poorest and richest regions but , as the figures confirm - and Greece is a prime example - there is increasing divergence , not just between Member States in the north and the south , but between regions within Member States themselves .
The only thing achieved with any degree of satisfaction is that people have been paid to turn a blind eye and mechanisms have been created to promote the interests of the large monopolies , which have benefited most from Community programmes .
Despite the fact that the rapporteur 's report fails to ' bring matters to a head ' , it does at least touch on several serious problems and we shall support it .
Weiler report ( A5-0360 / 2001 )
. ( PT ) The study contained in the 2001 Joint Employment Report , produced on the basis of national reports , demonstrates how little attention most Member States pay to employment guidelines .
In fact , only seven have paid any attention to the general objectives laid down at the Lisbon Council and reaffirmed at the Stockholm Council , and only three have referred to the specific objectives on the rate of employment for women .
As stated in the opinion of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , to which we contributed proposals , that were approved , antagonism clearly exists between the objectives for employment rates that have been laid down by the Council and the minimal importance that the majority of the Member States attach to integrating sensitivity to gender issues in their employment policies . This failure to integrate such sensitivity in Member State policies can be seen in the lack of national objectives for reducing the various disparities between the genders in the labour market , whether these be a lack in adequate childcare services , or the limited initiatives for reducing wage disparities between the sexes , for example .
The Weiler report is not sufficiently critical of the current employment situation in the European Union , although it does acknowledge some negative aspects of practices in these areas of employment , specifically where it focuses on the need to establish national targets and on meeting them .
It does not , however , provide a critical analysis of the guidelines proposed by the Commission nor does it offer any clear alternatives for issues that we need to commit to , specifically the need to give priority to employment policies or not to continue the current trend of subordinating these policies to monetarist ones , thereby finally burying the neoliberal approach that prevails in the European Union , having rejected the proposals that we tabled on this matter .
. The European Parliamentary Labour Party supports the thrust of the Weiler report on the employment guidelines for 2002 .
It also has a lot of sympathy for the amendments submitted by Mr Bushill-Matthews but feels that the Weiler report is not the appropriate report for such amendments .
. ( EL ) Without doubt the economic crisis is worsening , having already been exacerbated by the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington .
This recession , which appears to have set in for the duration , at least according to most analysts , cannot be resolved , yet again , at the expense of the workers , by making mass redundancies and eroding their rights .
Overall employment has basically bottomed out and unemployment is staying put , even if it is not increasing as , for example , in my country .
At the same time , more mass redundancies are on the cards in important sectors of the economy , such as transport , tourism etc .
Employment policies have become an exercise in apportioning unemployment , even more so in the guidelines for 2002 .
It is no accident that the countries ' patted on the back ' here by the EU are the countries which first proceeded to overhaul the labour market , especially by extending part-time and other forms of flexible employment .
The European Parliament report supports the guidelines , which revert to the familiar subjects of structural reform and more flexible employment contracts , the purpose of which is to create a huge army of employable people with no rights or claims , whose productivity and competitiveness are tailored to the speculative demands of big business and its interests .
Geographical mobility of the workers serves no purpose except to strengthen the concentration of human resources and wealth in the rich areas of the ÅU , which get richer by absorbing the best manpower and scientists .
The sole purpose of the second pillar of the guidelines on entrepreneurship is to make the unemployed self-employed , thereby artificially reducing unemployment and rejecting the responsibilities of social solidarity .
As for subsidised job schemes , not only have they been completely ineffectual in combating unemployment , the money has generally gone straight into the employers ' pockets and workers have been replaced by the subsidised unemployed , resulting in constant infringements of collective agreements .
Continuing privatisation , mergers , adjustment to EMU , increased imports and more intense capitalist competition , thousands of small and medium-sized farms wiped out and the closure of small and medium-sized enterprises have created conditions for spiralling unemployment .
The policy which the ÅU persists in applying , despite an average rate of growth of 3.3 % in 2000 , does not appear to be reducing the unemployment or the poverty which is the bane of the lives of 22 % of the population of the ÅU .
The workers want a different policy , a policy predicated on people and their needs , with full , secure social rights for all workers , a better standard of living and real social development and prosperity .
We are mainly well disposed towards Mrs Weiler ' s report .
We particularly appreciate the emphasis she places upon the quality of work .
We are nonetheless critical of quite a few of the amendments by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs which make sweeping ideological statements about the market economy and the way it is run .
We believe that an economic policy is thus being recommended that militates against the European employment strategy , especially during periods when the economy and demand for labour are not expanding .
Because these amendments have been adopted by the House , we chose to abstain in the final vote .
. I wholeheartedly support this report by Ms Weiler which welcomes the 2002 employment guidelines .
Whilst the report recognises that full employment can be achieved through further structural reforms of the labour market , it also calls for increased investment in training , especially for job seekers .
The quantitative , as well as qualitative , returns that the EU would reap as a result of its commitment to training are unquestionable .
Training and education are essential ways in which EU Member States can jointly boost the EU 's employment rate .
Time and again in Member States , investment in education and training has proved to be successful and when coordinated at a pan-European level , this would be amplified .
It is important that these commitments are realised and that they do not simply turn into hot air .
Finally , the recommendation that both sides of industry should agree on changes in working practices could pave the way for enhanced industrial relations and create a situation whereby the specialist knowledge of each party is fully utilised .
Seppänen report ( A5-0350 / 2001 )
Madam President , you , like me , love the sea and have often visited my city , Genoa , which I have admired for 20 years from the top of the Righi hills .
I see the sea and reflect deeply .
The sea unites , the sea belongs to everyone , the sea has no borders .
It is therefore right that the European Union should concern itself with all seas , particularly those which bathe the shores of some of our States , and that it should provide financial aid , not least , as in this case , to States beyond its borders such as Russia , for environmental projects to make these seas cleaner , more navigable and more beautiful .

Mr President , Mr Fatuzzo ' s explanations of vote are so poetic that I would like to ask you , as a member of the Bureau , whether the Presidency has any intention of publishing these speeches in a book , considering their value and the sentiments pervading them which surpass all the other speeches in the House and endow them with a poetic value that Parliament must not fail to appreciate .
I will inform the Bureau of your suggestion , Mr Dell ' Alba .
Virrankoski report ( A5-0345 / 2001 )
Mr Dell ' Alba , in a minute you will see that not all Mr Fatuzzo ' s speeches are poetic .
This one concerns nuclear power stations .
Clearly , through this funding we are protecting the Chernobyl power station - and I voted for the motion - but we must think carefully : should we really close the Bohunice power station in Slovakia - which I visited with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy last week - and on which thousands of billions have been spent to increase safety , and make its closure a non-negotiable condition for Slovakia ' s accession to the European Union ?
Should we not think more carefully about this ?
The manufacturing companies that used to buy energy from Chernobyl , and by means of which it was possible to sustain such a colossal complex of nuclear reactors , are , since the collapse of the Soviet Union , largely non-existent .
The population of the Ukraine is so impoverished that it lacks the purchasing power to be able to buy any substantial amount of electricity as a consumer .
Neither is there any internal funding available to finance new , cleaner and safe methods of generating electricity , and , given the long half-life of radio-active material , we will need to be very patient before what is left of the demolished stations is removed .
Everything that is being done now , unfortunately , is impossible without outside aid .
The measures to provide Chernobyl with a new protective casing by 2005 , are too little and too late .
The first casing - erected shortly after the disaster in 1986 - still conceals a dangerous seat of fire , and nuclear energy remains a source of future risks .
In the debate on 2 May regarding 15 years of Chernobyl , I already indicated that other types of nuclear power plants are also unsafe and that they , upon closure , leave a legacy impossible to solve .
Despite all these shortcomings , I support this finance proposal , for doing nothing is not a solution at all .
Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou report ( A5-0328 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou ' s report .
It concerns the Social Fund , which , as we know , is a fund dedicated to workers and to improving and enhancing the chances of the unemployed of finding work .
In particular , this document regulates the definition of innovative measures , that is the new initiatives in this sector .
I would like to take the opportunity afforded by this last explanation of vote to wish you ' Bon appétit ' , of course , and to apologise for the drain on the European Parliament ' s finances , for I have been informed that every minute of my speeches costs the institution ITL 1,2 million .
If the services were willing to pay half of it to please Mr Fatuzzo , I could save on the other half and not make any more speeches .
Joking apart , I would like to end this explanation of vote by calling for the innovative measures of the Social Fund to be encouraged and accepted , even if they are proposed to the Union by the candidate countries .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Council reform
The next item is the report ( A5-0308 / 2001 ) by Mr Poos , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the reform of the Council [ 2001 / 2020 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , it is a true honour for me to be able to present to you this report on Council reform in the presence of Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , representing the Council and Mr Barnier , representing the Commission .
This own-initiative report does not concern the Council alone .
It also concerns the European Parliament and Commission in equal measure , as they have the same interest in ensuring that the three institutions work well , and are efficient and coherent .
In an enlarged Union , it is imperative that the Community institutions improve their ability to make decisions and increase their reaction time .
I do not believe that it constitutes any insider dealing to state that today the Council is the most badly organised institution .
This is a serious problem , since this institution , which has both executive and legislative competences , is still , in spite of the changes made to the Treaty , the European Union ' s main centre of power .
The Council has already lost much of its effectiveness .
In my report , you will find a long list of dysfunctions .
The Council itself had carried out some preparatory work three or four years ago and I used this and other work as a basis .
Since then , however , nothing has been done , although some other preparatory work was carried out by former - and very key - figures on the international stage , and I shall mention , in particular , the Notre Europe working group led by Jacques Delors .
One of the dysfunctions that I must emphasise particularly is institutional digression , which has primarily been at the expense of Community procedures , along with the Commission .
The rise in power of the European Council , combined with the weakness of the General Affairs Council , has re-established the intergovernmental method of preparing decisions .
The aides , or ' sherpas ' , used by the Heads of State , have reintroduced a method that is reminiscent of nineteenth century secret diplomacy .
Mini-summit meetings , like the one held at Ghent , have brought back the tendency to place control in the hands of a chosen few , a dream that some have never given up on since the Fouchet plan of the 1960s .
In order to correct this digression , I recommend nothing more and nothing less than going back to the Treaty .
We should ask the European Council to stop tackling detailed issues and to stop acting like an enormous vacuum cleaner that tries to deal with all the important decisions .
You should not bite off more than you can chew .
What is even worse is that the European Council now causes the institutional system to come to a standstill .
No one dares to make a decision anymore .
Everything is now referred back to those at the top .
The European Council should restrict itself to giving general guidelines on European policy , as laid down in the Treaty .
We must re-evaluate the General Affairs Council , enabling it to resolve conflicts between the specialised Councils and ensuring that decisions are coherent .
To this end , it is essential to have a single channel for preparations , and the same single channel for preparations could also be used by the European Council .
We must demand that the ministers in the General Affairs Council do not deal with European affairs at a brief monthly meeting , where an in-depth discussion of the items on the agenda is not possible due to the limited number of ministers attending and the unacceptable practical conditions .
The proposal for a resolution suggests a number of practical solutions , which can all be implemented immediately without having to amend the Treaty .
Before I finish , I would like to draw the attention of Members to the proposals on improving collaboration with the European Parliament .
They concern the presence of Council ministers at our important debates as well as speeding up the legislative procedure from the first-reading stage .
With regard to transparency , I hope that the European Parliament and the Council will support the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which proposes that Council discussions be made public when it is working on legislation .
This obviously requires considerable reorganisation of the agenda and discipline in the conduct of meetings .
If the Council did not meet behind closed doors when carrying out its duties as co-legislator , citizens might also perceive it as a second legislative chamber , which is , in fact , a task that the Council already fulfils today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , I would also like to say that , with regard to the dysfunctions in the Council , the Commission widely supports the analysis presented in this excellent report .
Personally , I am not surprised by the quality of this analysis , given the experience and expertise that Mr Poos has gained over many long years and which he is now putting to use at the European Parliament .
I would like to say that , having begun by voicing our overall appreciation of the report , the Commission also supports the reforms that you put forward for the Council .
Transforming the Council into a structured and efficient body is in the interests of the whole European Union .
Your report takes up many of the suggestions and comments that we at the Commission have expressed in the past , and particularly in our recently published White Paper on European Governance .
These options for reform are all the more interesting since they can be made - as you have said - without altering the current Treaty .
With reference to the Council , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would obviously like to say that , from my point of view , each of our institutions is autonomous and has primary responsibility for its own reforms .
We know very well , however , that each of the institutions is concerned with how they all function .
It is in this spirit and within these boundaries that I would like to give you the European Commission ' s impression of the other institution , in other words , the Council of Ministers .
Admittedly , within the framework of the debate on the future of the European Union , we must carry out an in-depth examination of the institutional set-up , the role of each institution and the amendments that need to be made to the Treaty so that our Union has a genuine institutional framework that is both more democratic and more effective .
That is why I think , Mr Poos , that your report is an extremely important element , which will spark off the wide-ranging debate about to open on the institutional framework of the EU , its effectiveness and its democratic legitimacy .
Nonetheless , the debate on the most fundamental reforms in the run-up to 2004 cannot be an excuse for refusing to immediately adopt the reforms that the Council can already implement in the existing Treaty .
Furthermore , one of the objectives set out in the White Paper is to ensure the Council functions as efficiently as possible .
Apart from the different views that might be expressed on one point of detail or another , there is some convergence on the analysis of the dysfunctions that we have found - and of the reforms that need to be carried out .
This convergence is evident in the report that you are presenting , Mr Poos , in the White Paper and also - as Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck stated - in the Trumpf-Piris report , which was drawn up by the General Secretariat of the Council itself . The operational conclusions of this report were widely approved at Helsinki by the European Council and were also widely implemented in the Council ' s internal rules of procedure .
It falls within the remit and it is the duty of each institution - I would like to reiterate this - to continually examine whether that institution is working efficiently .
The Commission wanted to do this by adopting the White Paper and proposing the administrative reform drawn up by my colleague , Neil Kinnock .
I believe that the Council will have to do this one day , as will the European Parliament , and the Commission will do all it can to support these two institutions in this undertaking .
In this respect , I would like to reiterate that the Gothenburg European Council has already asked the Secretary-General of the Council to submit detailed proposals on this issue for the meeting at Laeken .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to emphasise - without going into the details of each proposal in your report , Mr Poos , that all we need is political will to successfully complete this assessment and improvement work .
Obviously , this must be shown by the Member States governments as well as by the institutions themselves .
There are at least two points that deserve particular attention . On the one hand , the concept of the legislative Council and , on the other , the role of the General Affairs Council .
We are well aware , ladies and gentlemen , that the Poos report defines the three functions of the Council , which are to legislate , to take decisions regarding government and to coordinate policies .
Consequently it is very clear - and the Commission supports this - that the Council must be organised differently so that it operates within the framework of one or another of these three functions .
Therefore , the legislative Council should basically work in complete transparency , with open debates and public votes .
Admittedly , the number of sectoral Councils may be too high , but it is primarily the lack of coordination between these sectoral Councils , which means that , unlike the European Parliament , in which the Assembly takes the final decision , the Council arm of the legislator has much more difficulty in coordinating its various decisions .
This situation calls for particular consideration of how determined we are - as you mentioned in the report - to encourage consensus between Parliament and the Council from the first-reading stage within the codecision procedure .
Mr Poos , although the Commission fully supports the determination to bring about swift agreements , we must ensure that they do not have a negative effect on the coherence of texts that the Commission proposes .
Under the Treaties , the Commission has the exclusive right of initiative and the responsibility of protecting the common interest .
The Commission therefore hopes that the determination of Parliament and the Council to bring about consensus at first reading ensures that the Commission will be fully involved in all aspects regarding substance and procedure , in order to guarantee this coherence in the texts adopted .
I would like to reiterate that the Commission has been given the exclusive competence to hand down a judgment to protect the common interest at this stage of the codecision procedure .
You are also quite right , Mr Poos , when you point out in the report that the crux of the debate is , essentially , how the General Affairs Council functions .
It is extremely difficult , in just one monthly meeting , to take decisions on all the issues relating to EU external policy , including those on security policy , on maintaining the single institutional framework of the European Union and all the horizontal and institutional issues , such as , for example , the recent regulation on access to documents or the coordination of the EU response to the tragic events of 11 September , as well as coordinating sectoral policies .
The Commission is fairly well placed to judge the degree of variation in the subjects dealt with by the General Affairs Council , as there are times when we require several Commissioners to represent us at the same session .
We therefore support your view , Mr Poos : the various formations in the Council need a central body responsible for coordination and , at the moment , it is very difficult for the General Affairs Council to do this .
We must therefore avoid a situation where the General Affairs Council becomes some sort of Foreign Affairs Council , because there is no other formation in charge of coordination .
Furthermore , is it necessary to create a new General Affairs Council , made up of ministers who fulfil a coordinating role within their governments and who wield the necessary political authority , as you suggest ?
This would , in any case , enable the European Council to be freed from arbitration and from policy coordination , so that it can fully devote itself to its real job of providing political impetus and defining guidelines for the European Union .
However , creating this sort of Council raises a whole raft of political , even constitutional , issues , as you yourself admit , in some Member States , particularly in those that have a coalition government .
To sum up , Mr President , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to thank Mr Poos once again for the extensive , excellent and very thorough piece of work that he has done and for the useful proposals contained in the report .
Quite frankly , I do not believe that it is the Commission ' s role to respond to one or another detailed comment regarding the way the Council functions because , as I have said , each of our institutions , quite naturally , functions autonomously .
This , however , does not prevent us from performing a global assessment where there are no taboo subjects , to repeat the phrase that Mr Verhofstadt used this morning , when he stated that there were no taboo subjects where the wide-ranging debate and the Laeken Declaration are concerned .
The issue of how to improve collaborative work , particularly in the field of legislation , is not a taboo subject either .
The Commission would like to say that it is also in its interests to work with an efficient Council and that the two messages contained in this own-initiative report , in other words , that we must guarantee coherent action as well as a certain level of political representation in the Council ' s decision-making , have certainly been heard , Mr Poos .
Thank you .
Mr President , Mrs Neyts , Commissioner Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , our group thanks the rapporteur , Mr Poos , for his report .
Our colleagues in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , led by our coordinator , Mr Méndez de Vigo , have , of course , been committed to supporting his work .
This report , though , sets alarm bells ringing .
When the report observes - an observation that I welcome , although I regret its accuracy - that the coordinating role of the General Affairs Council has been undermined , the Commission 's right to take initiatives weakened and , finally , government-level cooperation in Council built up to the detriment of cooperation at Community level , then that is cause for alarm as regards the Council 's ability to operate .
The Foreign Ministers , who at present constitute the General Affairs Council , can no longer perform this duty adequately .
They travel around the world - which is after all what they are meant to do - spend a few hours in the Council , leave their deputies to represent them and are not there for the vote anyway .
That is why the Council should , for once , take its Rules of Procedure , more specifically Article 11 ( 4 ) , seriously and check how many Ministers are actually present at the concluding votes .
We need , then , a new General Affairs Council .
Let us call it a Council of European Ministers , meeting weekly , or more often if necessary , in Brussels or , of course , in the national capitals , and always available within their governments .
We also insist on something to which Commissioner Barnier has referred , namely that the Legislative Council which meets in public to decide on laws - not in committees , but in final rulings - needs to be separated from the Executive Council .
I hope we will reach the point where this can be established and that a Council of European Ministers - as I wish to call it for the sake of simplicity - conceived along these lines , will also be able to coordinate the work of the various Councils .
Some of their voting procedures are utterly different , and the European Council must then again be asked to give authority to the Council , so that the ladies and gentlemen can deal with the matter again .
Things must change !
I would like to address one point which is not particularly topical but is intended to point the way ahead .
It concerns the need to find a successor to occupy Mr Hombach 's position .
I recommend that we should not appoint a sort of Hombach Mark II to this position , not because I have anything against Mr Hombach , but because , in institutional terms , we need to go in a new direction .
I think these duties should find a home at the Commission , so that the Commission , which has the Budget resources at its disposal , can also take responsibility for these issues ...
( Applause )
.... so that we can eventually achieve the transfer of the High Representative 's functions to the remit of the Commission , where a Vice-President would take them over .
( Applause )

Please let me make a final observation , which is not directed at my esteemed colleague Mr Poos : I hope that the present members of the Council have the strength and insight to come to the right decisions while they belong to the Council and not only after becoming honourable Members of this European Parliament .
( Applause )
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have asked to speak in this debate firstly in order to express my personal gratitude and that of my group to Mr Poos for his wonderful report .
It really is a piece of work carried out with knowledge of the subject , not only because he is a veteran of the Council , but because I witnessed perfectly , ten years ago when we were preparing the Treaty of Maastricht , how Mr Poos , then a member of the Council with the government of Mr Santer , along with Mr Santer , showed the same attitude of openness , cooperation and solidarity towards Parliament which he is now proposing in his report .
The result was the Treaty of Maastricht , which gave us codecision .
I believe that we must salute his coherent and serious political track record .
With regard to codecision , we are not just dealing with a reform of the Council as such , but we are an interested party in the matter .
Codecision has allowed us to develop a shared culture in which the Council , for the first time , has been opening up to Parliament .
We must consolidate this .
There is a very important step proposed by the Poos report , which is that the Council , in legislative session , should act publicly .
If there is an insufficient number of Ministers , they could apply the rule applied by Parliament : that votes should be nominal , and if members are not present , they should not be paid allowances .
These are therefore measures which can be applied straight away and which do not have to await the reform .
From this point of view , I believe that Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , whose path has taken the opposite course , having moved on from Parliament to the Council , can introduce a degree of freshness into the work of the Council .
I hope she can cooperate with us .
A final observation , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen : we are on the eve of the Convention ; we have fought for it in Parliament and we believe that we also have to cooperate positively in the process of reforming our institutions , which are interdependent on each other , in a way which means that we cannot reform one without taking account of the others .
In conclusion , I believe that we have to teach by example .
We are awaiting the Council meeting on the 30 October , from which we want a unanimous position from the Council with regard to the Belgian proposal on taxation , in order to bring about the statute of Members once and for all ; we also believe that the package of anti-terrorist measures is a great opportunity to demonstrate to our co-citizens that we are united .
And lastly , the President-in-Office of the Council will allow me to point out that we would like her , with a view to Laeken , between the White Paper on Governance and the Mandelkern report , which is with the Council , to present us with a coherent proposal which is not based on a reduction of Parliament ' s legislative powers .
That would also help the reform .
Mr President , just as the Commission and we in Parliament change our methods of working , the former through its White Paper , the Council too must of course change its own methods of working , both in the light of enlargement and because , as many people point out , its present methods do not work so well at present .
Mr Poos has much long-standing experience of how the Council operates .
I hope that the Council will take his views on board .
I assume that this issue will come up at the convention and that , as Mr Verhofstadt said this morning , there will be no taboos .
Precisely what shape is to be taken by the Council ' s work is not of course something we Liberals have any reason for taking a view on , because it is not our task to regulate these matters .
There are nonetheless certain issues in which we think we can become involved .
Transparency is one such issue .
For us , transparency in the EU ' s work is important when it comes to all the institutions .
It is a key to winning back people ' s confidence in the European project .
At present , the Council meets behind closed doors and legislates for millions upon millions of Europeans .
That is not acceptable .
Everyone talks about this , and everyone criticises it .
Very minor reforms take place , but these are not enough .
The legislation must be a matter for public debate .
A separate department must be formed within the Council in which the ministers meet entirely openly and in public in order to legislate .
There must , moreover , be proper Minutes issued afterwards .
The members of this legislative Council must of course be politicians , not officials , with clear mandates from their respective governments .
Another issue which worries us rather , and which Mr Poos also addressed , is that of all the overhyped ' mini-summits ' which assume an enormous amount of importance .
A great many decisions are made during these meetings of rather doubtful status .
We hope that less emphasis will be placed on these meetings and that they will instead be transformed into working meetings .
There is an increased tendency in the Council - not so much in the country that at present holds the Presidency , but in many others , especially Sweden - towards intergovernmental activity and a desire to strengthen the Council at Parliament ' s and the Commission ' s expense .
We view this development with great concern , because more intergovernmental activity and more decisions behind closed doors scarcely lead to a more democratic EU .
Mr President , during a meeting last Saturday , I happened to hear a new colleague of an important minister describing , with the frankness of a newcomer , his first experience of a Council of Ministers . He said that it was a sort of Barnum Circus , where everyone talks but hardly anyone listens or actually seeks agreement .
We support the rapporteur and the majority of his proposals , and so I would like to use the time available to me to send two messages from our group to the Council , in particular .
The first is that , even if the Council were to approve Parliament ' s proposals tomorrow morning , we would not be able to resolve the fundamental democratic imbalance and we would not be able to stop the intergovernmental drift .
The only way to genuinely improve the democracy and efficiency of the Union is by strengthening the Commission and Parliament and removing the Council ' s right of veto .
The second message is a call to reflect on what Commissioner Barnier has said , namely that despite the positive elements and the endeavours of the Belgian Presidency , it would currently be impossible to reform the Council without a grass roots debate among its members on the very nature of the Council .
I am sure that ideas vary among the Union ' s Member States on the Council ' s future , and I therefore call strongly upon the Presidency to assume responsibility for organising this debate on the future and to ensure that practical steps are taken which open up the way for rapid progress along the path outlined by Mr Poos , pending more comprehensive reforms .
Mr President , Mr Poos and the Commission ' s gargantuan endeavours could be likened to those of an eagle which is eager but unable to take flight towards the future heights of the new European ambitions .
However , we must see this report as a positive contribution to the preparations for the future structure of the Union , a Union which must of necessity be an autonomous , independent political entity , secure in its cultural and social traditions , which can serve as an effective response to the confusion brought by a hegemony such as that we are currently witnessing .
The Union must assume a new role .
In a situation in which alliances are being disbanded and reformed on a global scale , Europe comes across as weak , appointing dubious triumvirates to represent it on the world stage when it needs to be united and firmly autonomous in presenting and maintaining a line of peace and social justice to eradicate the threat of terrorism .
The reforms proposed by the Poos report are necessary and achievable , and we support them .
These are small but important steps , worthy of due consideration by the Council and Parliament .
They will also contribute greatly to resolving the democratic deficit , endowing the Council with a new institutional role and a closer relationship with Parliament .
This fundamental political and external security action and its mandated representative can only be effective if decisions are taken in a context of joint responsibility between all the countries rather than with some of them being excluded .
The Council has to understand this .
We are not just complaining for the sake of it : this is a democratic requirement for the well-structured , transparent running of the Union and will benefit the Union as a whole .
Mr President , I would like to say that I believe that both Parliament and the Commission are most fortunate in having somebody of the calibre of Mr Poos to give us this very fine report which is long overdue .
I very much welcome Mr Poos ' report and very much hope that when it receives overwhelming support from Parliament , as I believe it will , the Belgian Presidency will convey the importance of the report to the Council of Ministers .
We hope also that the Belgian Presidency will lead the drive , as it were , to rock the consciences of the members of the General Affairs Council as to what their role and function must and should be .
Regrettably , the General Affairs Council has very much receded into the background in terms of its effectiveness .
The Council has been undermined by the expansion of specialised Councils and by the European Council itself and this is very regrettable .
The General Affairs Council , as Mr Poos says , must remain a powerful political body and it must not be allowed to become a super Coreper .
If it does , nobody will have an overall view of what is happening ; where we should go and how we are to prepare for the future .
The work of the Council must be more consistent , and greater coordination is needed in the administration of the Council .
I feel the Council should confine itself to defining the general political guidelines of the Union and should not intervene in the questions of specific detail .
It is very much in the interests of better decision-making within the Union to have an effective Council which is transparent and exercises all the duties conferred upon it by the Treaty .
Also , Ministers who attend the General Affairs Council meetings must have all the powers required to carry out their tasks .
We are all too familiar with Ministers appearing at General Affairs Council meetings , taking the television cameras on the way in with their one or two one-liners and then going on their way .
The Belgian Presidency-in-Office shakes her head in disbelief .
Madame , I know , I was there !
I saw it for myself on more than one occasion and things have not improved since I left .
In actual fact , they have got much worse , and that is something that must be aired .
We want the General Affairs Council to do its business .
We would like the Presidency for the time being to do its business and we also want the Commission to do its business .
We respect , and must respect , the three institutions and the role that they have to play .
This Parliament cannot afford to sit back and be silent if we see the role of any one of the institutions , be it Parliament or the Commission or , indeed the Council , being sidelined for any particular reason by any small group of Member States for any political reasons they may have at any time .
Mr President , who knows the Ministers Mr Van Dale , Mr Conde de Saro and Mr Christoffersen ?
These three gentlemen will , over the next 14 months , be responsible for the adoption of the majority of laws in the EU .
The permanent representatives of the countries which hold , or are to hold , the presidency - Belgium , Spain and Denmark - are clever diplomats who live in the shadows .
They meet every week in Brussels and negotiate the larger part of our laws .
Seventy per cent of these are prepared by their subordinates and aides .
Fifteen per cent of them they deal with themselves .
Another 15 % are placed on the ministers ' desks , and the permanent representatives brief or deputise for the ministers during the formal adoption .
The meetings take place behind sealed doors so that no one can see how far we are from that democracy in which we are united in believing in the fifteen Member States .
It does happen that a matter is discussed in public and finds echoes in the national parliaments . Indeed , it may directly entail a brief or negotiating mandate for the minister .
However , that is the exception . As a rule , we as voters and elected representatives have forfeited the larger part of our democracy , which is administered by 15 permanent representatives and their officials .
The solution to this democratic deficit or embezzlement , for we know , of course , who have absconded with the power , is simple : to read our constitutions and return legislative power to the elected representatives .
Let us recreate the core of democracy whereby the electorate can go to the polls and new majorities can be obtained and new laws adopted .
That core does not exist in today ' s EU .
Mr President , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , ladies and gentlemen , we could actually say that we have had a stroke of luck .
The day after one of the worst spectacles that the European Union and , in particular , its Council of Ministers has ever provided to the citizens of Europe , the excellent report by Mr Poos , the former chairman of the Council of Ministers , appears , which not only shows us the way forward - it gives an outline that should be displayed on all the churches or public buildings in the European Union , just like the theses used to be posted on the Wittemburg church .
We have witnessed a European Council , where the dispersal of the institutions , the dispersal of the Council , split up into asides , factions and the most diverse formations , had a detrimental effect on the work of the Belgian Presidency , which did nothing to cause this of course . Now we are reiterating the great principles and calmly and dispassionately saying how Europe should be run , and where it is failing , because we are not applying the wise recommendations and thoughts of Mr Poos , which are also enhanced by his years of experience , of someone who has an insider ' s view of the Council of Ministers , and of the European Council full stop .
I therefore think that the vote on this report is a great moment for Parliament .
Unfortunately , Europe in practice does not provide any inspiration at all , which is one of the main reasons why the work of the EU , the image of the EU and the weight of the EU are insufficient .
Therefore , if this text can be an element that the Belgian Presidency , in the run-up to the Laeken Summit and the Laeken Declaration , may largely take into consideration by saying ' ladies and gentlemen , this is the way forward , this is the Community method and this is how things should be run , so that at least we are trying to put our house in order ' , then this text will be worthwhile , and I hope it will receive Parliament ' s unanimous approval tomorrow .
In any case , the radical Members will support it unreservedly .
We think that this is the way forward , that this is how we get there , that we must see European integration and not European destruction , which is , unfortunately , what the Council all too often gives us the impression is being allowed to happen . It is not really the Council itself , but its members , its actors , who certainly demonstrated at Ghent , as they did at Nice , that they are very capable of breaking up the institutions , and that they are actively working towards this goal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Poos and point out that all the institutions of the European Union will have to re-orientate themselves and find better ways of working in view of the challenges being presented to them , the enlargement of the European Union and the changes which will come about simply because of the number of people involved .
The Commission has for some time been pressing on with this sort of internal reform process .
The European Parliament is occupied in creating the same sort of conditions by means of the Corbett report , which is currently in progress , provided we can achieve these without amendments to the Treaties becoming necessary .
I believe this should be done by both these institutions and also by the Council , which will have the greatest problems simply by reason of the increase in the number of its members .
For when I consider that in future , when there are 27 members at a meeting of the European Council , it will take an hour and a half simply to deal with the precedence of delegations and then that the statements made by every delegation will make even lunch difficult - and of course we cannot go without lunch - then it clearly does not go without saying that we will be able to work effectively .
This has nothing to do with the effectiveness of a Council Presidency , but exclusively with the structures .
That is why it is extraordinarily important that we really do tackle many of Mr Poos ' proposals in this area , which can be realised by simple amendments to the Rules of Procedure and without Treaty amendments .
I believe we have to do this for two reasons , namely to increase efficiency and for the sake of greater transparency .
Efficiency can only be increased by the burden of the General Council no longer having to be borne by one pair of hands and in the context of one organisation .
Meeting up constitutes Item A , we do a bit of foreign policy , then all 27 of us meet the President of Kazakhstan , then move on to Item B , which is legislation , and all this with seamless transitions from one item to the next , so that half the participants are always in a press conference .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I may be exaggerating a bit , but I fear that the reality is rather like that in some areas .
It would in fact be necessary , for this reason , to move over to an Executive Council concentrating on foreign policy in particular .
We really should be in a position to formulate a coherent foreign policy in the Council , provided that it is an intergovernmental organisation , and must make it clear that one effect of transparency will be a Legislative Council whose votes will be publicly taken and publicly explained .
We will only win people ' s acceptance of Europe if they know who took what decision and for what reason .
That is a fundamental issue when it comes to gaining our citizens ' acceptance , and only in this way can we , by means of the codecision procedure , bring about the public interaction of Parliament and the Council , so that the citizen and the media have the chance to reach a fair judgment and hold to account those who are responsible , or believed to be responsible , for wrong decisions .
I believe it to be urgently necessary that the work should be made parliamentary in this way and that this should be the means by which it is also made political .
We are engaged in the work of legislation , which in many fields is regulated by officials who share in the decisions .
I find it hard to reconcile this with our democratic conceptions and so I would like to ask you to take the initiative on this point in Laeken , because we can achieve a great deal without amending the Treaty and should also be preparing ourselves in this way for enlargement of the European Union .
Mr President , the Poos report is audacious , cautious and realistic . Audacious because it immediately proposes a set of amendments to improve the workings of the Council .
Cautious because it acknowledges the viability of the amendments without needing to modify the Treaties . And realistic because it recognises that it is also becoming politically necessary to make considerable improvements to the workings of both the Commission and Parliament .
The report ' s proposals even consider the idea that improving the institutional workings of the Union will require major adjustments to the balance of established power which , without endangering the workings of these bodies , guarantee the full participation of all Member States .
I would say , as a matter of fact , that this is the fundamental issue .
The broad objectives for the European Union in economic , social and security terms and for its external representation will only be achieved in the short term if Europe as a whole , through its various public opinions , and the fifteen Member States , through their representatives in the various bodies , attach priority and urgency to improving political cohesion on the basis of fully egalitarian participation .
Passivity , a lack of clear definition , division and disputes between countries , which prevent changes from taking place , help maintain the status quo , prove right those who see the European Union as nothing more than a group of merchants whose primary concern is to divide up the limited financial resources it has available in a way that is not always fair or equitable .
Strengthening the institutions , improving their workings and efficiency , drafting and producing Community policies for security and for our external representation is absolutely essential , but this must be carried out by all fifteen Member States without exceptions and without cabinets .
For this reason , the report warrants our support and our admiration .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are debating today is an intelligent and creditable attempt by Mr Poos to reform the Council without changing the Treaties .
I congratulate the rapporteur on his efforts although I cannot share his optimism .
I do not believe that this mini-reform can solve the problems of the Council nor do I see the political will to carry it out , unfortunately .
I hope that I am wrong and Mr Poos is right .
Mr President , the golden age of the General Affairs Council has passed and it seems unrealistic to believe that the European Council is prepared to reinstate the powers which it has taken away from it .
European policies are not external policies but internal policies of the Member States and the important decisions must not be reserved for the Foreign Affairs Ministers .
They already have enough to do with the common foreign and security policy .
The institutional triangle is still essential to the good functioning of the Union , provided that each of its elements continues to adapt to the new requirements .
In the case of the Council , we are facing a quagmire whose deficiencies can only be remedied : a ) by recognising the decisive role of the European Council ; b ) by giving the General Affairs Council the task of effectively preparing its decisions so that they are not relegated to national bureaucracies ; and c ) by organising all the specialised Councils into an efficiently-structured system .
This efficiency will not be achieved without abandoning the now obsolete system of a rotating six-monthly Presidency , replacing it with a longer-lasting Presidency .
Effective political action cannot change its priorities every six months .
My group raised this issue in the debate of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , although , out of respect for the focus of the report , we do not insist on this point .
The Poos report has the merit of proposing to the Council some minimal reforms , which are likely to lead to a process of self-reform which is becoming increasingly essential .
I would be pleased if it achieved that objective at least .
We would all gain from this , even those of us who believe that Council reforms can only be achieved by the Convention because they need to be far more in-depth .
Mr President , every single pronouncement by the European Parliament expresses our faith in democracy , transparency and efficiency . And quite rightly so .
However , it is not enough . These general principles only acquire substance and translate into practice if they permeate the organisational structure of the entire European Union .
Which is precisely why we should welcome Jacques Poos ' motion for a resolution .
It is one of the most important texts to pass through the European Parliament .
The rapporteur demonstrates that a great deal can be done in the area of both democracy and efficiency without revising the Treaties , merely by applying them more accurately .
Taking the report as my starting point , I should at least like to highlight the following : first , the way in which the Council is organised is so complicated , with its 27 sectoral formations which have a fragmentary effect on its work .
It addresses individual trees , but rarely the wood as a whole .
The General Affairs Council should meet more frequently , but with the ministers present , not just in Brussels but , if possible , at the meetings too .
If the Council is to work , national administrations and governments need to adapt to the European institutional attitude and modus operandi .
As for relations between the Council and the European Parliament , there is good cause to increase the numbers of days ' presence , although personal appearances in Parliament by the President-in-Office of the Council and transparency do not necessarily mean that the Council has to be reformed .
Finally , I note that the Europe issue has increased the volume of work and deserves greater attention .
The members of the Council need to make a reasonable division between their national and European duties if they are to make a more effective contribution .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , in turn , should like to congratulate Jacques Poos on the excellent report which he has presented to the House and to thank him for the highly democratic manner in which he dealt with the proposals and observations of the other members of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , observations intended to improve the report .
I should like to comment on three points in the report which I consider extremely important .
The first is item 9 , which refers to the Council 's two areas of work , namely the legislative and the executive .
I think that Mr Poos is quite right to say that a distinction must be made between the legislative Council , that is , it must be clear when the Council is acting in a legislative capacity and when it is acting in an executive capacity .
This is extremely important and , I think , needs to be borne in mind .
The second point concerns collaboration between the Council and the European Parliament .
It would be unfair to the Council not to say that certain steps have been taken , but that does not mean that more are not needed .
I should like to comment on two paragraphs in Mr Poos ' proposals which I think are very important .
The first is paragraph 18 , which refers to the role and the relations which the High Representative for the CFSP should have with Parliament .
I should like to ask the Council to bring Mr Solana to order .
The High Representative needs to learn that his relations with Parliament come within a certain framework and are governed by certain rules which he would do well to understand .
The second paragraph is Paragraph 19 .
I was delighted at the excellent example set by the Belgian presidency this morning , when the President-in-Office of the Council reported to the European Parliament in person , and I should like to congratulate Mr Verhofstadt for this morning .
The third point , which I think is very important , is the huge issue of transparency .
It is an issue which concerns all the institutional bodies of the European Union .
It has been raised by other Members , such as Mrs Malmström , who has done an excellent job on the issue of transparency , as , of course , has Mrs Maij-Weggen , but what I want to say to the Council is that European citizens are not just interested in what the Council decides ; they are far more interested in why it decides what it does .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Council functions poorly , which is also bad news for all the other EU institutions .
It is bad for Parliament and it is bad for the Commission .
The lack of transparency and efficiency , which have often been referred to here , also affect our work and give us a bad image in the eyes of the EU 's citizens .
That is why reform of the Council is urgently necessary , as must be emphasised again and again .
Mr Poos has produced useful and valuable suggestions as to how such a reform might now be possible without the need for a new European Treaty .
I share the view that people have a right to know who votes and which way when it comes to laws and regulations that affect their daily lives .
The Legislative Council urgently needs this public character .
I do not believe that the number of Councils on various sectors is the problem .
The problem is the deficient coordination within the Council and also within the governments of the Member States .
Changes must be made here .
I believe we must follow up this idea of sending a permanent minister to Brussels who would take over the coordination of government policy at national level .
On Monday , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs added further items to the agenda , for example , the issue of the Council Presidency when there are at least twenty-five Member States , or also how the European Council is to be defined .
What is that ?
An organ , a super-board , or is it part of the Council ?
This reform is urgently needed , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , and we hope that you can do something even before Laeken , and that , in Laeken , the Council will again be on the agenda with a view to the future Treaty on the Union .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank Mr Poos for this report on the much-needed Council reforms .
We sometimes say in connection with the Pope that there is no need to be married to be able to talk about marriage .
However , in the case of Mr Poos , we can say that he has every right to talk about the Council as he has formed part of it for a very long time .
How badly the Council functions at crucial moments was evident at the Ghent Summit where three Prime Ministers had made prior arrangements outside of the Council , where the President of the Council made essential statements on the evaluation of the attacks on Afghanistan which were subsequently not backed by the Council , where various Prime Ministers made various statements following the European Summit , where decisions were taken on a payment issue of banks in relation to the euro , but where no decisions were made on crucial anti-terrorist measures proposed by the Commission and Parliament and where , to cap it all , an embarrassing dispute arose between the President of the Council and the President of the Commission .
That is how the Council comes across to the public . And that negative image dominates the entire decision-making process and the way the Union is viewed throughout the Union .
How can the Council be reformed in such a way as to ensure that the Union functions better and to improve the Council ' s image with the citizen ?
How can the Council be reformed in such a way as to ensure that the Union ' s entire institutional structure is more democratic and open ?
In my opinion , a few factors are of crucial significance in this .
First of all , the Council must confine itself to its original brief , namely to express the view of the Member State governments , under the supervision of the national parliaments and the European Parliament .
Secondly , the Council must coordinate its tasks more effectively , thus ensuring that the General Affairs Council and the joint committees speak with one voice .
In my view , the number of joint committees could be cut down even further .
Thirdly , the General Affairs Council should function far more forcefully on the basis of solid positions of national members of government for European affairs , preferably in the capacity of Minister .
Belgium set a good example in this connection .
Fourthly , where legislation and the budget are concerned , all Council meetings should be public , which means that both discussions and decision-making should take place in public and reports that are compiled on these should also be made public .
Fifthly , in the case of legislation , including the budget , only ministers should be granted a right to vote , which means that it is not acceptable for them to be replaced by , for example , the permanent representative or by officials .
In my opinion , the Council should function entirely in line with its actual task as a Federal Council , much like its German model , so that it becomes crystal clear to the citizens what its role is in the democratic process of the Union .
I truly hope that the report by Mr Poos will play a key role in the forthcoming IGC and above all , I hope that the Council will take to heart what has been expressed here in Parliament in the way of criticism , but also the odd word of praise .
Mr President , people have a right to know how their representatives in government have acted and voted in the Council .
It is entirely unacceptable in a democracy for laws to be made behind closed and bolted doors on behalf of 380 million people and without there being any public scrutiny .
The most important position adopted in the European Parliament ' s report on Council reform is therefore to be found in Paragraph 26 , concerning the need for openness and stating the European Parliament ' s request that , when the Council acts as legislator , both the deliberations and the votes should be in the public domain , as well as Parliament ' s particular request that , at the beginning and end of all legislative procedures , public debates be held in accordance with Rule 8 of the Council ' s Rules of Procedure and that Rule 9 ( 1 ) of the Council ' s Rules of Procedure be implemented .
It also states that the results of votes and the explanations of vote referring to legislative texts must be published .
Through this future openness , the European Union will be democratised .
It will lead to greater pressure being exercised by electorates and to greater supervision of the Council by national parliaments .
It is about time !
In turn , that will lead to growing demands for a concentration of the EU ' s tasks and the need to limit the EU ' s powers of decision-making .
In other words , the report we are adopting today will have long-term consequences .
I believe that we are thus coming significantly nearer the objective formulated by former Commission President Jacques Santer in 1995 : Do fewer things , but do them better .
Thank you very much , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
Preparations for the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on preparations for the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation .
Commissioner , Mr President , honourable MEPs , in two weeks ' time , the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation will get underway in Doha , Qatar .
The European Union is making every effort to ensure that , on that occasion , a new trade round will commence on the basis of a broad and balanced agenda .
In this connection , the conclusions reached by the General Affairs Council on 26 October 1999 will remain a point of reference .
The General Affairs Council of 8 October has underlined the importance of a new trade round .
Next week ' s General Affairs Council will once again examine the state of affairs .
It is indeed important for a strong and united Union to leave for Doha .
You all know , of course , that it is the Commission that negotiates in matters of trade on behalf of the European Union - as is the case here - and that Commissioner Lamy , who will be taking the floor after me , plays an absolutely crucial and , in any case , very valued role in this .
For your information , I should like to add that the topic of the preparation of the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation has also been discussed during the Social Affairs Council , the Agriculture Council , and , if I am not mistaken , this will also be done at the Environment Council , with a view to harmonising the positions , or at least , to being informed of the different sensitive issues .
A new round of broad-based negotiations must enable progress to be made in the further liberation and regulation of world trade , which is vital for a variety of reasons .
Firstly , the Conference will be taking place against a backdrop of a slowing down world economy , a situation which has been exacerbated by the tragic events of 11 September which are having a negative impact on economic growth in both the industrial and developing countries .
An agreement on the start of a new round will thus give the world economy a powerful and positive signal .
Even during the most recent informal Council in Ghent , the EU Heads of State and Government and the President of the Commission urged , and I quote : " to work actively towards launching of the WTO negotiations .
The current economic uncertainty means that trade liberalisation founded on a rules-based multilateral system and associated with a real development dimension is more important than ever , economically and politically " - end of quote .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a new round of trade negotiations is also extremely important for the developing countries .
The round must enable us to improve the integration of developing countries , and especially the least developed countries , into the multilateral trade system , particularly by providing better market access , through measures that facilitate the implementation of agreements that have already been reached , and also through measures that seek to make more operational the special and differential treatment given to these countries .
Thirdly , a new round will aim to strengthen the WTO rules-based system , by clarifying and explaining existing provisions , particularly with regard to trade and the environment , and by extending the WTO ' s scope to new areas such as investment , competition and trade facilitation , so that the WTO adjusts to the needs that have come about due to changes in the global economy and so that it responds to the concerns arising from globalisation .
The European Union will also attempt to promote multilateral governance by ensuring increased coherence and improved cooperation of the WTO with other international organisations , particularly with the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) , in order to help to improve the way that globalisation is controlled .
( NL ) I should like to underline that consequently , the European Union not only seeks to further liberalise world trade , it also seeks to further regulate world trade .
In fact , that reflects public opinion in the Member States perfectly .
Non-trade issues , further progress in terms of transparency of the World Trade Organisation mechanism , the preservation of the European model of government services and the special statute of those services are some of the interests which the European Union protects .
Together with the developing countries , a serious effort has been made over the past three years on the issue surrounding implementation .
That has made it possible to identify the relevant themes .
In some cases , these concern the application of the agreements , or a slight adjustment or interpretation of the text to be specified .
In other cases , these concern points which could well result in a formal change to the existing agreements .
All this slows down the process .
It is a process in which the European Union takes an active part , and is fully aware that this forms a key component for many countries .
I should like to point out that , alongside this effort involving the developing countries , an effort must also be made involving the so-called ' rich countries ' which were originally , up until the beginning of this year , absolutely unconvinced - some more than others - of the fact that there is a real problem of implementation with regard to the developing countries .
( FR ) Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for over a year , the European Union has played a central role in another important matter , namely trying to find a solution to enable the world ' s poorest people to have proper and effective access to medicines .
The European Commission action plan in this area was approved by the General Affairs Council last May .
The European Union is working hard so that a clear statement on access to medicines and on the TRIPS agreement can be adopted at the Fourth Ministerial Conference at Doha .
Today , the WTO consultations are focusing on the draft Ministerial Declaration and on the draft decision on implementation-related issues . Two documents , which were tabled on 26 September by Stuart Harbison , the Chairman of the WTO General Council .
Many of the WTO members consider these documents to be a good basis for our work , and they will be amended in line with the negotiations that have taken place since they were published .
As far as the European Union is concerned , the draft Ministerial Declaration will take into account a whole raft of subjects that we consider to be crucial .
The document still , however , falls short of expectations in several areas .
Commissioner Pascal Lamy will no doubt comment on this issue in his speech , and the Commission will continue to strive to ensure that the Ministerial Declaration responds to the European Union ' s concerns and interests .
We are taking an active part in the negotiations on the agenda of the new round with an open and flexible approach , and we are also particularly concerned about assisting developing countries whilst protecting the legitimate aims and objectives of the European Union .
While the various components that will feature in the new round and the implementation-related issues form a whole , the final assessment by the Union will be based on both the overall balance and on the balance within the various subjects that will be discussed .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , by way of conclusion , I should like to say that the purport of the forthcoming Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation is to further adjust the regulating effect of world trade , and that this conference offers us a chance to give the world economy a considerable boost by commencing a new trade round .
Finally , I should like to underline the positive political and economic significance of such a round .
It aims to reinforce international solidarity , curb inequality and to enhance the stability of the world and the world economy .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the European Parliament for having organised this debate on the progress of preparations for the forthcoming Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation . There are two weeks to go before the conference opens and some lively discussions are now going on in Geneva and elsewhere on the negotiating programme that will be launched .
I would now like to say that , as negotiator for the European Union , it is very important to me that the European Parliament actively participates in this debate .
As you know , we fought together , at the previous Intergovernmental Conference - at which the Treaty of Nice , as we call it , was draw up - in order to enhance Parliament ' s competences in the area of trade policy .
As you also know , the Member States did not adopt our proposals .
In these circumstances , the Commission is doing everything in its power , within the framework imposed on us by the Treaty , to inform the European Parliament and to involve it in the Union ' s trade policy .
You also know that we are in favour of creating a consultative parliamentary body at the WTO , to enhance the role of Members in the multilateral trading system .
I am convinced that , if we want the support of public opinion , if we want to improve the WTO ' s legitimacy , then enhancing the role of Members in the WTO ' s work is not only possible , but also , and above all , it is necessary .
So , what is in the negotiating programme proposed by the European Union ?
On several occasions over the last two years , since Seattle , we have had the opportunity to come together to discuss the progress of preparations for the forthcoming Ministerial Conference .
The exchanges of views that we have had here or in committee have given us food for thought as to which strategy should be applied .
The considerations and concerns that you have voiced during these meetings are very similar to those of the Commission .
Like us , you want a negotiating programme on the liberalisation of trade and investment , to meet the needs of our exporters and those of developing countries .
But , like us , you also want an agenda that focuses on the drafting of new rules , the clarification of current rules and the linking-up of World Trade Organisation rules and those of other international bodies in the areas of society , the environment , health or food safety .
It is these rules that will provide greater market efficiency , better social development and sufficient environmental protection .
We believe that the key to sustainable development of the planet as a whole hinges on our ability to combine the opening-up of the markets with the application of multilateral rules .
This is why there are three subjects on the agenda supported by the European Union since the Seattle meeting . These are market access , regulation and the integration of developing countries ; the unity of these three subjects is guaranteed by what is called the single undertaking .
Lastly , we want to hold intense negotiations and come to swift conclusions .
Some may be surprised that the tragic events of 11 September have changed neither course nor our schedule .
I would like to briefly explain this .
Even before 11 September , we believed that an approach based on the principle of well-ordered liberalisation was required .
This has become even more necessary since the terrorist attacks took place .
The process of opening up markets , regulating trade , integrating developing countries and the concern to ensure environmental and social sustainability - we need these more now than ever before .
These are issues of stability and security , both in relations between countries and between generations .
Dialogue , negotiation and peaceful resolution to commercial conflicts have made international trade a laboratory for international governance , where each partner participates in decision-making .
Faced with the instability caused by the attacks , we must further strengthen the importance of the multilateral dimension , which we believe to be the best way to give today ' s de facto globalisation a legal status .
Of course , the WTO is only one of the pillars making up a multilateral system , which must meet the challenges of globalisation .
A round of World Trade Organisation negotiations is therefore necessary , of course , but it is in no way sufficient .
We must also strengthen the other institutions of governance , the environment , social development , development funding and policy support agencies .
Let us now consider the prospects for the Ministerial Conference , which will take place in two weeks ' time .
Generally speaking , I think that we are in a better position than we were at this stage before the Seattle conference .
The preparatory work is being carried out in a spirit of positive cooperation .
The belief that the multilateral system must now , more than ever , be an essential part of growth and prosperity is widely shared .
And I think we must also point out that the open , constructive spirit and the efforts made by many partners - such as ourselves , the United States , and an increasing number of developing countries - have already helped to partly reconcile the differing views that prevented Seattle from being a success .
This came across very clearly at the last informal select meeting of WTO trade ministers , which was held in Singapore on 13 and 14 October and which I attended .
I feel that this was also correctly reflected at the meeting of APEC trade ministers ( Pacific-rim countries ) that took place last week .
I think that we have now reached a point where we can envisage an ambitious , balanced round that meets the primary objectives of the European Union .
Of course , we have not yet achieved this goal .
We are now entering the final and crucial stage , in the run-up to Doha .
As you know , a draft Ministerial Declaration , which will constitute the framework of negotiations for the new round , was published on 26 September 2001 .
All the members of the WTO considered this document to be a sound basis for moving forward .
Of course , no one was fully satisfied , which , if you are familiar with the culture at the WTO , is more or less a good sign prior to negotiations .
Obviously , not everything in this document is acceptable , not even for us , and I shall outline to you the main areas of difficulty , which require further work .
The first difficulty concerns trade and the environment , areas that give us particular cause for concern due to the lack of ambitious proposals .
Clearly , we hope to make the framework for negotiation much more substantial .
Progress is being made in some areas , but we must admit that most of our partners in developing countries are still hesitant , to say the least , about the idea of accepting negotiations on this subject .
We shall do everything we can in the following days to improve this situation .
I also made it clear to my colleagues , in Singapore , that a framework on this issue was not only a political necessity for the European Union , but should also be of interest to all the members of the World Trade Organisation and of the multilateral system as a whole .
I think that the message concerning the political importance that this question holds for us has got through .
We still need to draw operational consequences from this .
The second difficulty , after environment , is agriculture , which is still a very sensitive subject .
The draft declaration before us seems to pre-empt the outcome of the negotiations in several respects , since it aims , in particular , to phase out subsidy categories , which goes further than the framework that Franz Fischler and myself received ...
Mr Lamy , I must ask you to interrupt your speech .
As you will all , of course , understand , this is an exercise in evacuating the Parliament building .
We shall adjourn the sitting and leave the Chamber immediately .
I would ask you , ladies and gentlemen , to follow the instructions given by Parliament ' s security staff calmly and orderly , and to leave by the emergency exits .
This sitting is now adjourned , and will resume as soon as the bells indicate that work can be resumed as normal .
( The sitting was interrupted at 16.35 due to a fire drill and resumed at 17.10 )

Mr President , I shall carry on with what I was saying before this brief interruption , which is that the draft statement for the Doha Conference , currently on the table , raises a number of issues with regard to the environment and agriculture , and now I shall talk about the social aspect .
We are not completely satisfied with some aspects of the statement either , specifically with the way it deals with the social domain .
We feel that it is treated too sparingly and should be extended to more appropriately reflect the importance of this issue for our societies and our own ambition , for such is the mandate I was given , to establish an international and multi-institutional dialogue on this subject .
With regard to investment and competition , we are unhappy with one of the options put forward , which is to limit ourselves to working programmes .
In our opinion , working programmes cannot replace negotiations , even if it does make sense that there should be a connection between a working programme and a negotiation , provided , of course , that this is agreed in advance .
The issue of the relationship between health and intellectual property , which the President-in-Office of the Council mentioned , is also problematic .
As you know , we are very committed to this matter and we are working actively on reconciling the more extreme positions so that a substantial political statement can be agreed on in Doha , reconciling the flexibility of the agreement on intellectual property with , on the one hand , the need of developing countries for access to essential medicines and , on the other , the concern to ensure that innovation through research can take place .
These are our concerns and other delegations will obviously have their own concerns about the ministerial statement .
For a number of developing countries , the implementation of existing WTO agreements , or in many cases , their adaptation , is of the utmost importance and we must , we feel , be willing to respond openly and creatively to these concerns .
Some of the least advanced countries have a real problem of lack of capacity and resources and a solution must be found to this problem in the future work of the World Trade Organisation .
Despite the concerns that I have highlighted , most of the WTO member countries seem increasingly willing to show the necessary flexibility and openness to sufficiently conduct ambitious negotiations in Doha in terms of substance , and I am beginning to think that we might be able to see our four priorities met there : trade liberalisation , further regulation , the inclusion of development at the top of the multilateral agenda and the integration of our objectives for sustainable development into the WTO . All of these aspects are designed to ensure that we give greater consideration to our fellow citizens ' concerns .
On behalf of the Commission , I hope that the resolution you will be voting on tomorrow will provide clear and powerful support for these European Union objectives .
With a vote in favour , you will be strengthening our negotiating hand and sending a political signal to our trading partners and to the general public , that the European Union will not simply be taking a ' business as usual ' approach to these negotiations .
To conclude , I should also like to take this opportunity to welcome , on behalf of the Commission , the Members of this Parliament who will be joining our delegation to Doha , and the positive and cooperative approach between us that I would say we developed in Seattle .
This is , in any event , the result of the questionnaire that I sent to you at the time , to which most members of the delegation replied , and I count on your active support to promote what is , in my view , our common agenda .
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner Lamy , it is my pleasure to be able to state on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats that the major Parliamentary Groups have found it very easy to reach agreement on the joint statement which we will decide on tomorrow following this discussion .
This shows that on certain major questions a general view predominates over party lines .
We have not seen much of Commissioner Pascal Lamy over the past few months , and for once I can say that we are glad about this .
He had energetically and skilfully shuttled all over the world trying to create a basis for a new WTO negotiation round ; on which a decision needs to be taken in Doha in mid-November .
In the midst of all this , however , Commissioner Lamy has found time to do a good and adequate job of briefing the Parliamentary delegation that is leaving for Doha .
We must thank him for this also ; of course I was not to know that his message is so explosive that a fire drill would have to be arranged during it .
My group fully supports the negotiation line that the Council had already decided for the Seattle conference .
The new negotiation round to develop the liberalisation of world trade and rules of the game must treat matters on a broad basis so that we can strengthen sustainable economic growth ; reinforce , develop and renew a trading system based on global rules ; and ensure that its benefits are shared out equitably .
We are also happy with the idea that the meeting will be held in Qatar .
Now , if ever , it must be shown that we cannot be intimidated by terrorism ; instead , we shall continue - on the ' business as usual ' principle - with our policies of international cooperation for the sake of freer and fairer trade .
This must also work towards a better environment , social development , the reduction of poverty , and human rights .
There are some who would like to eliminate free trade , abolish the WTO and return to bilaterally regulated trade .
This road , ladies and gentlemen , would be a road to protectionism , and then on to trade wars and also , subsequently , to possible armed conflicts .
It would be a road which would make all enemies of freedom , democracy , the State under the rule of law , social development and human rights nod with satisfaction .
I would like to thank all my colleagues who have worked so hard in order to bring about a Parliamentary meeting in connection with the Doha meeting .
I would like to mention by name my colleagues Erika Mann and Konrad Schwaiger .
We have heard today that there is still uncertainty about the mission from the United States Congress .
We must indeed hope that at least as strong a delegation arrives from the United States Congress as from here ; without them we will be a bit one-sided .
I believe that during the next few years we can develop Parliamentary monitoring of world trade ; this is important in order to open up to citizens the work of an organisation such as the WTO and , through this , to seeking approval of the activity falling within its sphere .
Mr President , it appears that Doha has sounded the alarm bells here in this House .
Over the past two years , the WTO has been under fire on many occasions , with good reason .
Some of the critics claim that there is so much wrong with the WTO that we should not start a new trade round until the problems surrounding , for example , fair access to the world market for developing countries , the lack of democracy and decision-making within the WTO and the imbalance between trade and non-trade issues have been resolved .
We , the Social-Democrats , however , have reached the opposite conclusion .
These problems must be solved as an absolute priority , and it is precisely by starting a new trade round that this can be achieved most effectively .
Only then will reform be truly possible .
The PSE Group gives its unqualified support to a new trade round with a broad-based agenda aimed at economic and political reform .
It is quite simple : we know that trade stimulates growth , attracts investment and creates employment , both within and outside Europe .
The world economy is now poised between recession and recovery .
The recession as a result of the terrorist attacks on 11 September gives the perpetrators ultimate triumph .
Who stands to suffer most from these attacks ?
The world ' s poorest of the poor .
The World Bank expects that the terrorist attacks will cut economic growth in the developing countries from 5 to 2.5 % .
The expected growth and effects are approximately another ten million people under the poverty line and an added 20 000 to 40 000 children under five who will die .
That is a disaster .
A new trade round is necessary in order to restore confidence in the world economy to some extent and to open the way to renewed sustainable growth .
We also know , however , that trade on its own is not enough .
Without an adequate regulating mechanism , we run too great a risk of the trade benefits being distributed very unevenly indeed and of the environment and social standards coming off worst .
That is why in the negotiations with other groups on the resolution , we , as the PSE Group , insisted that the Fourth Ministerial Conference ' s first priority should be to tackle worldwide poverty , reforms , democracy and the relationship between trade and non-trade issues .
Why ?
Think of the impact of the WTO rules on matters such as the environment , safe food , workers ' rights or the freedom of governments to regulate public services without running the risk of being taken to court by profit-seeking multinationals .
To the Social-Democrats , the fundamental objective of institutions such as the WTO is to bring worldwide processes such as globalisation under political control , enabling us to steer these processes in accordance with democratic , political choices .
It is therefore our greatest challenge , together with many developing countries , together with many reform-minded and sound NGOs , in the face of opposition from the neo-Liberals , but also from a number of our fellow MEPs here in Parliament and that section of the anti-globalists who oppose a new round , to start this new round nevertheless .
The Fourth Ministerial Conference is a key moment in the debate on globalisation , including the socio-economic security aspects of this debate .
If the programme for the forthcoming three-yearly trade round compiled at the Ministerial Conference does not provide a solid basis for progress in the field of democracy , the fight against poverty , environmental protection , growth in developing countries and the protection of public services , then we , as Social-Democrats , fear the worst for the course of the current debate on globalisation , and eventually the very concept of globalisation itself .
This is the message of the resolution which , we hope , will be adopted tomorrow .
We support a new trade round .
We are in favour of free trade which is fair and supports the citizens throughout the world .
Finally , a word about the acid test in all of this .
We hope that those cheap medicines which the President talked about in plain terms will also prove to be a true test , for without it we cannot imagine that this new round could be successful .
We wish Mr Pascal Lamy every success , for he is doing fantastically well so far .
He has a great relationship with our Parliament , for which we are very grateful to him .
Mr President , firstly I should like to extend our congratulations to both the Council and the Commission for what seems to be a much improved preparation for this meeting , compared to the methodological confusion that seemed to reign prior to Seattle .
We hope it will bear fruit in a couple of weeks ' time .
As a group we are also very keen that we should learn the lessons from Seattle and not use the launch of the round , or the text for the launch of the round , to somehow foreshadow or preclude the conclusion of the round .
That is obviously a lesson well-learnt and we applaud the attempts to keep the document which will be discussed in Doha as crisp and brief as possible .
I am not entirely sure whether the principles of brevity and crispness have been fully respected in our own resolution , but this is certainly something we hope you will follow in Doha .
There are two issues of absolutely fundamental importance to us as a Liberal group .
Firstly , trade and the environment : for us issues such as the interaction between trade and multilateral environmental agreements , eco-labelling , the incorporation of the precautionary principle are not add-ons or luxuries , they are absolutely fundamental to the future credibility of the WTO and , arguably , of globalisation as a political process itself .
We feel strongly , therefore , that without those kinds of provisions in the next round of negotiations , it will simply become politically unsellable and unsustainable within Europe .
Secondly on agriculture , our own views are that paragraphs 23 to 25 , whilst just above adequate , are a little convoluted and mealy-mouthed on agriculture .
We prefer the emphasis in paragraph 6 because it draws attention to the fundamental fact , highlighted recently by a study from the Centre for Economic Policy Research , that the greatest instrument to alleviate poverty is the further liberalisation of agriculture .
That is a fundamental principle for us which we hope will be fully respected in the next round .
Our group has not signed the compromise resolution with the larger groups for a number of reasons , but the most important one is this : We believe that fundamental reform of the World Trade Organisation 's processes and rules must be a precondition for any new round of trade talks .
Reform is not something that can be simply addressed as one issue among many in a new multilateral trade round where it risks being traded off against other interests and demands .
In our view , the WTO faces such a crisis of legitimacy in public opinion that reform must come before any further negotiations , and that is the position we have put forward in our joint resolution with the GUE Group .
Now that is not a tactic for putting off indefinitely the start of a new round .
In our view , nothing has slowed down the WTO more than the debacle in Seattle which was caused in no small part by the chaotic and exclusive structures , rules and procedures of the WTO .
So , for those who believe in multilateral trade rules , as we do , serious reform is not an option but a necessity .
The lessons of the failed Seattle Ministerial were that the WTO must become a fully democratic and transparent organisation which genuinely supports sustainable development and which effectively responds to the needs of developing countries .
They need to be far bigger players in the WTO .
Their marginalisation needs to end and they need to be listened to .
In recent weeks , many poorer countries have made it clear that for them addressing concerns about the implementation of Uruguay Round commitments should be a precondition for a new round .
Just two days ago , a communication from the G77 reiterated that position .
Our group agrees with developing countries when they oppose new issues on the agenda on the grounds that expanding that agenda would over stretch the capacity of many developing countries which are already struggling to participate effectively in the WTO process .
It would distract attention from the unfinished development business and increase the risk that developing countries will end up accepting disadvantageous trade-offs .
The possible opt-outs that are on offer are not a realistic or effective way of dealing with these concerns , since developing countries still do not have the capacity now to affect the negotiations of an agreement which they may be later under pressure to sign .
Pressing ahead with a new trade round in the face of major opposition from the majority of developing countries is not helpful .
Simply calling it a development round without genuinely addressing the demands of developing countries is a sleight of hand that fails to address their real concerns .
Finally , our group agrees that strong international rules are needed to manage trade .
We agree very much that internationalism is important , but the current international trade rules favour narrow business interests and not the poor and the environment .
Changing those rules is the priority for Doha , not launching a new round .
Mr President , after 11 September , we have every reason to redouble our commitment to multilateralism .
Persisting with the Doha meeting and making it a success are , therefore , of considerable political importance .
Of course , we cannot at this stage hope for the sea change that is required , but adapting , improving and consolidating the WTO system would at least be a good start .
As supporters of the multilateral approach , we must fulfil this commitment .
The criminals who destroyed the twin towers of the World Trade Center know the value of symbols .
Making trade the focus of coexistence with other countries is a deeply reductive approach and directing world trade centrally is unacceptable .
Multilateralism must be neither asymmetrical nor imperialist .
Doha will not be Seattle , however .
Civil movements have helped to make their leaders think , the southern countries are , with the welcome support of the Commission , playing an increasingly important role and the time when Carla Hills wanted to use a crowbar to open up other countries ' markets to her own will will soon be a thing of the past .
Doha is not a sign of a new wave of liberalisations , but nor is it an agenda for development .
It will be something vague between the two .
An agenda will be negotiated there whose objectives will remain general .
There has been no prior negotiation of the outcome , fortunately , and we approve of the principle of the Union ' s mandate : to set a broad agenda , but more than just balancing liberalisation by means of rules , there is no getting away from the fact that we must try to resolve the contradictions between society ' s choices and trade rules .
The social issue is symbolic .
The main front on which we need to fight is finance , and a Union which allows tax havens to flourish within its borders must put its own house in order .
Nobody can claim , though , that trade has nothing to do with fundamental rights .
The WTO may not be the place to produce social conventions , but it certainly does have a responsibility to ensure coherence .
The implementation of the Marrakech agreements and the incorporated agenda on agriculture and services will be at the centre of the forthcoming round .
The legitimacy of the trade interests of the South must be recognised but the problem will lie in preventing negotiations boiling down to a process of tough haggling over their interests and our own .
The concerns of northern societies as of those of the South must lead to a change in trade rules and to break their monopoly that favours one group .
With this in mind , we must accept that we will have to open the door to the renegotiation of certain rules , in particular , those concerning intellectual property .
Lastly , although the democratisation of the WTO will certainly not be on the agenda , it is nevertheless clear that this round will not succeed if it is nothing more than a diplomatic battle between countries , even if the European Union is happy to play the honest mediator .
Civil society must be involved ; we must consult our citizens and take account of their criticism and their demands .
This is the only way to ensure that democracy will penetrate the WTO .
Mr President , Commissioner , on the eve of this new meeting of the World Trade Organisation , which I prefer to call the Trading the World Organisation , you have used the correct term : legitimacy .
The failure of Seattle , which I predicted , several weeks beforehand and in writing - forgive me if I gloat - was entirely due , in my opinion , to this twofold lack of legitimacy .
Firstly , because the WTO itself has no legitimacy and , whatever people may think , is not up to the task that it has set itself .
I am talking more precisely , however , about the absence of legitimacy of the European Union and I must say that this is not meant as personal criticism or criticism of the quality of the very idea of having a single negotiator , even if it does have a mandate , to replace all of our old nations , the United Kingdom , France , Germany , Holland , Italy , which have , since the early middle ages , expanded on the mould of this international trade , which is now global .
No one can picture you , whatever your qualities , which everyone recognises , promoting both the interests of all of these countries and maintaining the diplomatic channels that the history of our ancient nations could allow us to fulfil , either with Latin America for Spain , Africa for France , etc .
There is , as always , a huge pretentiousness or even vanity , on the part of the European Union , in seeking to replace , in one fell swoop , a thousand years of history and in claiming to be able to fulfil this role .
The second stumbling block , of course , is the hypocrisy of the World Trade Organisation , which is approaching these negotiations like a wolf approaches a lamb .
Since the financial world effectively took control of the economy twenty years ago , international trade is now mainly an excuse to continually , ceaselessly and forever and beyond expand the sphere of financial speculation to the point that these negotiations are beginning to look like a big raffle held for the benefit of those organising the raffle .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , international trade is in crisis : according to the forecasts of the Istituto affari internationali , 2001 will see growth of 2 % compared to the 13 % in 2000 .
I feel it is right to raise the issues of WTO reforms , legitimacy and transparency of decisions so that we do not lose sight of the WTO ' s primary , unique mission which is to extend international trade .
This is why Doha must not fail : it must not fail because it has to ensure the sustained expansion of international trade over the next few years .
The responsibility of the success or failure of Doha lies with Europe and the other more advanced countries .
In general , I feel that we must take note of certain considerations and questions .
Firstly , in my opinion , we must stop following the line of reciprocity at all costs .
Removing the barriers to trade - even unilaterally - is not an act of surrender . It is a farsighted measure , particularly in economic terms .
I commend Commissioner Lamy for taking this approach with the Everything but Arms initiative , although we will have to explain to the European citizens that , under that initiative , which was well-received and rightly so , banana duties will fall definitively in 2009 , that is in 10 years time - a geologically important period in many respects - and we will also have to tell them why .
A further problem we must avoid is overloading Doha with an oversized agenda . I would stress that Doha has a specific mission .
We must not overload Doha and the WTO by attempting to use them to put right a number of issues which we feel need to be rectified in the world today .
Certain positions expressed on the environment , health and employment standards do nothing to defend us against accusations that the advanced countries and Europe are actually using the extension of the agenda for protectionist ends .
The developing countries are in a strong position and are not so very far from the truth when they say that all these so very politically correct issues actually serve to slow down the opening up of our markets to goods which have to come , first and foremost , from the least developed countries .
With regard to agriculture , I feel that we must bring to an end this game of hide-and-seek , this game of role plays between Europe and the United States in which , while we are waiting for someone to make the first move and start to reduce agricultural protection , we are all maintaining duty levels and levels of agricultural subsidies which are incompatible with the liberalisation of trade in the agricultural sector , when , as has been pointed out , this is one of the sectors which could most be most beneficial to the developing countries .
In Europe , we grant a subsidy of a dollar a day per bovine animal - and these animals are not high quality , they are our own mad cows - when there are one billion , three hundred thousand human beings who have to live on less than one dollar a day .
There you have it : if we genuinely want the WTO and Doha to be successful , these are the issues we must address . We must be bold and , I would stress , abandon the principle of ' reciprocity at all costs ' .
Unilateral measures opening up international trade benefit , first and foremost , those who have the courage to implement them .
Mr President , Commissioner Lamy deserves our gratitude for referring to the much-needed institutional reinforcement of the role of the European Parliament in European trade policy .
I wish to ask you Madam President-in-Office of the Council , whether you can support this position when you are assembling your papers for the forthcoming Inter-Governmental Conference and , firstly , for the Convention for which we are all striving ?
It is there that the breakthrough should at last occur , so that the European Parliament can draw even in institutional terms with the American Senate and House of Representatives .
In the next few years , the WTO will , through the imminent accession of China and Taiwan - both of which have long been important trading partners of Europe - and the eventual accession of Russia , gain a global dimension , giving it an even greater worldwide representative role and presenting it with new challenges .
To achieve this , it will have to adapt its structures and change the way it works .
With Qatar , there is the additional factor that we must make a start and genuinely involve all the developing countries , not only the representatives of the least developed , in the negotiations .
The technical aid which the EU and the other industrialised countries are called upon to provide is crucial for these countries ' future real involvement in the decision-making process .
The WTO must , however , also increase its efficiency despite these changes and become more transparent and more readily understood by the world 's citizens .
How will the WTO harmonise its new , strengthened universality with the need to become even more efficient and make markets more open ?
Our resolution attempts to reconcile these two requirements , although surely incompletely as yet .
We Europeans must contribute our environmental legislation , our regulations on food safety , our multifunctional agriculture and our social security legislation as expressions of a tangible European reality .
Now , some weeks after 11 September , it is particularly important , partly as a response to terrorism , that we , the EU and , particularly , the European Parliament , continue without distraction on our way towards greater openness and democracy in the WTO and resolutely set about the necessary reforms .
We need to promote fair and freer world trade rather than seal ourselves off by means of protectionism and fall back upon national markets .
We must also strive to realise soon the central proposition of the European Parliament - the establishment of an effective parliamentary assembly for the WTO , to be the world 's mouthpiece in trading matters .
We therefore need representatives of the American Congress in Doha as well .
We are relying on the parliaments of the industrialised states , of the emergent countries and of all the developing countries .
May we ask , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , if you , at the end of your presidency of the Council , could give your support to this proposal , which we must implement as soon as possible ?
We support Commissioner Lamy 's efforts at using our cooperative structures to involve Africa in particular - Africa , that continent which is largely forgotten by world trade - more intensively in dialogue on the subject of a parliamentary assembly .
Our seminar on 12 April was the first example of a successful conference on trade , democracy and development to involve our friends from Africa alongside the representatives of the industrialised countries in America , Europe and Asia .
Technical support from the Commission and our parliamentary budget played an important part in this .
Mr President , Commissioner Lamy , Minister Neyts-Uyttebroeck , ladies and gentlemen , the tragic events of 11 September have led to a re-emergence of two concepts which seemed to have been forgotten : multilateralism and solidarity .
Firstly , political practice is developing in such a way that we can only confront global threats in a global fashion : all united .
Furthermore , we also know that poverty and underdevelopment are significant causes of insecurity .
A Japanese thinker , Daisako Ikeda , said that the new concept of security , which focuses on the security of States , must be defined differently , focusing on the well-being of peoples .
Only by extending freedom , human rights and development can we recover our security .
At the same time , these events have speeded up the decline in confidence in our security and the economy , areas which were already showing signs of weakness .
It is therefore now important that we send clear signs of revitalisation and attention to the concerns of our citizens and , above all , to the concerns of the countries which need it most , that is , the developing countries .
It must therefore be an absolute priority to launch this new round of multilateral negotiations in Qatar on the date set , not yet to negotiate , but at least to set the agenda in the direction we wish to take .
We want to move towards a result which provides a balance between opening up trade and subjecting that trade to rules , internal democratic , and external democratic , rules , which respect fundamental social standards , the environment and the security of our consumers .
We also want a balance between an increase in exchanges and special attention to the concerns of our citizens , as well as the concerns and needs of the developing countries , who must be allowed to share fully in the benefits of international trade .
In summary , therefore , the mandate which the Council has given to the Commission , in our opinion , corresponds to these balances and deserves our full support .
I would like to thank Commissioner Lamy for the sensitivity he has always shown towards the European Parliament and his constant cooperation .
In return , Parliament and the parliamentary delegation which will accompany him to Qatar will offer him all their support .
Mr President , in Doha the EU must show its hand .
On which side does the EU really stand in the global North-South conflict ?
Things are looking quite bad .
In spite of the stream of protests from , for example , India and Malaysia , the least developed countries , the G77 group , China and a host of environmental and solidarity movements , the EU intends , together with the United States , to try to play its trump card by making the WTO ' s free trade doctrine apply not only to traditional trade but to practically the whole of economic life .
According to what Commissioner Lamy said in a statement earlier today , the EU ' s main objective is to open the markets of the developing countries to EU companies .
When it comes to TRIPS and GATS , too , it is obvious that the EU is on a collision course with the developing countries .
In this global struggle , which is more crucial than the fight against terrorism , a number of ' progressive ' people have believed that the EU could constitute a tool actually to combat neo-liberal globalisation .
If the EU does not change its tactics , there is everything to indicate , however , that , when it comes to the crunch , the WTO meeting in Doha will be proof that all the fine declarations of solidarity are being abandoned .
It is then that a ' policy of naked interest ' appears , that is to say , a policy that places the EU alongside the United States and against the majority of the world ' s poorer countries .
Mr President , obviously the diverse manifestations of democratic resistance to the dangers of an uncontrolled expansion of the WTO 's powers have given pause for thought .
It seems , however , that well-intentioned appeals are not going to prevent it from going down this path .
It is simply the case that trade in goods and money transactions are governed by the law of the market .
The market is , by its very nature , immoral .
Those who want to maintain their hold on the market have to make a profit or else they go under .
The WTO has obviously set itself the goal of cutting the market off from the demands of society at large and even from parliaments .
The opinions now on the table at least show an awareness of the problem .
It is right to take small steps .
However , far more ambitious steps must follow .
We cannot wash the coat of the bear which the WTO has become without getting the animal itself wet .
Our aim must be to work towards a new global economic order which distributes the wealth of this earth differently , justly and fairly , overcomes poverty , establishes and guarantees broad-based democratic cooperation giving parliaments a voice , and makes independent economic development possible for all countries .
The European Parliament should do everything within its power to challenge the Council and the Commission to do this .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would firstly like to thank you for the efforts you have made and the strategy you have employed in preparing for the Doha Summit , to promote fairer and more balanced sustainable development on a world scale , which contributes to respect for fundamental social rights and the protection of the environment , the benefits of which also reach the least-developed countries .
Kofi Annan recently said that the Doha Summit must be the development summit .
If this is to be the case , it is essential that the developing countries can be fully integrated into the structures of the WTO and they must be given easier access to world trade .
That is why I want to insist on the importance of the technical measures for developing countries , because it is these measures which will allow these countries to take full advantage of the commercial opportunities offered by the liberalisation of the markets .
Repealing or renegotiating the agreements already adopted is not the solution .
On the contrary , in Doha the European Union must remind all the member countries of the WTO that it is necessary to respect the commitments made in the existing agreements , just as the European Union has respected its commitments .
I am thinking specifically of the textile industry , which has strictly respected its commitment to open up its market , increasing quotas and progressively increasing the application of the GATT rules in the sector , which is something that not all countries have done , including the most developed countries .
It is true that trade , even if it is multilateral , will not in itself resolve the inequalities of our planet , but it may reduce them by reconciling the interests and concerns of all the parties involved , especially those of the weakest .
The European Union has proven experience in this task and we hope that after Doha , by following the line we have taken until now , Commissioner , we can finally succeed in it .
Mr President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , like others , I wear a badge which symbolises trade with justice .
Open trade - yes , but only with rules .
Our national and European interests , yes of course , but also the interests of the developing world - your approach , Commissioner , and ours .
I am going to concentrate on two frankly difficult areas - TRIPS and the environmental aspects of trade which you have already mentioned .
Firstly , TRIPS : what we now have in the agreement is not clear enough or good enough .
Intellectual property rights are important in world trade , but we thought that the 25.5 million HIV positive people in sub-Saharan Africa could have access to cheap drugs under TRIPS .
Let us ensure that this is made more explicit after Doha .
Ironically , the United States , the world 's most fierce defender of intellectual property rights is now faced with the dilemma of needing huge supplies of antibiotics to combat anthrax .
Attitudes may change with new circumstances - in any case , they have to .
Secondly , environmental standards .
The EU faces charges of protectionism .
Commissioner , you know that this is not the case , that we are ready to help developing countries in any way necessary as we are helping applicant countries , that we have science on our side and that we will not abandon our hard-won progress - why should we ?
Multilateral environment agreements cannot be discarded in the name of free trade and the precautionary principle must be explicitly included in WTO rules .
This is a deal-breaker for us .
We in the EU know more than any other part of the world how untrammelled free trade can be controlled through multilateral rule-making to the benefit of our citizens .
Our achievements in the EU are relevant elsewhere , and we should defend them - your task Commissioner .
I know you will be tough on our behalf .
I hope you will be tough too on core labour standards .
Seattle did not work - Doha can if it is fair and if there is a balance of trade and justice .
Good luck Commissioner .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with your permission I will just say a few additional words , which perhaps have more to do with practicalities and less to do with the substance .
Firstly , I should like to compliment Commissioner Lamy most particularly on the superb cooperation which we are enjoying and - I think that I speak for everyone - on the excellent manner in which he is representing the European Union in the run-up to this forthcoming trade round .
His task will certainly be a difficult one .
The right balance needs to be struck between , on the one hand , representing European interests and , on the other , ensuring that the other countries , our negotiating partners , and in particular the developing countries , are brought on board .
Personally , I believe that this round will , more than any other , be able to send out a message to the world that it is possible to reconcile trade and politics .
I trust , Commissioner Lamy , that you are in a position to achieve this , working together with your colleague Bob Zoelleck , but also with the many other negotiating partners that you have .
It will not be an easy task .
However , everything bodes well .
I am grateful to you for consistently encouraging Parliament to play a more significant role in trade policy .
Regrettably the Council has not taken the same step .
Like you , I hope that we will be able to achieve more in this respect in the future .
Incidentally , I should also like to thank all those colleagues in this House who have always supported this policy .
I should , moreover , like to remind you , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , that you also have a task to carry out in Doha , namely organising the meeting with all of the trade ministers .
We have a good tradition of arranging for the European Parliament 's delegation to meet the ministers attending the trade round .
I would earnestly request that you organise this meeting again this time and also ensure that we have a debate and that it is not just an occasion for a chat or seen as a bit of an afterthought , as the Council is wont to do , but that it really is an occasion for serious dialogue .
In addition , I should also like to inform you very briefly - my colleague , Konrad Schwaiger , mentioned this - that the parliaments will also have a joint meeting in Doha .
The invitation will be extended jointly by the President of this House and the President of the IPU .
I hope that we will make progress there .
Here , too , we need your support , Madam President-in-Office of the Council .
We have always had this support from the Commission .
Thank you once again for cooperating with us .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I should like to extend a warm thanks to all those who have taken the floor in this debate , for the good wishes they have conveyed to Commissioner Lamy and hopefully the Council presidency too , and I hope that we indeed manage to organise a balanced trade round with a broad-based agenda .
My only comment in this respect is that I very much appreciate the fact that you have valued our respective efforts to improve the atmosphere prior to the start of such a round , and that you , as it were , assisted us in those efforts .
This is a tremendous boost a fortnight prior to the start of this Fourth Ministerial Conference .
If you allow me , Mr President , I should like to respond briefly to the specific questions that have been raised , notably those by Mr Schwaiger and Mrs Mann about the role of parliaments and Members of Parliament .
Mr Schwaiger , I can only respond on behalf of my government with regard to our position concerning an amendment to Article 133 of the Treaty .
I can only say to him that it was not the Belgian government that has precluded an amendment to the article .
We will continue to strive towards a broadening of the Commission ' s negotiation authority under that article , and towards greater parliamentary involvement .
Secondly , I can say to Mr Schwaiger and Mrs Mann that I am delighted with the initiative for a parliamentary meeting in Doha ; that appears to me to be extremely important .
I will therefore be very happy to lend my support to this effort , and I hope that it will be possible to inject a little more stability into the meeting , because I believe it to be absolutely of fundamental importance for Members of Parliament - for in addition to MEPs , the meeting will , of course , also be attended by a number of national MPs - to learn to listen to each other .
Maybe it will then be a little easier for us , members of the government , to convince our national parliaments of the accuracy of some of our claims when they hear those expressed by their colleagues from other countries , and particularly from developing countries .
I welcome this development with open arms .
It is significant in itself .
It will also contribute towards more transparency in the activities of the World Trade Organisation .
This does bring me to one minor remark made by Mrs Lucas who believes that the World Trade Organisation should be reformed first , before negotiations can commence .
I should like to say to her that I cannot see how any changes could be made to the way the organisation works without a negotiation round .
I should like to draw her attention to the fact that the very careful preparation of the Doha conference in itself bears witness to an entirely different approach from before .
Finally , I should like to remind her that the World Trade Organisation is , in fact , a very young organisation which is very much open to improvement , and we will happily take part in this exercise .
I gladly promise Mrs Mann , I will be organising a meeting with the Members of Parliament in Doha .
Mrs Mann , you know very well that you and Mr Westendorp , as well as a few other MEPs , have had the opportunity to exchange ideas with us immediately prior to the start of the informal External Trade Council , so we will naturally carry on with this tradition .
Mr President , I too wish to thank the speakers who have stated their support for the Commission ' s position - including the President-in-Office of the Council - and also to thank those who have wished the negotiators good luck .
Custom dictates that I should answer those who expressed more critical views and who , in tomorrow ' s vote will not be adopting the position that the majority groups have stated they will .
I shall do so briefly , replying first to Caroline Lucas - speaking on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - the reasoning in whose speech I consider to contain a slight contradiction .
On the one hand , Mrs Lucas , your group is in favour of tougher rules governing trade - specifically from the point of view of considering the environment - and yet , on the other , it is not in favour of negotiations taking place .
You must have some solution for changing international rules that does not involve negotiating .
Please tell me about it , because I have no such solution .
To Mr Herzog , whose group I understand intends to adopt a similar position , I would like to say that I particularly liked your expression ' tough haggling ' .
There will indeed be some of that .
It is true that the WTO sometimes seems a little bit like a grocer ' s shop but we must also remember that the more progress globalisation makes , the more trade develops and , occasionally , the more our values are at stake .
In these cases , I think that toughness becomes a duty , whatever resentment this may engender .
Mr Abitbol spoke on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .
You lament the fact , Mr Abitbol , that the Union has a single negotiator .
I would remind you that this issue was decided for the future of the European Union 44 years ago .
You choose to see in this the vanity of our founding fathers .
Fifty years on , all I can see is their foresight .
Lastly , Mr Abitbol , on the point you made , as on other critical points that were made , I would simply remind you that although the Commission negotiates on behalf of the Union , it does so under the control of those who gave it its mandate , which are the Council of Ministers and Parliament .
Both will be attending the meeting : the Council , representing the States and Parliament ' s delegation , with which you are familiar .
In all honesty , I really cannot envisage a more effective method of ensuring that the negotiator ' s political responsibility is maintained throughout .
It is up to the Presidency-in-Office of the Council to oversee this process of giving account but , ultimately , I shall return with a position that I have negotiated and it will be up to the Council and Parliament to state their position with regard to the Treaties .
This is how our democracy works .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
International trade
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0331 / 2001 ) by Mr Désir , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on democracy and opening up international trade ( 2001 / 2093 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the transition from the GATT era to that of the WTO changed the dimension as well as the nature of the multilateral trading system .
With the advent of the WTO , trade rules were extended to a large number of new areas , including services , intellectual property , investment and rules on non-tariff barriers , that frequently affect non-trade issues .
These rules have a binding force , which is backed by a dispute settlement system with the capacity to impose sanctions .
Finally , enlargement , which begun under GATT , has resulted in an unprecedented diversity among its members with regard to international trade .
The rules of the multilateral trading system now apply not only to the countries that account for most of world trade or only to the one-fifth of world production that is traded across borders .
They also apply to goods and services that will never be traded internationally .
All countries are concerned and their internal rules affected , whatever their share of international trade .
In recent years , trade agreements have also had a growing impact on other international rules in areas such as the environment , health and social rights .
Thus , WTO agreements or decisions have threatened the precautionary principle , environmental protection and access to medicines .
The cause of this is partly the ambiguity of some agreements , such as the agreement on intellectual property , in the case of medicines , but with regard to public services , the scope of Article 1 of the General Agreement on Services is also to blame .
To this , we can add another reason for the undermining of the multilateral trade system : the democratic legitimacy of the WTO , an intergovernmental organisation , in principle , relies firstly on the equal participation of all members , on the fact that they have an equal say in the organisation .
Most of the developing countries , however , feel marginalised by its operation and cut off from the decision making process .
At least 24 developing countries that are members of the WTO have no permanent representation in Geneva , and numerous others have only very small delegations that do not allow them to follow all of the proceedings that concern them .
Many developing countries lack the necessary competences .
In such situations , form and content are real issues for developing countries because the rules and agreements more often reflect the interests of the trading powers that have negotiated them between themselves , sometimes in ' green rooms ' or in informal meetings , which are far too secretive - than the interests of all members , particularly of the poorest countries .
Consequently , since the Uruguay Round , many developing countries have stated that they were not aware , when they signed , of all the legal , administrative and financial consequences of agreements such as the TRIPS agreement on intellectual property , which were drawn up without their involvement .
Generally , where the developing countries are concerned , six years on from the creation of the WTO , the picture before us reveals a limited opening up of markets in the north , considerable difficulties in implementing agreements and persistent marginalisation from the workings of the WTO .
This feeling is more acute still for the least developed countries ( LDCs ) , which , twenty years ago , accounted for 0.6 % of international trade . Today the figure stands at only 0.4 % .
The WTO , therefore , continues to be dominated by the large trading powers , and it is they that benefit overwhelmingly from its policies .
And , two years after Seattle , the multilateral trade system is still undergoing a threefold crisis of democratic legitimacy , as a consequence of the uneven distribution of the benefits of world trade , of the marginalisation of many of its members , as a result of the impact of some WTO rules on other basic principles , even at international level , and lastly due to a lack of transparency and the limited involvement of parliaments and civil society in the work of the WTO .
Although the WTO has started to acknowledge the need for reform , this recognition has yet to be translated into the necessary changes .
As you know , Commissioner , our committee , therefore , adopted , by a large majority - 48 votes to 5 , with 1 abstention - a report which is noteworthy above all for its set of practical proposals , grouped into four main chapters .
First of all , the equal and effective participation of all members is a key factor in any new direction for the multilateral trading system .
This will require an increase in the provision of technical assistance .
The Commission has already undertaken a number of actions and we urge it to persevere in this direction .
We propose going further , however . The Commission should propose the creation , for example , on the basis of a contribution proportional to each member ' s share of international trade , of a fund or an increase in the WTO ' s budget , which would enable all member countries to have a representation in Geneva .
We propose supporting regional representations , which is already being done , specifically for the ACP countries , but we feel that we need to go further ; we need to establish internal transparency ; until all members have a representation , we must allow non-resident countries to have rapid access to records of meetings and draft agreements ; we must establish clear rules on so-called ' informal ' consultations to allow all countries that wish to take part to do so , by publishing agendas in advance and by ensuring that reports of prior decisions , which are sometimes prepared , are provided to the competent bodies in good time .
We also propose that the dispute settlement system be reformed , because there are still inequalities linked to the market share of the various member countries , to ensure that the small countries , those that account for a small proportion of international trade , can , in certain circumstances , seek financial compensation .
Secondly , there is the issue of opening the WTO up to society and external transparency .
We feel that much remains to be done in this area before we reach the level of other organisations , within which observer status has been given to non-governmental organisations .
We feel that the dispute settlement procedure itself could , given the judicial nature of the procedures , be held in public , as is the case in court proceedings .
Thirdly , there is the issue of parliamentary control , which was mentioned in the previous debate , at both national and European level and also by means of a consultative parliamentary assembly within the WTO .
Where the European Union is concerned , we propose that Article 133 of the EC Treaty be reformed , that the 133 committee be opened up to Parliament 's representatives , and that the European Parliament ' s assent be required for all trade agreements .
Fourthly , there is the balance between international standards and establishing new relationships between the WTO and other international organisations .
We propose that all other multilateral organisations , such as the International Labour Organisation , the World Health Organisation , etc . , be given observer status within the WTO and that their opinion be systematically sought by the dispute settlement body when there is a risk of conflict between trade rules and other rules .
In our view , the European Union should propose a de facto hierarchy of standards at international level , with which all countries must comply . In other words , it should recognise that business law or trade law cannot supplant the principles of environmental protection , public health and respect for the social rights of workers .
It must fall to the ILO , and the ILO alone , to decide whether or not it is appropriate to adopt retaliatory measures and to impose trade sanctions on countries , and not the World Trade Organisation .
I feel , however , that the WTO must give a commitment to respect any decisions that the ILO may take on such matters .
To conclude briefly , Mr President , I would say that trade policy , which is one of the oldest of the EU ' s policies and its oldest external common policy concerns , of course , economic interests , but it also says a great deal - or , in any event , the European Union says a great deal - by means of this trade policy , about its vision of the world and of north-south relations in particular . It also reveals a belief in a division between that which is the domain of the market and that which societies must do in the name of principles , such as , solidarity .
This policy must reflect the Union 's fundamental values and objectives .
For this reason , the EU ' s priorities must be the establishment of fair and equitable trade , a democratic multilateral system , and a reformed WTO .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , Commissioner Lamy , ladies and gentlemen , we need more and not , as has been called for several times , less , international cooperation .
For small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular , we need the basic conditions to be legally certain and foreseeable .
The aim has to be to use world trade to create more wealth for our people .
In so doing , however , we must not overlook the fact that Europe has 18 million small enterprises , which , at the end of the day , employ two-thirds of the workforce .
This means that salaries are mainly being paid by small and medium-sized companies .
Sixty per cent of GDP and , important for us politicians , 80 % of taxes come from small companies .
That is why where the WTO is concerned , we should not only consider involving and integrating the ILO in this process and reflect on how we might better structure it , but should also and especially bring the social dialogue and the social partners to the fore .
The Everything But Arms initiative should not contain the clause ' Everything But Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises ' , but instead ' Everything For Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises ' .
The economy is at the centre of this discussion , and this is something that we should not forget in the whole WTO debate .
Very briefly on TRIPS : here we should consider , in particular , having compulsory licences and , above all , development aid ; we should consider having calls for tender and also giving countries medicines of the necessary quality .
As regards the dispute settlement mechanism , I should like to recall that many companies and individual firms are damaged by WTO rulings , for example because of carousel trade retaliation .
Here I should like to ask : how do these companies obtain redress ? How do they come to be damaged by an international agreement which is not actually in accordance with the law of the country concerned ?
Finally , we need to introduce more transparency into these areas and ensure that decisions are made closer to the people .
That is why I welcome the fact that President Neyts will support the European Parliament and parliaments throughout the world in their efforts to bring more transparency and also in the end , I hope , more wealth into this world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to congratulate the rapporteur , Harlem Désir , on his very good , clear and extensive report .
Commissioner , if the decision-making process in the WTO is not made more transparent and democratic then , in the long term , the people of the WTO Member States will not stand for it , because we cannot have nation states increasingly referring crucial issues to the competent supranational organisation , while parliaments and , therefore , also society at large remain prevented from exercising their democratic right to monitor and participate in its work .
Events in the Dispute Settlement Body must also be seen in this light .
The Dispute Settlement Body needs to be thoroughly overhauled .
It needs to be transparent and changes also need to be made to its composition .
In the same way , it is necessary for us , finally , to give the developing countries the tools which will actually allow them to participate in the negotiations on an equal footing and then to assess the decisions which need to be made as they see fit .
There is , of course , a difference between a delegation arriving with 150 experts and a developing country having great difficulty sending its ambassador to the places concerned .
I should like to point this out once more here .
Otherwise , Harlem Désir has already said everything that needed to be said .
Mr President , I would also like to join in the congratulations to Mr Désir , the rapporteur .
This report strikes us as an excellent piece of forward-thinking , a blueprint for the WTO of tomorrow .
It comprehensively rejects those who claim that the WTO is beyond redemption ; that it cannot be reformed ; that it is inherently biased against the poor or the dispossessed ; and that it is just an agent for the rule of the jungle , rather than the rule of law .
It also rejects the contrary view : the idea that free trade should prevail at all costs ; that the WTO should be an agent for the dismantling of outstanding trade barriers , and should do so to the exclusion of all other political and public policy considerations .
Instead , it represents almost a synthesis of those two views , because it shows how and when and why the WTO should , and must , be reformed .
It shows how the WTO must become more transparent and legitimate .
I should add that all the emphasis that we , as Europeans , place on the need for increased legitimacy and transparency in the WTO will come to nothing if we do not reform the way in which we conduct our own trade policy in the European Union .
I was delighted to hear the presidency today say that it has supported in the past , and will support in the future , Parliament 's demands for more transparent and legitimate trade policy-making in the European Council and the European Union .
The report also - and this is perhaps its greatest contribution to the debate - shows the way in which the WTO has to be placed increasingly in a context of other public policy priorities and other multilateral organisations and agreements .
It cannot rely on a role as primus inter pares on the international scene .
Instead it should learn to interact with other priorities and other multilateral agreements .
Our role is , therefore , to flank the WTO with other supporting agreements in other fields , notably the environmental field .
Mr President , international trade is fundamental in our system and , in the opinion of those who advocate a different type of globalisation , including myself , international trade must be based on fair , equitable trading bringing development and wealth to the greatest number of people possible .
Regrettably , the trade negotiations held under the auspices of GATT and the WTO did not serve to create fair international rules : quite the opposite , they left entire communities with no defence against the greed of multinationals .
It therefore follows that these institutions are suffering an unprecedented crisis of legitimacy in respect of vast sections of communities , and are in vital need of thorough reform .
The Désir report addresses clearly the limitations and dysfunctional areas of international trade , of unequal participation , and the lack of transparency and democracy and the ensuing consequences , and proposes reforms to remedy these shortcomings .
We support the report and will vote for the motion , but we feel that this must only be the start of a process of change .
The Commission and the Council must refuse to be influenced by pressure from the rest of the world .
Mr President , justice must be done , but more importantly justice must be seen to be done : the WTO is a very powerful international organisation , dealing with rules and law , and it must be seen to act justly .
Accountability and transparency are therefore exceptionally important .
Global trade requires global rules and development requires understanding of some of the problems of the developing countries .
If we are discussing transparency and accountability within the WTO process , transparency for its own sake and accountability for its own sake are just not enough .
The fundamental purpose of both is to create integrity in the system so that those who have promised to do things , and here I mean the developed countries , are forced to do them because of international public opinion .
There are many things that the developed countries promised in the Uruguay round which have not been delivered .
Conversely , those in the developing world who now have systems of corruption and bad practice will also be brought to book through the process of accountability and transparency .
In this regard , I would like to support Mr Désir in saying that he has produced an excellent report which I want to support .
It is vital to understand the permanent position of the rule of law .
Equality before the law and confidence in it is an absolute necessity for developing countries .
Without it all the well-meaning words and the great aid-giving we indulge in will come to nothing .
Justice must be done and must be seen to be done .
Mr President , international trade is of central importance if conditions for growth and development are to be created throughout our world .
The rules governing this trade determine whether growth and development are to benefit the whole of humanity or are to be confined to the industrialised world .
Mr Désir ' s report is an excellent instrument for bringing about something more akin to global justice in world trade .
The developing countries must be put on the same footing as the industrialised countries when it comes to participating in the joint work of the WTO .
For me , as a Social Democrat , global justice is an end in itself .
The acts of terrorism in the United States also point to the need to limit the basis for hatred and fanaticism .
Less injustice will increase the safety of us all .
The voluntary organisations must be given scope to express their opinions when world trade is discussed .
Democracy can be deepened through the setting up of a parliamentary assembly within the WTO .
Social dumping must be prevented and employees ' rights must be provided for .
Fundamental human rights must be respected , the fight against environmental devastation intensified and child labour prohibited .
We must stop dumping our food surplus in the developing countries and , instead , give farmers in those countries a chance to increase their production and their opportunities to provide for themselves .
In that way , we can make our contribution to a more just and more secure world .
Mr President , the new WTO round perfectly illustrates our criticism of the way in which this body is organised .
This is supposedly a development round , but the European ministers for cooperation and development are not taking part in the forthcoming meeting .
Furthermore , the Committee on Development and Cooperation has not been able to deliver an opinion on the Désir report .
Fortunately , the report asks pertinent questions , and it has our support .
This is supposed to be a development round , but the 49 LDCs are opposed to it and rightly so .
Liberalisation , which is supposed to lead to development , growth and prosperity , has only made their situation worse .
The WTO perpetuates the imbalance in world trade and the establishment of rules that are unfavourable to the developing countries .
Furthermore , it has ended the preferential system instituted by the Lomé Convention .
Similarly , the Cotonou Agreement urges the ACP countries to abide by the GATS or the agreement on Trips but the UNDP , itself , states that the liberalisation of services will only benefit multinational companies .
The GATS is basically the IMA by the back door .
It is a tool for dismantling democracy .
Mr Lamy , if negotiations must take place , then they must focus on a root and branch reform of the WTO .
It is the development of the least advanced countries that must benefit rather than the development of multinational companies ' profits .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to thank Harlem Désir for the quality of this report , which , of course , I fully support .
The point that you made just now , Commissioner , on developments within the WTO to my mind shows all the more the need for such a report .
I shall use two points to try to illustrate this .
The Commission must keep a close eye on the issues of agriculture and intellectual property , so that the current shifts we are seeing within the WTO do not continue indefinitely .
The dice have been and remain loaded against the weakest , either the poorest countries or the most endangered social categories in our own countries , because the WTO is a body that is neither transparent nor democratic .
Let us take the example of the Marrakech Agreements on agriculture .
They guarantee neither self-sufficiency with regard to food supply nor the right to protect biodiversity for the southern countries . They prevent the specific nature of small-scale farming in Europe from being taken into consideration , with all its quality , social and environmental aspects .
There is a danger that , in the near future , they may ban small farmers from sowing the seeds that they have themselves produced .
The Commission must exert pressure to change this , to have an in-depth review of the Trips agreement drawn up so that it is fully compatible with the Rio convention on biodiversity and the Cartagena protocol on biosecurity , as the African group within the WTO is calling for .
This will enable us to preserve the biological heritage of the developing countries and the traditional skills in the south as well as the north .
Furthermore , the patenting of living organisms must be prohibited , because these are the heritage of all humanity and cannot and must not be hijacked by private interests that want to turn life into a commodity .
I hope , Commissioner , that you will convey this message .
Mr President , Mr Désir ' s own-initiative report makes a number of recommendations that are quite close to the spirit in which we are approaching the WTO ministerial conference in Doha .
You would like to see the developing countries integrated into world trade , which is an objective that we share .
You emphasise the importance of the WTO addressing the public ' s concerns , over and above the traditional issues of access to the markets or of customs tariffs . We also share this objective and feel , as you do , that rapid economic change and the effects of globalisation must be managed .
The fact is that progress has already been made on many of your suggestions , specifically with regard to follow-ups with technical assistance or councils for developing countries in WTO negotiations .
The European Union , for example , is responsible for establishing the ACP countries ' Centre in Geneva , which will enable these countries to better coordinate their position and consequently exert greater influence within the WTO .
It is the European Union that insisted on streamlining meetings in Geneva and on making the participation of members who do not have a representation in the WTO easier .
I am giving these two examples , to which one could add the efforts made to encourage the accession of a number of countries - and in Doha , an LDC , the island of Vanuatu , will sit side by side with China and Taiwan , for example - not to suggest that the situation is perfect or that nothing remains to be done , but in order to ensure that the debate on the proposals for reform is held on the basis of a full and up-to-date knowledge of the current situation .
On this subject , I should like to make a small correction to a point of fact that appears in your explanatory statement , Mr Désir , concerning hormone-treated beef .
Contrary to what you state , the European Union has not been condemned for banning hormones in cattle breeding .
The WTO has explicitly recognised the right in this affair of each member to set its own level of protection .
The Union was condemned because , at the time , it did not supply the necessary scientific evidence to justify such a ban .
I have a few other different interpretations , or rather differences of opinion , concerning some of your comments or suggestions .
You mention the crisis of democratic legitimacy , which other speakers have taken up .
I disagree with the content of this criticism .
Admittedly , the system could be improved : it must be made more open and the developing countries must be more fully integrated .
The challenge of reconciling our ' civil society ' agenda with our ' development ' agenda is indeed formidable and your report , furthermore , attests to some of these difficulties , in that , for some subjects , you propose both external transparency and fundamental social standards .
We know very well that , where these two matters are concerned , our sensitivity to the positions of the developing countries forces us to severely limit our ambitions : consequently , our own position is not entirely free from contradiction , as your report highlights .
Nevertheless , calling the current situation a serious crisis of democratic legitimacy strikes me as somewhat excessive .
As far as I am aware , the Marrakech Agreement was not only adopted by the Member State governments , but was also ratified both by the national parliaments and by your House .
In other words , the Marrakech Agreement has been ratified by the European Parliament .
With regard to your statement that decision making within the WTO is the sole preserve of the richer nations , I would say that , although this may once have been true , it is increasingly less the case in an organisation of more than 140 members and , in which , small discussion groups are inevitable in its day-to-day work .
We are trying to ensure that these meetings include both rich and poor countries and that they guarantee a representative mix both in terms of geography and in terms of stages of development .
It may be the case that these informal groups make it easier to reach consensus , but they never , as we all know , take decisions .
Many preparatory meetings of this type have taken place over these last few weeks , for example , the ministerial mini-meeting in Mexico at the end of August , the Europe-Asia meeting in Hanoi in mid-September , the Europe-Africa meeting in Nairobi in mid-October and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC ) meeting at the weekend .
I would also add that , in terms of the method of preparation , the lesson of Seattle has been learned and that the participating delegations are larger and better informed about the issues you have raised .
With regard to dispute settlement , an issue you have also addressed , I would make three comments .
First of all , let us not forget that the main objective of the mechanism for settling disputes is the effective and disciplined implementation of commitments that have been freely negotiated and accepted .
This is what a member of the WTO hopes to obtain when it resorts to the dispute settlement procedure .
Like you , we are also opposed to immediate implementation and to trade sanctions .
There must be more room for trade compensation .
Personally speaking , I have greater reservations about your suggestion to replace sanctions with fines .
My fear is that financial penalties would not resolve the imbalance between rich and poor countries , and might , to some extent , even allow the rich countries to buy off their breaches of obligations .
With regard to the transparency of the panels , we are also in favour of opening up the hearings of the appeals body to the public .
Let us remember , however , just between ourselves , that the developing countries have very firmly held positions on this point , which we do not share .
Where the relationship with other rules of international law is concerned , we must ensure greater coherence and prevent conflict between trade and non-trade rules .
This must apply to the very substance of the commitments in question .
As to the issue of revising the agreement on intellectual property , which you consider to be necessary , I do not think that a thorough revision would be appropriate .
If we take the examples of access to medicines or of the patenting of living organisms , the agreement provides sufficient latitude to establish an intellectual property system that responds to the concerns expressed by developing countries .
It is the task of the members of the WTO to interpret and clarify this flexibility , and we feel that it is better to do so by means of discussion or negotiation than to leave this task to panels .
This is the basis of our position in Geneva , which I mentioned in the previous debate .
Mrs Auroi , the issue of compatibility between the agreement on intellectual property and the convention on biodiversity is one of the points that we wish to see clarified in these negotiations .
With regard to the incentive measures to ensure compliance with basic standards in the field of employment law , we agree with your wish , Mr Désir , to highlight the importance of strengthening the ILO and this is why your suggestion to create a multilateral agreement within the WTO does not fill us with any great enthusiasm .
As for the incentive measures to ensure compliance with basic social standards , I would say that we must not undermine the influence of the International Labour Organisation .
This is not a weak institution that the WTO must provide with a dynamism that it would not otherwise have .
We must instead work on improving the ILO ' s profile .
Lastly , with regard to creating a parliamentary forum within the WTO , a proposal that , as I stated in the previous debate , we have always supported , I shall conclude briefly by saying that we shall make use of the guidelines that Parliament has laid down for this set of work , to which we can now add your report , Mr Désir .
I would say that , as this afternoon 's debate has shown , the Commission ' s political line , approved and implemented by the Council , is also coherent with the position of this House .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
Common foreign and security policy ( CFSP )
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0332 / 2001 ) by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the progress achieved in the implementation of the common foreign and security policy ( C5-0194 / 2001 - 2001 / 2007 ( INI ) ) .
I would point out that , after the rapporteur , Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , President-in-Office of the Council , and Commissioner Patten will speak , and they will then have to leave as a result of urgent air transport issues .
This change to the agenda is due to the evacuation of Parliament , which is of course neither the responsibility of the President-in-Office of the Council nor of the Commissioner .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , in recent weeks we have frequently said it , and in the light of this annual report we should emphasise it once more : since 11 September we have not actually learnt anything new .
It has become clear to us , however , and we have become more conscious of the fact that we need a new definition of security , that the old concepts of security policy actually no longer work and that , for this reason , a particular combination of external and internal security needs to be formed .
It is no longer the case , you see , that a potential enemy can be unambiguously recognised behind a border ; now the enemy also has the ability to be in our midst .
Here , I believe , a coordinated approach needs to be agreed .
Admittedly , we also know that this threat can no longer be fought by individual states because the challenge is international and runs across borders .
That is why we also need to find cross-border solutions .
Each individual European state only has a chance of guaranteeing the long-term peace and security of its own people if we pool our resources , in terms of military forces , in the field of prevention and in the field of civil crisis management , but also in terms of ensuring cooperation between our security bodies and intelligence services .
For this reason , I believe , we have actually made considerable progress in the last two years in view of the decisions made since the Treaties of Amsterdam and Nice and , in particular , those made at Cologne and subsequent summits .
On this basis , I think that we should press on with developing a European security and defence policy once the necessary conditions for doing so are in place .
In our opinion , we have to recognise that it will be necessary to make certain structural changes to achieve this .
This is because we believe that it will only work if , firstly , the Member States realise that only the joint institutions can act and that bilateral initiatives also weaken the individuals concerned , even if they think that it makes them appear particularly powerful in the media .
The second point is that the structures in the different institutions will also have to dovetail to avoid there being any duplication of work .
It does not , in my opinion , make any sense for there to be committees on civil crisis management in both the Commission and the Council , with the High Representative .
That is why I wish , on behalf of the European Parliament , to repeat our position that in the long term the duties of the Commissioner for External Relations and those of the High Representative should be merged within the Commission .
That should happen in order to ensure that there really is a uniform approach and so as to have uniform structures .
This has nothing to do with the merits of those specifically involved at the moment ; it is a question of structure .
On this basis we must also , of course , make sure that this person has special relations with the Council so as to give their work the appropriate legitimacy at that level .
I also think , however , that we can make it clear that added value really is being generated .
I should like to give just a few examples here .
I believe , for example , that the large anti-terrorism coalition would not have been formed in this way had it not been for the particular European influence exerted by the troika 's travelling to the Middle East , which yielded significant results .
I do not believe that the large anti-terrorism coalition will be able to exist in the long term if the European Union does not foster stability in the Mediterranean area through the Barcelona process .
For this reason , I also believe that the European Union has the task of addressing the root causes which sow the emotional seeds of terrorism , whether it be in the Middle East , in the relations between Pakistan and India , or in other parts of the world where we should make a particular effort to make our contribution to securing peace .
In this process we have to recognise that our relations with the United States take the form of a partnership and that , regardless of all our efforts to develop our own security and defence policy , NATO is still necessary because it alone is able to guarantee the collective security .
If we wish to play a role in politics as a whole , however , we must also actively work to further develop our relations with Russia , build new bridges and provide those countries which at present cannot , should not or do not wish to be members of the European Union with a new framework and a new form of European economic area .
Nevertheless , I should also like to say that all of this will only work if we are also prepared to make the money available in our national budgets to make it possible to really keep our pledge to provide 60 000 people for the Rapid Reaction Force .
We will not be successful in terms of prevention and civil crisis management and we will not continue to play a key role in foreign policy , but will just be passive observers , including in our relations with Russia and the United States of America , if we do not plausibly demonstrate that we have our own military capability .
It is often the case that prevention only works if it is possible to show the country in which you want to intervene to establish peace that you also have military options .
It is often sufficient to possess a military capability - this is shown throughout history - to prevent military resources from even having to be deployed .
That is why realising our vision of having a 60 000-strong Rapid Reaction Force , transport capabilities and our own satellite system by 2003 is decisive for the credibility of the future European foreign and security policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Brok on his excellent rapport , in which he not only asks pertinent questions , but also , and from the outset , provides some valuable answers .
Incidentally , the report is most timely , because , with regard to all issues concerning foreign policy as a whole , in other words , the Union ' s policy towards the rest of the world , security policy in all its aspects and defence policy , the European Parliament is clearly in a state of change .
I was present in this House for the discussion of the Treaty of Amsterdam , when we stated our disappointment at the little progress made on common security and defence policy .
Looking at the point we have reached today , we see that we have come a long way and especially that we have progressed very quickly .
The events of recent months and weeks have shown , whatever may have been said about them this morning , that the European Union is becoming , and is being perceived to be , an increasingly important player on the world stage .
This gives us both greater visibility and , of course , imposes greater responsibilities on us .
I am sure I am not the only person here to have been confronted over the last few weeks with the question : ' but where are the European Union ' s troops ? ' asked by people who have completely forgotten that we are not involved and are far from being involved .
This means quite simply that we are increasingly perceived to be a player on the global stage and that we must have all the institutional , financial and other means available if we are to successfully achieve all of these responsibilities .
This result could clearly only have been achieved as a result of the energy and dynamism both of the High Representative for Security and Cooperation and of Commissioner Patten , who , in a spirit of perfect cooperation , both manage to represent us superbly on all world stages , in all crisis hot-spots on our own continent and in much more far-flung parts of the world .
We , the Member States of the European Union , are also increasingly managing - and the Belgian presidency has played a part in this - to speak with one voice in international bodies and I am thinking in particular of the United Nations , which currently play an extremely important role .
We therefore wish to see ourselves become a major political player on the international stage .
This will enable us to better shoulder our responsibilities so that we can contribute to peace and stability across the world .
This policy is progressing at the pace we had envisaged .
I am sure you know that this is an open process , in which the Fifteen want to involve the candidate countries and the allied non-Member States of the European Union .
Negotiations currently taking place with NATO are due to establish the methods of cooperation between ourselves and the Alliance , in order to ensure access to NATO ' s resources and capacities and in order to avoid efforts being pointlessly duplicated .
As you know , these negotiations are not straightforward and you also know why they are so complex .
Ultimately , however , you also know - and I repeat what the presidency has already stated on previous occasions - that we have no intention of allowing this process of establishing the means to guarantee our being operational becoming hostage to events within NATO .
We shall lead the way and we shall continue to work to achieve the objectives I have mentioned .
I fully agree that conflict prevention and crisis management are amongst the foremost priorities of our action , and , as Mr Brok has said , these priorities must lead us to be committed at every stage .
We shall maintain this commitment on a long-term basis in various crisis situations , whether it be in the Balkans , the Middle East or in Africa .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis which has its origins in the terrible attacks on 11 September in the United States has shown that the European Union is capable of reacting in a rapid and coherent manner .
Our reaction bore witness to horizontal coordination and has , in fact , transcended the pillar division .
I believe that that too is , and will be , an important element in the further development of our common policy .
I should like to point out that the European Council has rarely been so outspoken over the past few weeks as it was in that context .
We have decided to adopt a voluntaristic policy vis-à-vis the Arab-Muslim world and we are united with many to give out the same message , namely that the crisis that has broken out and the fight against international terrorism can in no way be considered a war between civilisations .
This morning , we were reminded of the importance of resuming the peace process in the Middle East .
You know that the presidency will be making a visit to that region shortly in the hope of giving out that message and of receiving backing for this .
As I have already stated , our campaign in the Middle East is still based on the implementation of the roadmap , as can be found in the recommendation of the Mitchell committee .
( FR ) With regard to the Western Balkans , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is committed to the systematic implementation of the conclusions of the Zagreb Summit .
Cooperation with the International Criminal Court for the former Yugoslavia is one factor allowing progress to be made on negotiating stabilisation and association agreements with every country that participated in this summit , of which the transfer of Mr Milosevic to The Hague was the most striking symbol , although not the only one .
We welcome the progress made by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia since its return to democracy a little more than a year ago .
With regard to Kosovo , we are focussing our action on the preparations for the general elections of 17 November , and we are delighted to see that more than 170 000 Serbs have enrolled on the electoral registers , which provides hope that the result may be a balanced one .
The situation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is unfortunately not so straightforward and , here also , it has taken all the efforts of our representative , Mr Solana , of Commissioner Patten , and many others , to prevent the crisis that took place there from unfolding into a true civil war .
As you know , the situation remains extremely delicate and Mrs Pack even drew my attention to the matter when I reported on the General Affairs Council decisions of 8 October .
We are all aware of this and we are monitoring the situation , as you and many others are , extremely closely .
I should nevertheless like to emphasise that events in Macedonia have shown that close cooperation between NATO and ourselves is possible and that we are able to play a role in the prevention and management of crises .
( NL ) Another region in crisis where the European Union is pursuing an active control and prevention policy is Africa .
The troika will shortly be making a few visits to that region , too , in order to keep the two peace processes that are running there , and are sometimes faltering , I have to say , namely the Lusaka peace process for Congo and the Arusha peace process for Burundi , on track and to ensure that they can herald the end of the military action and hence peace .
For without peace , the reconstruction of Africa is not possible .
Could I finally draw your attention to the meeting of the European-African Ministerial Conference of 11 October ? It was a great success from the point of view that a political dialogue was entered into , whereby , needless to say , due consideration was given to the development of democracy and human rights .
Lastly , with regard to our strategic partnerships , I should like to emphasise that our relations with Russia have also been given a new boost at all levels .
Little by little , we are seeing the establishment , not so much of mechanisms but of forms of contact and dialogue , which enable us to envisage genuine cooperation and a genuine strategic partnership .
This development can only contribute to the stability not only of our own continent , but also to stability throughout the world .
I must , however , state quite clearly on this subject , that this rapprochement between the European Union and Russia , in no way means that we will be any the less vigilant over the situation in Chechnya .
We are continuing to discuss the matter and to insist on the need to find a political solution .
Lastly , I should like to mention the Fourth EU-China Summit , which also enabled us to strengthen political dialogue but , once again , this political dialogue includes the issue of human rights .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have limited speaking time and the fire drill did not , of course , help and for this I apologise .
Out of all that has been said , however , I should like to take up , in conclusion , the three following aspects : a strong Europe , a Europe that is able to project its influence onto the international stage is , above all , a Europe in which internal cohesion supports external action ; secondly , it is a Europe in which the synergies between Presidency , Member States , Commission and High Representatives are exploited to the full and , lastly , it is a Europe in which action , whether it be in the field of justice , defence , cooperation or anything else , matches the rhetoric .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Brok , ladies and gentlemen , thank you .
I am sorry for the reasons to which you alluded , President .
The fire drill has meant that this important debate is in a sense an inadvertent victim of the importance of enhancing our parliamentary security .
I will unfortunately have to leave shortly because the minister and I have to get to Bucharest by dawn - a challenging journey at this time of evening from Strasbourg !
We have to be there for the opening of the Stability Pact conference tomorrow , which , and it is not entirely irrelevant to what the honourable Member says in his report , at least indicates a measure of success over the last couple of years for the evolving common , foreign and security policy .
I would like to congratulate the honourable Member , on what is a very comprehensive and valuable report .
As he said in his own remarks , the evolution of a common foreign and security policy is shown to be even more timely by the appalling events of the autumn of 2001 .
The honourable Member 's report gives a very accurate overview of what has been achieved so far .
I particularly welcome his proposals for a strong parliamentary dimension in the common foreign and security policy .
It is very important that we put down deeper democratic roots for the common foreign and security policy and that should involve not only this distinguished Parliament but also national parliaments .
I have made a point of trying to appear in front of the select committees in national parliaments on bilateral visits to the Member States .
If anybody challenges the progress that we have made in developing a CFSP they should compare what happened during this crisis with what happened in the run-up to the Gulf War at the beginning of the 1990s or how we coped with the Balkans in the early to mid-1990s .
We cannot yet , as pop singers would perhaps suggest , ' strut our stuff ' . But we have some reason for being modestly proud of the achievements that have been made so far .
I fully agree with the report 's analysis of the prerequisites of successful CFSP action .
We have to bring together the resources and instruments of all the EU players : the Community , the Council and the Member States .
I doubt whether history will regard the present institutional structures as ideal .
I do not put it any more strongly than that , but the High Representative and I have worked as hard as we could make these structures work as effectively as is possible .
What will happen in the future is for other people greater than me to determine .
I do not want to go through all my agreement with the honourable Member on individual regional and geographical areas , not least because Bucharest calls .
But I want to stress one or two points he made .
I could , for example , have gone into a detailed paragraph or two agreeing on Russia and the Ukraine , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , on the Balkans in general and on the importance of getting back to Mitchell in the Middle East .
The two points I should like to mention briefly are these : firstly , we rightly talk about the importance of trying to ensure that the international campaign against terrorism is not seen as a conflict between the West - Europe and North America - and the world of Islam .
It is absolutely right that we have to make it clear this is not a clash of civilisations .
But we have a real opportunity and responsibility in the European Union to use the mechanisms of the Barcelona process , to use the mechanisms of the Euro-Med partnership in order to strengthen the relationship between Europe and the Islamic world .
We have a real chance and a real responsibility to do this .
I hope we will seize it .
I also hope we will look very hard at our relationship with the Gulf Cooperation Council in this regard .
The other point that I want to pick up from Mr Brok 's remarks and from the report is simply this : in my judgment , we have to try to ensure that we can make use of this crisis to open doors and windows which have otherwise been shut .
That affects , for example , our future relationship with Pakistan .
It also , in my judgment , very clearly touches on our relationship with Iran .
I have no doubt at all that the Iranians are serious in wanting to establish a better , more profound relationship between themselves and the European Union .
I have no doubt at all that they are serious about wanting to negotiate a trade and cooperation agreement with us .
They know perfectly well that any arrangements with us will involve a dialogue on human rights and related matters .
But I believe they are serious interlocutors and that it is incumbent upon us to respond as positively as possible to the overtures they have made .
On Afghanistan I will only say that I look forward - I hope sooner , rather than later - to the time when I will have to come back to Parliament and the Council and point out the financial consequences for all of us of the political promises and pledges we have made about the future of Afghanistan .
There will be an important moment when we have to put our money and our diplomatic efforts where our convictions have been and should remain .
Finally , I would like to say once again how important it is to mobilise all our institutions , all our competences , as effectively as possible in pursuit of a common foreign and security policy .
Sometimes it is possible to underestimate the contribution which the Commission can make and wants to make in the CFSP field .
There is a great deal that we can do in order to make sure that the CFSP develops effectively as a way of reflecting Europe 's growing clout in the international political arena .
The rapporteur has been well ahead of his time in pressing us to do more in this field .
I hope that we will live up to his expectations in the months and years ahead .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Brok on his report on the progress achieved in the implementation of the common foreign and security policy , a report whose objective is not only to sing the praises of this policy , but also to point out its inadequacies and deficiencies .
It goes without saying that the European Community , making a virtue out of necessity , has , thanks to the determination of the Commission , the Presidency-in-Office of the Council and the High Representative , seen its visibility increased since the attacks on 11 September .
This morning , during the debate on the European Council in Ghent , the President-in-Office of the Council fairly diplomatically said that an awkward situation had arisen as a result of the tripartite meeting that had taken place outside the summit .
To a certain extent , Mr President , it is logical that in times of crisis each person tries to save their own skin , but , in my opinion , it is important not to give way to the temptation to act unilaterally , or , to be more precise , on this particular occasion , trilaterally .
Europe is strong when united , but when fragmented is weak .
For this reason it is important that Europe should be able to speak with one single voice .
And the European Union , in the aftermath of the situation that has arisen as a result of the September 11 terrorist attacks , has to rethink its common foreign and security policy , including within it the fight against terrorism , speeding up the achievement of its objectives and making the common strategies mechanism more efficient .
Today , unilateralism , including that of the most prosperous and powerful countries , as we have already witnessed , is nothing but a pipe dream .
In the globalised world we are living in today , politics , diplomacy , security and defence are interrelated concepts that have to respond to the new threats we are having to face .
Security becomes a universal idea that cannot be split up , far removed from the traditional concepts of state and status quo .
In turn , defence is constantly changing its boundaries in a world in which the perception of these is ever more blurred : nowadays , we cannot only consider the territorial defence of one State faced with a possible attack by another , but rather , as has been correctly said , we have armies that lack clear enemies and enemies that lack armies .
In this world of globalisation , not only economic , but where terror , politics , diplomacy , trade , aid to development , security and defence are all interrelated concepts , it will depend on us to be capable of understanding and accepting that dangers and conflicts affect us all in the same measure and the response to these will also have to be the same for all those concerned .
But we will have to start - and I am convinced of this - by creating a true common EU foreign and security policy with a common conscience that is efficient , coherent and visible , as Mr Brok ' s report recommends .
Mr President , Mr Brok 's report , which , as usual , is very carefully drafted , has come just at the right time , a time when we need some pointers for where the common foreign and security policy is heading .
For us , ' common ' means above all , and I am saying this deliberately now , that we must not have , or even give the impression of having , a board of directors issuing instructions and determining policy .
' Common ' also means , and here I would support my colleague , Mr Brok , that the High Representative 's duties need to be combined with those of the relevant Commissioner .
' Common ' also means ensuring that we have a European Union Rapid Reaction Force as soon as possible .
The policy has to be European to the extent that it clearly defines European objectives , and this means that we show solidarity with the United States of America but also insist that this solidarity is not a one-way street .
If I have to read at a time like this that the United States of America is still rejecting the International Criminal Court and that Congress is even debating whether or not those who cooperate with the Criminal Court should be penalised , then this is not what I understand by developing a policy based on solidarity between the European Union and the United States .
Solidarity with the United States must therefore also mean our drawing the United States ' attention to those areas where it is necessary to pursue a common policy in the world community .
My third and final point is that if we form alliances , in particular this alliance against terrorism , an alliance which we must and should form , we will more often find ourselves facing a contradiction or conflict between our strategic concerns on the one hand and our human rights concerns on the other .
We should be under no illusion about this .
Anyone who wishes to enter into an alliance , and I do , with the Soviet Union , with Russia , with China and with the Islamic States , will repeatedly encounter this contradiction .
We should simply realise that we also need to make it absolutely clear to the public that this contradiction exists .
We need to work towards both objectives .
We should never abandon our aim of securing respect for human rights in the medium and long term when we have to form a strategic alliance , because if you support the shahs of today you will get the Ayatollah Khomeinis of tomorrow .
This can happen if we do not remain vigilant and at the same time put the issue of human rights at the centre of our foreign policy .
Mr President , our group recognises the efforts made by Mr Brok in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , which has been a positive effort to reconcile the various contributions .
However , we do not agree with the fundamental aspects of his report and , for this reason , we cannot support it with our vote .
As an example , I will now briefly mention three of these aspects .
Firstly , 11 September was an opportune moment for the European Union to demonstrate that it could play a positive , peaceful and reflective role with the United States , in order to find , in the International Criminal Tribunal and through International Law , a solution to the conflict .
What appeared to be taking place in this direction has now been frustrated by the emergence of the Schröder - Blair - Chirac triumvirate which has missed this opportunity .
Secondly , the report gives great importance to NATO , when we think that NATO works against the interests of the European Union .
Lastly , it is very important that the European Union should play a role in the Middle East and in the Western Sahara , and we are also wasting this opportunity .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , entirely in line with the current international situation , the rapporteur , my fellow MEP Mr Brok , is of the opinion that the fight against international terrorism should become one of the European foreign and security policy ' s core tasks .
This task allocation allows me to draw the Council ' s and Commission ' s attention to the security situation in the Western Balkans and the Indonesian Archipelago .
Further to a recently published scientific analysis of the question whether Bosnia might function as European base for Osama bin Laden ' s terrorist network , I should like to find out from the Council and Commission whether they have any concrete indications that Bin Laden followers are indeed active in the Western section of the Balkans and if so , how the EU and its Member States , obviously in close cooperation with the US , intend to stand up to this dangerous destabilisation of that region .
Furthermore , the Brok report calls for a continuation of the political dialogue with Indonesia .
I expect the Council and Commission to constantly monitor the security situation on the Moluccas where Bin Laden followers are also conducting a jihad against indigenous Christians .
Finally , I happily vote in favour of the amendment by Mr Gahler which states that the NATO and its extension on our continent are still vital as a guarantee for security across Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I know I am repeating what others have already said when I say that the tragic attacks of 11 September have changed the course of this century ' s history for ever , but I feel that I can never stress enough how true this is , that the international Community is now faced with a crisis that is as great as it is unprecedented and unfamiliar , with rules and trends that not even the most experienced of political analysts is able to predict .
However , at a time such as this , it is important for the European Union to show itself to be as , and more , united than before and as , and more , capable than before of reacting with one voice .
At a time such as this , when all our worst fears are unexpectedly realised , we realise the importance of this Europe that we are integrating , the importance of being united and having coordinating structures able to operate in real time , of being able to think and act all together and in respect for all the positions .
It is certainly true that we still have a long way to go : the common foreign and security policy is not yet operative and there are still complex issues to be ironed out in its operating mechanism , particularly in the area of national sovereignties , but we now need , more than ever before , to speed up our work .
I therefore cannot fail to congratulate the rapporteur , the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , Mr Brok , on his report and on the priorities he has set for the forthcoming year in this area , particularly with regard to what - as we have been witnessing in recent months - will be the real challenge of the new millennium : preventing conflicts , finding a non-military solution to the crisis and , most importantly , combating terrorism .
You see , the greater the possibility of seeing Europe united in terms of foreign policy , of making our foreign policy practical reality , the more successful Europe ' s internal politics will be .
Quite frankly , the acceleration of the euro , acceleration on the economic side of things , has not been matched by acceleration on the political front . Well then , there must be acceleration in political matters , and the foreign policy is crucial if that is to happen , particularly at this time .
If we do this , we will achieve a stronger , more resilient Europe and a stronger euro , and we will certainly be able to take a better approach to enlargement and , moreover , to compete on equal terms with the dollar and NAFTA - Canada , the United States and Mexico - the Agreement as it stands , a market which already exists and already presents important political points of reference .
We must act and we must be fully confident in what we are doing : the foreign policy will become vital in the short-term future , especially for the new generations .
Mr President , Commissioner , if you would be good enough to take an interest in the debate , ladies and gentlemen , in our efforts to construct a common foreign and security policy we must not lose sight of the fact that , in the future , as in the present and the past , the European Union will certainly face the risk of its forces becoming involved in armed action .
Let us not be under any illusion : if this were to happen , it would never be in a ' clean ' war .
No one is in a better position than a soldier to know that a war will always be ' dirty ' and that , despite advances in technology , mankind will never be able to kill off all evil people just by pressing a button if only because it will find it impossible to tell the good from the bad with any degree of certainty .
War will always be dirty and will always be an evil , but it could be ' the lesser of two evils ' , if it is only embarked upon in the aim of achieving a political objective that cannot be achieved through any other means .
To quote Clausewitz , ' War is only the continuation of politics by other means . '
It must , therefore , be ended as soon as its political objective is achieved and must not be embarked upon if there is no chance of achieving this objective .
What is the objective of the war we have just embarked upon in Afghanistan ?
Everyone can see that it is to enable the Afghan people to rid themselves of a regime that has proved its barbarity .
This seems today to be not only desirable , but also possible .
We are sensitive to the suffering that this war is inflicting on the population and hope , therefore , that this objective is achieved as quickly as possible .
We must therefore understand that a halt to hostilities , even a temporary one , would only strengthen the position of the Taliban .
Let us show ourselves to be capable , having learned from the unfortunate experience of the Gulf war , of seeing it through to the end , in other words , to the establishment in Kabul of a regime that is acceptable to all Afghans . Let us show that we are capable of ensuring that country ' s gradual return to peace and stability .
To this end , many of us hope that the European Union will give its support to the negotiations currently taking place under the auspices of the United Nations , between the former king , Zaher Shah and the opposition ' s representative .
I would have liked to hear the personal opinion of Commissioner Patten on this matter .
I realise that he is not present to be able to give an answer , and so I ask you , Mr Lamy , whether you would be good enough to give us your personal reaction to this idea .
Thank you .
Mr President , Mr Haarder could not make it to this session , and so on behalf of the Liberal Group I would like to thank Mr Brok for a well-drafted report , and to congratulate him on this .
The report is a good one , but it still fails to take the full measure of the profound change which has taken place in international politics following 11 September .
We are still unable to grasp the full ramifications of this change ; but we know that it is a very profound one .
The representatives from the United States have stated that a second Cold War has begun , and some have even talked of a third World War .
Here , in Europe , we have been wary of excessive dramatisation and have avoided using the word ' war ' .
My personal view , however , is that , in time , history books will come to refer to this period as the Third World War .
We must very carefully analyse what has happened and what is currently happening , and very prudently come to grips with those problems which are now facing us .
We need a broad global perspective and grasp ; we need something which , in English , can be called ' global governance ' .
Finally , there is the matter which I intended to mention in my own intervention . The progress achieved in the common foreign and security policy during the last few years has been based on the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Rapid advances have been made , particularly in crisis management .
In the Treaty of Amsterdam we also took as our joint task the safeguarding of the Union 's integrity and the maintenance of peace on its external frontiers .
Up to now , no definite content has been given to these new treaty obligations .
In the initial phase at any rate , the main question is probably this : how are the different geographical positions of the various Member States to be taken into account in sharing the burden and dividing the work among them ?
From the point of view of the Union as a whole it may make sense for those Member States situated on its common external frontiers to direct their resources to the control and defence of these borders , and for them to take part in crisis management in a way which is in harmony with this primary task .
I hope that debate will be initiated within the Commission and the Council on the practical implications of the provisions of the Treaty concerning the integrity of the Union and the safeguarding of its frontiers .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I should like to join with other speakers in commending the excellent work of the rapporteur , my colleague Mr Brok .
Any analysis of the evolution of the CFSP would regrettably have to conclude that the Maastricht Treaty sacrificed political integration to ensure economic integration and , as a consequence , undermine the EU 's potential to be a major foreign policy player on the world stage .
Nowhere was this more apparent than during the Bosnian crisis when there was significant disunity among Member States .
Our mediation efforts were dogged by bad luck .
It is also true to say we were ineffective peace-makers .
We finished up as the United States ' junior partner instead of an equal one .
It seemed for a while that we had learned from this grim experience and there was a determined effort in the Treaty of Amsterdam to ensure more coherence in our common foreign and security policy approach .
Although the end-result of the Treaty negotiations represented a step forward , they did not go far enough .
However , I suppose we must be thankful that considerable progress was made at the Cologne , Faro and Helsinki Summits .
Whatever institutional and other changes take place , there will never be real progress unless and until all Member States act and speak as one .
The current situation in the wake of 11 September underlines this point .
The EU had an opportunity to be an equal partner with the United States in responding to this crisis .
Regrettably , the solo run by British Prime Minister Tony Blair has seriously undermined the EU 's influence and our foreign policy strategy .
This problem was further compounded by the decision of the UK , Germany and France to hold a mini-summit prior to the Ghent Council .
If actions like this continue , either on the part of an individual Member State or a group of them , the EU 's common foreign and security policy will be in tatters , despite the best efforts of Commissioner Patten and Mr Solana .
Mr President , allow me to start by echoing the congratulations by my fellow MEPs for the excellent report that Mr Brok has presented again this year .
However , I have to add that I am very interested to find out how the report would fare next year , for just when the common foreign and security policy is being further detailed , it is meeting with enormous new challenges .
The events of 11 September and subsequent events greatly impact on that policy .
They will put it to the test .
It is too early to gain a complete overview of the new security framework and the new threat .
However , we would like to ask the Council and Commission to produce an initial evaluation as soon as possible .
This evaluation should also touch upon the question to what extent the pillar structure forms an obstruction to effective action in the new situation .
External policy has become internal policy , and vice versa .
The European Union is not sufficiently prepared for this at this time .
Conflict prevention and crisis management have taken on a different aspect .
Our approach is often still too regional and too geographic . Horizontal issues must now be thrown into the spotlight .
Increasing use must be made of regional policy in an integrated manner to tackle terrorism and international organised crime which are interrelated in many ways .
The guiding principle in this should be to help each other .
Take countries such as Ukraine .
They form part of the problem which we are now facing because the lack of transparency in countries such as those , forms the ideal breeding ground for all kinds of crimes , to put it mildly .
We have too little control over this because we have not sufficiently developed this kind of cooperation .
Maybe we have focused our attention too much on the Balkans .
That region , too , is a source of security problems , but anyone who studies the ' map of evil ' will realise that the new secondary routes of drugs , arms , illegal immigrants , etc. traverse the Slav Commonwealth .
I am pleased that rapporteur Brok insists on a more effective implementation of EU strategies .
There is more cause for this than ever before .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to echo the congratulations expressed by previous speakers and address just two points in Mr Brok 's report .
My first point concerns conflict prevention .
The case of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia provides us with an example of unsuccessful conflict prevention .
If all of the Members of the Council had worked as intensively as Members of this Parliament have for years to put pressure on all Macedonian governments finally to put an end to the discrimination of the Albanian citizens of that country , then we would not be facing the difficulties and problems which we are now .
If this issue had played a part in the Stabilisation and Association Agreement then the Members of the Council would also have seen it as a precondition and the terrorists from Kosovo would not have had any support for their campaign in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
The Macedonians would not now be under pressure of time to change their constitution almost because of the success of the terrorist campaign , because they would have already done so .
So much for our failure to prevent conflict in this country !
A second matter which is very important to me was addressed by Mr Brok .
I think that the Stability Pact should finally mark the end of the conferences and quick start packages .
The Stability Pact should be closely linked to the work of the Agency for Reconstruction and should perhaps be extended to the Agency for Reconstruction and Development in this region .
For this reason , the Stability Pact should be incorporated in the Commission 's remit ; this is where all of the work has to be done in any case .
We would then be able to avoid resources being wasted because of friction , we would be able to achieve synergies and we would be able to make progress on establishing real stability in the region .
In this way , we would , for example , be able to foster significant and large-scale cooperation in the energy sector .
We would be able to make progress on the free trade area in the region , on constructing transport infrastructure and on combating trafficking in human beings and other commodities .
Many Commission officials will in any case very soon be unemployed because the enlargement negotiations in the Commission are as good as closed in some areas .
Let us give these people something to work on .
Let us hand over responsibility for the Stability Pact to those who can manage it and take it away from those who have in any case already begun to abandon it .
Let us give the Stability Pact to the Commission and , perhaps , to one other wise man , Martti Ahtisaari , in addition , so that it really is a success for the entire region and for the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report under consideration states that the struggle against terrorism must become a central plank in the EU 's foreign and security policy .
What should this policy be ?
September 11 revealed with one bang the prevailing error of the old security policy .
A missile shield gives no defence against terrorism - I said this the night before at the meeting of our committee - nor can justice be created with weapons ; at times , perhaps , it may be possible to put a stop to the perpetration of injustice .
But we are so vulnerable that we are dependent on one another .
The benefit of each depends on that of all others .
I propose that a new fundamental policy line of dependency be created for the Union , both at the United Nations and at the WTO ( concerning which we were speaking ) and also within the Union .
Internal and external security policy must be connected ; the difference between them , after all , has disappeared .
In this policy of dependency , we will use , in the first instance , social workers instead of soldiers ; nurses instead of bombs ; and teachers instead of missiles .
The more people and nations receive justice , the less terrorism will be generated ; this is something which we all know .
I therefore ask the Commission to shape a clear fundamental policy line of dependency for all fields .
We must get away from armed security , this hangover from the cold war .
Who could sleep peacefully with bombs under the bed ?
Mr President , there has only been one victim of this afternoon ' s emergency drill and that is the answer to the question Mr Morillon asked the Commission , to which the Commission must , of course , reply !
I shall , therefore , try to play the role of nurse , by answering , at least in part , Mr Morillon ' s question , which concerns the role of the King in a future Afghan government .
The Northern Alliance , as its name suggests , is composed of various ethnic groups from Northern Afghanistan .
It clearly does not represent the Pashtuns , who account for half of the Afghan population and it goes without saying , therefore , that a government formed or dominated by the Northern Alliance would not meet the criterion of being representative , any more than the Taliban government does , not to mention neighbouring Pakistan ' s position on the Northern Alliance , with which we are all familiar .
We feel that the objective is , therefore , to bring together , in a government , sufficiently representative groups , with the support of Afghanistan ' s neighbours .
The King ' s role , if he is to have one , must , in my opinion , be considered with this objective in mind .
This , Mr Morillon , is basically all I can say on the subject .
I admit that it does not provide a completely adequate answer to your question and I shall ensure that you are given a more precise answer tomorrow .
Commissioner , I asked you whether you might consider my idea , which is that the Stability Pact should be linked to the Agency for reconstruction and development and , in particular , to the work of the Commission , which , very soon , will have enough staff to be able to undertake the work .
I am sorry ; I thought this was a suggestion and not a question .
I am not going to comment on this point .
You are probably aware that there are various ideas about the way in which the Growth and Stability Pact should be managed .
This is part of a network of institutions set up a few years ago , probably in conditions where concern for total coherence did not prevail .
We can probably do better in the future .
I agree with you , Mrs Pack , that the European Agency for Reconstruction in Kosovo has done a good job and I think that everyone would recognise that .
The links between the Stability Pact , the Agency and the action undertaken by my colleague , Mr Patten will probably , at the right time , be open to suggestion .
It remains to be seen whether these suggestions will emanate from the Council or from the Commission .
On this point , I reserve the position of the Commission .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 7.45 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Turkey
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports :
( A5-0343 / 2001 ) by Alain Lamassoure , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the 2000 Regular Report from the Commission on Turkey ' s progress towards accession ( COM ( 2000 ) 713 - C5-0613 / 2000 - 2000 / 2014 ( COS ) ) ;
( A5-0338 / 2001 ) by Alain Lamassoure , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council regulation on pre-accession financial assistance for Turkey ( COM ( 2001 ) 230 - C5-0219 / 2001 - 2001 / 0097 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , since the last resolution adopted last November on the basis of the report by Philippe Morillon , which I welcome , Turkey has been through a year of great contrasts : it was a black year in terms of the economy , a tense year politically , and a year of progress , though unequal progress , in terms of the pre-accession process .
On the one hand , we should welcome the real advances .
Given the very serious financial crisis in Turkey since the beginning of the year , the government has had to play by ear .
At the instigation of Mr Dervis , a radical stabilisation and recovery plan was signed by the three coalition government partners .
It came into operation in the spring , under relatively satisfactory conditions , which have made it possible to undertake basic reforms , which had been put off for too long , and , more generally , to establish a healthier relationship between politics and the economy .
In the short term , however , one of its unavoidable effects has been a severe drop in GDP , of 8 % this year , which may have serious social consequences .
The worsening of world economic conditions , both before and after 11 September , can , unfortunately , only make efforts to recover more difficult .
During 2001 , Turkey has been genuinely committed to a process of bringing itself closer to European democratic standards .
We should welcome the fact that , at a particularly difficult economic time , a large part of government and parliamentary activity has been devoted to basic reforms linked to this European process .
In March , the government presented its national programme for the adoption of the acquis .
It is true that this first list of reforms is still vague as to the timetable for implementation and the exact scope of the proposed measures . However , since September , the Grand National Assembly has begun to consider several dozen - around 34 - constitutional amendments , the first half of which were adopted at the beginning of October .
The results still lag behind current democratic standards : the death penalty has not been totally abolished , the non-Turkish languages are no longer banned , but are not fully recognised , the National Security Council remains , but civilians play a more significant part within it .
Above all , most regrettably , the principle of the supremacy of international law - and thus , possibly , in the near future , of European law - over national law has been expressly ruled out .
Undeniable progress has nonetheless been made , which the European Commission and the Council of Europe have welcomed as such .
Furthermore , on 8 October , the government tabled a second legislative package of rights and freedoms , which relate to the penal code and penal procedure and the laws on anti-terrorism , the press , political parties , associations and demonstrations .
The third advance outside parliament was that this summer saw the beginnings of a public debate on the taboo subject of the role of the military in political life .
Finally , I would also like to highlight President Sezer ' s courage in denouncing corruption , an endemic disease of Turkish society , and in using his legislative veto against texts which represented a step backwards for democracy .
Because there are also delays and even retreats .
In the political sphere , the year was marked by dramatic events in Turkish prisons .
I will leave it to Mr Daniel Cohn-Bendit , who chaired the parliamentary committee which visited Turkish prisons , to express our views on this subject in a moment .
The draft reform of the audiovisual legislation was rightly criticised by the president of the republic , since it did not comply with the principle of the independence of the audiovisual sector in relation to the political powers .
The dissolution of the main opposition party ( the Virtue Party ) demonstrated that the political system has not stabilised and that changes in the law regarding the status of political parties are required as a matter of urgency .
In general , a gulf persists between good intentions and reality in the human rights field , where progress is too slow : the torture and degrading treatment of detainees continues to be widespread , freedom of expression is still unusually restricted and several thousand people currently in prison for offences would , under our laws , be considered prisoners of conscience .
The main groups working to defend human rights remain subject to what amounts to legal harassment .
In the South-East , the end of armed terrorism by the PKK has not yet been turned to account in embarking on an overall policy towards the south-east provinces and Kurdish identity , and , likewise , the unambiguous European Court of Human Rights judgment has not been used as an opportunity to set free Leyla Zana and the other former parliamentarians from the Democratic People ' s Party ( HADEP ) who are still in prison .
Finally , since the consideration of the Poos report by Parliament , we have seen Mr Denktash ' s surprising refusal to restart the negotiations proposed by Commissioner Verheugen , which I welcome , and the UN Secretary-General on the status of Cyprus .
And we note that Turkey continues to block the draft agreement between the European Union and NATO , a draft which is all the more urgent given current international tension .
In this area , as in others , the impression remains that the signs of openness which are , on occasion , expressed by governmental authorities , may be challenged by military powers , which still have an unusual influence on Turkish politics .
Since our resolution of 15 November 2000 , which is cited in our current motion for a resolution , our Turkish partners have been aware of the importance our Parliament attaches to the official recognition of the Armenian genocide .
We hope that the processes of dialogue , such as those which bring together former diplomats and academics from Armenia and Turkey , will lead to a common understanding based on scientifically-recognised historical facts .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the coming year will be crucial in testing the real desire of Turkish political leaders and Turkish society as a whole to move closer to the European Union .
Over the coming weeks it will be possible to gauge the exact scope of the constitutional and legislative reforms regarding the rule of law .
Coming months will be vital in judging efforts to modernise the economy .
Finally , on the crucial issue of the status of Cyprus , after 27 years of political deadlock , the moment of truth extends from now until autumn 2002 .
The end of negotiations on Cyprus ' s accession to the EU are set for that date , and this will make it necessary , finally , for both parties to adopt a clear position .
Our judgment will be based on the facts .
Turkey wishes to have its own models for society and democracy .
This is a perfectly legitimate objective .
The European Union does not impose one single model .
On the contrary , its special achievement lies in bringing about the coexistence and collaboration of peoples who have had very different histories , for a long time mutually hostile , and who , on occasion , have very different ideas on fundamental subjects such as the organisation of society , changing moral values , relations between religion and politics , the status of minority communities or races and the application of the subsidiarity principle .
But there are two needs which we all acknowledge .
First of all , that there are universal values which make it necessary that fundamental human and democratic rights are guaranteed in the same way everywhere ; secondly , that the models conceived in previous centuries must be adjusted to the needs of this one .
European integration is a way of helping one another to comply with these requirements and to preserve our special qualities in an exciting and dangerous world .
Mr President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , I should like to comment on the issues which relate to women 's rights in Turkey , to which the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has paid too little attention .
Allow me , therefore , to point out that very little progress has been made with women 's rights in Turkey , rights which we , the Committee , consider to be a sine qua non to the integration of Turkey into the European Union , because women 's rights are human rights .
I understand that the Turkish National Assembly started a debate today on the reform of the Civil Code , numerous articles of which infringe the United Nations convention on abolishing all forms of discrimination against women , despite Turkey 's having ratified the convention .
I trust parliament will pass this bill , as adopted by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs in June .
However , the crucial question which arises is whether the law will also apply to existing families because , unfortunately , the Justice Committee submitted an amendment exempting existing families at the last minute .
It is quite unacceptable to introduce changes to the Civil Code that only apply to future generations and I know that women 's organisations in Turkey have expressed their total opposition to this .
The national programme for integration into the European Union talks of revising the constitution so as to guarantee sexual equality ; however , there are no plans , whatsoever , to adopt positive measures which , as the women 's organisations have pointed out , would allow all the laws which institutionalise discrimination against women to be amended .
As far as women 's right to work is concerned , I should like to highlight both the high rate of unemployment among women - 39.6 % and even higher in agricultural areas - and the limited number of women who benefit from national insurance .
I should like to call on Turkey to abolish all forms of discrimination against women and I should , of course , like to call on Europe to provide the economic and technical assistance needed to put this into practice .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mr Lamassoure for his report , in which he also points out that , as a Member of NATO , Turkey is a very significant partner particularly at this time .
Despite all of the criticism which we have rightly voiced in the past and still do today , in respect of the constitution and human rights , we have to say that , compared with most of its neighbours , Turkey is a country which is exceptionally pro-western , democratic and respectful of human rights .
Everything is relative and must be seen in its context .
We also have to recognise that progress has been made in a number of areas and that , despite the severe economic problems which Turkey is currently experiencing , it is still attempting , by amending its constitution and changing the composition of its security committee , to ensure that the civilian political forces are given more powers to act in more areas .
We will have to check to see whether all of this is sufficient .
Commissioner , you will have to help us to respect the Copenhagen Criteria .
The Copenhagen Criteria explicitly state that we need to see developments on the political aspects for accession negotiations even to be justified .
We will have to assess this on a case-by-case basis .
If further negotiations get underway we will also have to answer the question of whether Turkey is in a position to meet the conditions of the European internal market .
At this stage , I should like to mention just two points , which will provide a tangible touchstone as the European Union embarks on this very complex development against the background of a very dangerous situation for security policy .
Personally , I cannot understand why Turkey refuses to seek a compromise under the European security and defence policy over the issue of the conditions under which it will be involved and what kind of cooperation there will be with NATO .
For me this is a test case .
We should not allow there to be any blackmail on this issue .
I believe that there has to be a willingness to accept a compromise which was negotiated in Budapest and blocked by the military .
Surely we should now be in a position to find our way back to these criteria and agree on them .
The second point concerns what should be done about Cyprus .
Is Turkey prepared to seek a constructive solution in Cyprus ?
If a solution is not possible , how will it react when the European Union enlarges ?
I believe that these are two very tangible issues on the basis of which Turkey 's credibility can be judged .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Lamassoure on his report .
It is a very good report .
Some people think that it is too soft .
I do not believe that it is too soft ; it simply uses a language which leaves the way open for a dialogue with Turkey and we want to enter into this dialogue .
There are a number of hard points , however , which we need to discuss with Turkey , and certainly there is still a need to discuss the issue of human rights , in particular .
It has been mentioned that people are in prison who should not be , first and foremost Leyla Zana .
Turkey could and should , particularly in the light of rulings made by the European courts , ensure that they are released without delay .
On the issue of Kurdish rights too , much remains to be done .
It is obvious that the language , which , thanks to constitutional amendments , can now be used , should also be employed in the official media as soon as possible .
The state of emergency could then be lifted relatively quickly in the provinces in which it is still in force .
The constitutional amendments which Turkey has made are positive steps .
We definitely wish to take note of them .
However , now it is a question , firstly , of removing the constraints still connected to them , for example the death penalty , and , of course , of ensuring that the constitutional amendments are also implemented .
A major task for Turkey is to do this in the very near future .
On the subject of time , I should like to come back to an idea which I put forward when I had the honour of drawing up a report for this Parliament comprising a road map or timetable , and that is why tomorrow we will also be proposing that Turkey , itself , should table a timetable next year showing how it intends to meet the political Copenhagen criterion .
Satisfaction of this political criterion is the precondition for our also being able to negotiate with Turkey .
After all , this is the aim of the whole exercise , of which this report is also a part .
I should also , however , like to address two points , which continue to be crucial for relations between the European Union and Turkey .
The first point is Turkey 's assistance in shaping an active and efficient external security policy .
We know that at the end of the day this also presupposes that we are able to use NATO resources and this is still a stumbling block for Turkey .
Turkey needs to know that this is damaging its prospects .
The final problem is Cyprus .
Here , too , I should like to say quite clearly that it is important to resolve the Cyprus problem , firstly , for the Turkish population of Cyprus and secondly , and undoubtedly , for the Greek population of Cyprus , the whole of Europe and Turkey itself .
Turkey simply has not realised this .
I would stress something which I have said repeatedly in the past : Turkey 's path to the European Union is via Cyprus .
Its assistance with resolving the Cyprus issue is not a precondition for our accepting Cyprus into the European Union , but it would be a basis on which we could enter into serious discussions about Turkey 's membership of the European Union .
Mr President , the Liberal Group welcomes Mr Lamassoure 's report , which we find balanced and thoroughly informed .
It will be closely studied in Turkey , where the reformers will find much to encourage them in their efforts to bring Turkey forward on the track of modernisation , liberalisation , full respect for fundamental rights and social and economic progress .
So far the majorities in the Grand National Assembly for reform are great , but could I urge our colleagues inside the Turkish parliament to respond to this report in a truly parliamentary fashion ?
Why not pass a resolution calling for their government fully to respect the rulings of all the international courts , including the European Court of Human Rights here in Strasbourg ?
Why not pass a resolution supporting the setting up of the Rapid Reaction Force and why not pass a resolution to bring pressure to bear upon Mr Denktash to work towards the integration of Turkish Cypriots into the European Union ?
Such reciprocity between our two parliaments would demonstrate , in a dramatic way , that Turkey is truly advancing upon its European journey .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the interpreters for being here in greater numbers than us to translate this very important debate which is being held at such a late hour .
Yes , Mr Pasqua , you will have the right to speak . That will be very interesting .
It is not late . It is the morning for you .
As you know , in any event our political leanings vary from morning till night . So there is no problem .
I would like to say , not to repeat what we have said amongst ourselves since Mr Lamassoure began his report , that it is actually not only a well-packaged report , but also one which rightly says things clearly , being wise and measured .
It is also based on a high degree of consensus , since Mr Lamassoure has really tried to bring together all the opinions in this House .
One thing is clear : Turkey is trying to make reforms , Turkey is making efforts , but , nevertheless , things are moving very , very slowly .
And things are moving very slowly not out of wickedness but because of the fact that democratic culture , the culture of openness , is not a culture which , in a still very authoritarian society , has been imposed on the behaviour of all parties ; on the behaviour of governors , on the behaviour of certain political forces or on the behaviour of the military .
Our role as the European Union is not , therefore , simply to give lessons , but , rather , to accompany Turkey on the journey towards democracy , in other words , to have positions to defend .
And that is why I will make a comment , and I would ask all those who still wish to tell Turkey that there was a genocide seventy-five years ago - which is true - in what way does that help the debate in Turkey today ?
I do not think that that helps it .
So , what we have in today ' s resolution , in this report , is the possibility of holding a genuine , heated dialogue with Turkish society , with the Turkish government , on our notion of democracy , on the notion of freedoms , on our notion of the enlargement of Europe , and , therefore , of the place that Cyprus can and must hold within Europe , and the place which Turkey can and should hold in this process .
I think we should be clear , however .
This evolution will perhaps be more discouraging at some times than at others .
The European Parliament , the societies of the Member States of the European Union , will not show indefinite patience if the situation does not appear to be improving .
I would therefore like to end by appealing to the Turkish parliamentarians up there in the gallery , and say to them that if they really want the Turkey which they love and govern today to join the European Union , they must be aware that the efforts which our notion of democracy requires of Turkey are efforts which go beyond what is being undertaken at the moment by the Turkish Grand Assembly .
They are efforts which go beyond what seems acceptable to the Turkish military .
If they do not go further , our future will perhaps not be a common one , which would be a shame .
Mr President , I think it important that we send two clear messages today .
The first must be that we want Turkey as a member of the EU and as a member of the European family .
It will be good for Turkey , but it will also be good for ourselves .
The second message must be that Turkey is faced with a number of tasks , including that of being honest about its history and its genocide of one and a half million Armenians , half a million Assyrians , Chaldeans and Syrians and several hundred thousand Greeks .
In addition , there are the tasks - not only on paper but also in practice and in the real world - of improving the conditions in Turkish prisons , ceasing to keep prisoners in solitary confinement , guaranteeing the rights of minorities and ensuring democratic progress not only for minorities but , I would emphasise , for the whole of the Turkish people .
There are the tasks of completely abolishing the death penalty and of getting the political process under way that is necessary if political life in the Turkish state is to be democratised .
I have read my fellow MEP ' s , Mr Lamassoure ' s , report very carefully .
I have to say that he is very diplomatic .
I think the report is excellent , but I also think it needs to be more precise on a number of points , and a number of amendments have , therefore , also been tabled , not only by my group but also by other groups , and I believe that most of them must be supported .
There is a single exception .
I do not think that the EU should interfere in the matter of where Turkey has embassies .
However , I also think that the report is sound , and I shall recommend voting in favour of it , but also , of course , in favour of the amendments tabled by , for example , my group .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have listened carefully to Mr Lamassoure and the Members who have just spoken .
I will surprise nobody by reminding you of the position of the French delegation of my group .
I have tried in vain to understand why the majority of this House have an absolute desire for Turkey to join the European Union .
For a start , most of the territory of Turkey is not in Europe .
You have decided to urge her to join us .
In reality , this decision has but one justification , which Mr Brok has just confirmed , and that is that Turkey belongs to NATO , and that it is therefore desirable for there to be a certain resemblance between the European Union , as some people imagine it , and NATO .
I have just listened to what Mr Lamassoure said , and what he said in his report , which was full of reservations , of observations which should lead us to ask questions , and while I believe that we should be careful about trying to promote or impose our institutional system or our value system , which is too often our tendency , there are naturally things which are not acceptable .
And it is true that while we are perfectly aware of the difficulties faced by Turkey as a result of the presence of Islamic fundamentalist elements on their territory , which are a danger , which require certain measures to be taken , at the same time we must accept that , in terms of democratic principles , the journey they have to make is still , to say the least , very long .
And besides , many of you have said so before me . But I will add something else .
What I do not understand , even though a certain number of countries have , unanimously in some cases , such as France , condemned the genocide suffered by the Armenians , is why the current Turkish government and Turkish people , who are not responsible for the past , but who are responsible for a collective history , are determined not to accept responsibility for that genocide .
Other countries which have been responsible for genocides have been better able to accept their responsibilities .
I think it is justifiable , here and now , to ask them to do the same .
In any event , as long as it has not been recognised , as far as we are concerned , we will remain firmly opposed to Turkey ' s entry into the European Union .
Mr President , earlier this month , a leading Dutch newspaper sported the following front-page headline : ' As terrorists we can go about our own business in Europe ' .
Could this be an arresting and , therefore , not very truthful headline ?
Not really , for the enlightening interview with an anonymous member of the extreme-left terrorist movement , Dev Sol , was in total agreement with this disconcerting title .
The outspoken Turkish terrorist left the reader in no doubt as to the fact that his organisation makes full use of the EU ' s territory as their base of operation for their murderous actions against the Turkish state and as a willing reservoir of funds , as and when required .
' For in Europe , anything is possible ' , the man simply declared . And should Europe be serious about fighting terrorism , then action will also be taken here , he threatened .
Mr Lamassoure hardly touches upon this highly topical and acute problem in his report . Despite this , it has been Turkey ' s criticism of the EU Member States for years .
The rapporteur ' s appreciation , expressed in Paragraph 29 , of the Turkish contribution to the fight against international terrorism counts for very little in this .
About terrorism in Turkey , the Lamassoure report concludes in recital G " that Turkey has largely overcome the difficulties posed by various forms of terrorism in the past " .
I should like to find out from the Council and the Commission whether they share this , in my view , far too rash , conclusion .
Official Turkish sources produce very different noises .
These are voices which , following the satanic terrorist attacks on the US , have gained a great deal of support .
They express the feelings of authorities that are deeply hurt .
For years , they could not even count on European solidarity in their bloody fight against Turkish terrorist organisations . Quite the reverse , in fact .
EU Member States offered , and still offer , the activists of those movements shelter . And while the Ankara authorities condemn the West ' s specific policy of tolerance , this time round , Turkey is allowed to take part in the international coalition against terrorism .
After the memorable date of Tuesday , 11 September , Turkey considers that the time has come for the European Union and its Member States finally to issue effective anti-terrorist measures .
In specific terms , this translates into meeting Turkish requests to extradite Turkish terrorists instead of offering them asylum or a residence permit .
The European Union and its Member States should , at long last , recognise the permanent internal and external threat to the Republic of Turkey .
The double standards applied by the Europeans should , at least from the Turkish angle , come to a definite end .
The EU ' s emphasis on human rights in Turkey coinciding with the fact that it turns a blind eye to the fight against international terrorism is unacceptable .
At least , this is the Turkish point of view .
Is this harsh criticism levelled by Turkey at Europe justified ?
It is a fact that various violent groupings of Turkish origin maintain organisational structures in EU Member States .
Certainly after 11 September , it is more difficult for Brussels and the capitals of the EU countries to ignore this in silence .
How do the Council and the Commission intend to cooperate with Turkey , a country which has , after all , formally acquired candidate country status , in future in the fight against international terrorism ?
Indeed , there is no shortage of legal and political pitfalls .
The far from gentle criticism levelled at the Lamassoure report speaks for itself .
Despite this , the progress of Turkey ' s accession to the European Union will also depend on Europe ' s reaction to Turkey ' s ' open flank ' , also known as the country ' s Achilles ' heel for terrorist attacks .
Mr President , I would not like to miss this opportunity to join the other Members , with knowledge of the subject , in complimenting Mr Alain Lamassoure on the quality of his report .
I say ' with knowledge of the subject ' because I know how passionate the debates on this subject have been over the last two years or more .
I would like to expand on just two points of the report , which have already been mentioned by Mr Brok and others .
The first relates to the geostrategic importance of Turkey , which has certainly increased as a result of the events which have just taken place and by the European Union ' s realisation of the need to enter into a coalition to combat Islamic fundamentalist terrorism .
To this end , I would like to say to our Turkish colleagues who are in the gallery , how in vain it would be , to fear that European defence might develop in competition , in parallel , and therefore redundantly , with defence based on the Atlantic Alliance .
European defence is based on the Atlantic Alliance and it will continue in that direction , quite simply because Europe would not have the means to do otherwise .
My second comment concerns Cyprus .
It has been said that the resolution of the Cypriot problem is one of the conditions , in my view a prior condition , of any possible decision on the entry of Turkey into the Union .
I do not believe that the Turkish populations in Cyprus are really in danger today and I believe it would be a very important gesture for Turkey to accept , as a first step , during the current negotiations , a reduction in the number of its armed forces in Cyprus , or even better , their evacuation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I should , of course , also like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Lamassoure , on his success in drafting a good report .
I am saying this , above all , because in Turkey , I often come across people making a certain assertion : those in Turkey who repeatedly accuse the European Parliament of being hostile to Turkey will now have to admit yet again that this assertion is not true .
Like the report of my colleague , Mr Swoboda , this report , too , is an objective opinion on the situation in Turkey .
As the rapporteur states , the flurry of legislative activity in the Turkish Parliament to reform the constitution really is laudable .
Given the current constraints in Turkey , our Turkish colleagues , some of whom are also here today amongst us , have really been very successful .
Now , however , they are asked to continue the work which they have begun .
The Ministries for Home Affairs and Justice in the Turkish Republic play an important role in this area .
The long-awaited implementation of the reform is urgently necessary , particularly now after 11 September , but also in spite of 11 September .
It is easy to ascertain through the Turkish media that people are still being tortured in some police stations .
There are still strange cases of people committing suicide while in police custody .
For as long as this kind of thing continues to happen in Turkey , and , for as long as Turkey is not prepared to meet the Copenhagen Criteria , there will obviously be no date for the start of accession negotiations and Turkey will remain the only country , out of 13 countries with candidate status , not to have started negotiating .
I hope that this last report will motivate those responsible in Turkey to move forward and , not only to talk about reforms , but also to really implement them .
Mr President , this very good report shows Turkey is making progress towards Europe , but more is needed .
For instance , 19 people are being prosecuted for insulting state officials because they attended a conference at which victims who had suffered torture in the form of rape in custody spoke out against their tormenters .
It is not only women to whom this happens .
It is clearly outrageous that the state should condemn the victims , rather than their aggressors .
I call on the Turkish authorities to drop these shameful prosecutions .
Secondly , I want to urge the Turkish government to take an initiative towards a political settlement with the Kurds .
The PKK have observed the cease-fire for over two years .
Its leader , Abdullah Ocalan , is appealing to the European Court of Human Rights against the unfairness of his trial .
It is time to launch peace negotiations .
Finally , now is not the time to eject 80 000 Kurds , breach environmental standards and human rights , in order to construct the Ilisu dam .
It must not be built and EU governments , such as the UK government , must not grant export credit .
Mr President , what efforts has the Turkish government made since the Helsinki Summit to guarantee human and fundamental rights , to find a peaceful solution to the Kurdish issue and to abolish the death penalty ?
The latest amendment to the Turkish constitution does not go far enough .
The death penalty has only been partially abolished and the Kurdish language has not been recognised .
Is this a genuine reform ?
I would answer , no .
Turkey must not be given any special treatment in the enlargement process .
I think that we run the risk of giving in to Turkey 's wishes if we adopt the Lamassoure report as it stands .
The report is guarded on a number of issues so that we leave Turkey room for manoeuvre .
We must insist that a political solution be found to the Kurdish issue and that human and fundamental rights be guaranteed .
The time is right for sweeping reforms .
In my conversations with people on my trips to Turkey they have repeatedly expressed a wish for peace , brotherliness and freedom .
I , too , carry this message in my heart and will also do all I can in the future so that one day this wish will come true .

Mr President , I , too , should like to take my turn in congratulating the rapporteur Mr Lamassoure on his recent effort to draft as objective and balanced a report as possible on Turkey 's progress towards accession to the European Union , a task rendered all the more difficult by the particular nature of this country 's problems in various sectors of special interest to Parliament , such as its record on human and minority rights , its democratic principles , its international conduct , its refusal to admit to tragic historic events and so on .
Having said which , I think that , thanks to certain amendments approved by the rapporteur and despite certain other amendments dictated by the policy of expediency , the final report which has taken shape is generally acceptable , even to the official Turkish side .
And , of course , we all know what that means , we just have to make allowances for the usual abusive response by the Turkish foreign secretary towards the honourable Mr Poos and his report , which is seen as negative towards Turkey .

So all that remains is to ascertain the extent to which Turkey will basically respond to the good will and to the spirit which dominates the report , by which I mean the spirit of constructive criticism of numerous Turkish shortcomings , the deliberately indirect reference to the continuing Turkish military occupation of Cyprus , which is unacceptable in a civilised society , the fact that previous Turkish crimes , such as the genocide of the Armenians , have been passed over in silence , contrasting with praise for any minor progress made by Turkey or any circumstantial compliance by Turkey with its contractual obligations , such as Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty .
Time will tell if Turkey recognises and appreciates these well-meant messages , although I fear that experience to date does not give us cause to be optimistic that we shall soon have a clear response from Turkey to the effect that it really is prepared to prove itself worthy of its candidate status and of integration into the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Lamassoure report maintains that Turkey has a right to become a member of the European Union .
That is its basic message .
I , for my part , believe that membership is not just Turkey 's right , it is vital to the country .
Historically speaking , Turkey has made an admirable effort to move towards Europe .
An effort which started not today but a long time ago .
Turkey 's efforts to modernise started at the end of the nineteenth century .
We Greeks , as Turkey 's neighbours and ' historic adversaries ' , if I may put it thus , know this better than anyone else .
We know from our own experience how difficult it is move forward from a tradition of eastern despotism towards a modern society .
Turkey has a particularly long tradition in this respect because it was at the top of the pyramid of despotism in our region .
Turkey suffered the historical accident of basically coming out unscathed - not unscathed as such , because it suffered a great deal - but it was not defeated in either the First or the Second World War .
Sometimes it is better to lose than to win a war .
We must not forget that France and Germany , the mainstays of the European Union , were both defeated , one at the beginning and the other at the end of the Second World War and I think that they learned that armed force and confrontation are not the way to survive in today 's world .
The disaster on the 11 September has taught us , I think , that today 's world needs reconciliation in order to survive , by which I do not of course mean reconciliation with the terrorists , I mean reconciling tensions between us , precisely in order to isolate terrorists and establish a safe and fair world .
Turkey is a third world European country which needs to learn the same lesson as France and Germany , that is , that if we want to move on , we have to stop waging the wars of the 1920s or the wars of the 1940s in the present day .
I think that Turkey has built up an internal mechanism and a system of external relations which is dominated by the idea of authority and it uses this to tyrannise its people - witness the terrible story of prisoners ' suicides and much else besides .
Of course , the move which Turkey has to make is a difficult one .
But it is trying to make it and we must help it and our reception of it in the European Union must be commensurate with its efforts to move towards us .
Mr President , the report acknowledges certain obvious truths .
That is a fact .
However , at the same time it makes findings which have no bearing on reality .
It sees progress where there is none , it extols the famous ' national programme ' and a number of individual reforms which , basically , do no more than pull the wool over the eyes of the world in order to conceal the continuing and , from certain sides , the worsening situation for the working classes .
We warned that the decision taken in Helsinki would help not to democratise but to embolden the regime .
The army is still the determining factor in political life .
The grass-roots movement is being dealt with in the crudest fashion .
Arrests , over 10 000 political prisoners , torture chambers , murders , inhumane conditions in prisons , which are extolled in the report , are on the agenda .
The hunger strikers have been fighting to the death now for 370 days and dozens have already died .
The death penalty has only been abolished for criminal prisoners , not for people fighting for democracy and freedom .
The report calls these fighters extremists and the Turkish state calls them terrorists , while the Kurds are deprived of fundamental rights , the occupying forces remain in Cyprus after their barbaric invasion 27 years ago and the report says not a word .
However , the key point of the report is Paragraph 29 , which extols Turkey 's contribution to the fight against terrorism , clearly dismissing the Kurdish fighters , and its peace-brokering efforts in the Balkans , obviously meaning its open support for the KLA criminals , and it incites it to facilitate the application of the ÍÁÔÏ treaty .
Allow me to finish by saying that my brotherly love towards and solidarity with the Turkish people prevent me from voting in favour of this report .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I think I was right to take my headphones off relatively early on .
It spared me somewhat .
Mr Lamassoure has submitted an excellent report , as numerous Members have said .
I should like to qualify the report as a fair report , because I think that Turkey , like every other candidate , is entitled to a fair report , meaning that we duly address all the shortcomings , but we also acknowledge any progress made .
I should like to call on our Turkish counterparts and the Turkish people to take note of the report as a whole and not just selectively , just as we are making an effort to take note of all the developments in Turkey .
Finally , I take the view that a Turkey that has made a start on fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria is preferable to a Turkey which has not made a start on fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria .
It is a Turkey that is motivating the forces trying to overcome the unacceptable shortcomings still remaining within the country in relation to the political criteria .
It is not in a position to expect political discounts .
We do , of course , realise that we rightly wish that all Muslim countries in the world were structured like Turkey and that we would then have fewer problems , especially in the light of 11 September .
But this discount does not mean turning a blind eye when it comes to the candidate countries .
On the other hand , however , Turkey is also entitled not to have any additional conditions imposed .
For example , I think that Mr Lamassoure has chosen exactly the right wording for the point on Armenia .
Having expressly referred to the genocide last year , we note this year that things are clearly moving in the right direction .
We realise that people are getting together to talk about the past .
My own country found this a very worthwhile exercise and I think that this is an approach which we should support in this specific case , so that good neighbourly relations can develop in the future between Turkey and Armenia .
Mr President , I , too , agree that not-insignificant progress has been made , and not just in terms of the Copenhagen criteria - a rather cold , aristocratic expression which conjures up an image of this Europe that always wants to be seen as a model of democracy .
I am thinking , rather , of the extremely tangible progress made in the field of honesty : the courage and honesty of a President who is able to condemn the corruption present in his own country .
However , we would be wronging Turkey if we did not make things absolutely clear to her - being clear , not hypocritical - and being clear means telling her that a great deal remains to be done in terms of democratic civilisation and behaviour , and that means reforms .
In this sense , the ability to implement political and social reforms benefiting the Kurdish minority is a highly effective parameter .
It is true and important that the Turkish Constitution intends to remove some of the restrictions placed on the use of the Kurdish language but , Mr President , I am appalled by this idea of partial removal of restrictions : the idea of partial removal of restrictions applied to a fundamental right such as the use of one ' s own language is a quite horrific contradiction in terms .
I am also appalled by the fact that only a cultural right is being recognised to a minority that does not enjoy even the most basic political and social rights .
Mr President , we expect Turkey to show signs of cooperation , and a sign in precisely this area - addressing this long-standing dispute with the Kurdish people with courage and tolerance , in a tolerant , civilised manner - would be very well received by the entire European Parliament .
Mr President , I would also like to pay tribute to Mr Lamassoure 's excellent work as rapporteur .
Although I have been a constant critic of Turkey 's human rights record and its treatment of the Kurds , I also strongly support the decision of the 1999 Helsinki European Council to recognise Turkey as an candidate country .
I do not agree with those who believe the boundaries of Europe should be narrow and exclusively Christian .
I want to see a pluralistic Europe .
I have always believed that Turkey could be a very important bridge-head between the current Members of the EU and the Islamic world .
This would facilitate greater understanding and mutual respect .
It is especially important in the changed world that exists after 11 September .
However , Turkey still has a long way to go .
In last year 's annual assessment report the Commission concluded that , although a wide-ranging debate on political reforms had begun and Turkey had signed several international human rights instruments over the past year , the situation on the ground had hardly improved .
Let us hope that the publication of next month 's annual report will show significant improvement .
In this context , I welcome the recent decision by the Turkish parliament to adopt a constitutional reform package to bring Turkey further in line with the acquis communautaire .
At the launch of the EU-Turkish Foundation of 17 October , Commissioner Verheugen said that these reforms are a significant step towards better protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Turkey .
It is clear that continued support for a closer EU-Turkey relationship , including eventual accession , is the best way to accelerate political reform and progress in human rights .
However , the timetable for possible accession lies in Turkish hands alone .
Negotiations can only begin when Turkey fulfils the Copenhagen criteria .
It must strive harder to fulfil its obligations in that regard .
Mr President , I think that this debate , once again , underlines the fact that we all share the same premise : that it is imperative that we , in the European Union , should have increasingly close relations with Turkey , until the opportunity arises , when the time is right , that it should become a Member State in its own right .
But it also underlines another point of view that we should make very clear to the Turkish authorities : that in order for this to take place , Turkey must become a full democracy .
I agree with what Mr Lamassoure has said in his report .
The Turks have made advances .
It is also true , however , that this constitutional reform contains three elements that impair its credibility .
First of all , it ceases to class as crimes actions that are still crimes because they fulfil the conditions as such .
Secondly , the constitution is being reformed , but other laws remain in force , such as the Penal Code , the anti-terrorism law and the audiovisual law , which continue to uphold the existence of certain crimes of expression , of opinion , of public demonstration and association . Thirdly , and most importantly , the constitutional reform is not being put into practice .
Arbitrary detentions and violations of human rights continue to take place .
We all receive , as I do myself , constant complaints , of which , today , there have been many , that are continually causing problems for the defenders of human rights and their organisations , not to mention , of course , the situation of the Kurdish people .
Yes , the Kurdish people .
It is not enough to lift the restriction of using a language if this is upheld in law and there is no recognition of the existence of a Community as a people in their own right .
This is the case with the Kurds .
This is even more the case , Mr President , where a Sakharov Prize winner , Mrs Leyla Zana , remains in gaol , and we must continue to strongly demand that she be freed .
Mr President , I would like to call on history to remind us that , while it serves its purpose on occasions to demonstrate a point , it can also let us down .
I would particularly like to remind Mr Pasqua that he should recall where the Presocrats originate from , that Ionic art was born in Turkey , and that the truly Christian French Kings did not hesitate to call upon the Ottoman Empire to fight against the Pope and other European States in the Sixteenth Century .
However , if we continue to look into history , we will also see both good things and bad things about Turkey .
Turkey , in the strategic position it occupies , is the only truly secular state , and Europe has been founded upon this great battle to achieve secular states .
On this level , then , yes , Turkey is a totally European State .
Its efforts to eliminate religious interference , whilst having truly fundamentalist communities within its borders , is something to be admired , and which could be a factor for future stability in the region .
On the other hand , under the Ottoman Empire , the Greek monasteries , the Sufis and the Sephardis all survived .
This was because , at their respective moments in history , the authorities did not attempt to destroy them .
Today , it is also a strong state fighting for the education of its people .
On this subject I would like to remind Mrs Uca , with a heavy heart , that 30 % of women in Turkey do not go to school , nor are allowed to do so , so in this way they miss out on an education .
To conclude , I would like to say that there are also bad points .
The major black cloud over the Ottoman tradition is its perception of the unlimited rights of the conqueror over the conquered .
This gives rise to the great problem of prisons and exterminations : the loss of rights of the conquered , the weaker party , rape , exterminations , silence and death .
I think that it is in this area that we should offer our help , for Turkey is a stabilising factor in this region : it is establishing agreements with Syria and is an important element in the creation of a peaceful border with Europe .
We have to contribute to the strengthening of this strategy and its improvement , with European ideas used in governance .
Mr President , here is another chance for Turkey to exploit its strategic position and use its proverbial military capabilities : let us hope that , this time , its attachment to the West will be more effectively translated into vital internal reforms .
Mr Lamassoure has painted an objective , clear picture of the country but , despite some positive elements , he does not hide his concern that Turkey might regress to a state which is worse than the current situation .
It is positive that the Turkish government has presented a programme of conditions for joining Europe and it is positive that it is working on the Constitution , but it is negative that neither the ' road map ' nor the timetable for the reforms has been clearly defined .
The European Union is not asking every country to follow the same procedure , but there are certain values , certain individual and democratic rights which must be respected - and Europe does know how to be patient - in Turkey and in its prisons too .
One final point : the question of the Armenian genocide is , strangely , becoming increasingly important with the passing of time .
Today , humanity no longer tolerates lies or inaccurate accounts when it comes to the horrific events of history .
It is not necessary to say , for example , how much the descriptions of the blood baths of the two world wars by former enemy historians helped to soothe feelings and cool emotions , and this example should be followed as soon as possible by Turks and Armenians , with a view to starting to normalise relations between the two neighbouring countries .
Lastly , I am sure that Armenia would be quite willing to erect a monument in front of one of the European institutions commemorating its sacrifice and entrusting it to history .
This would also make it possible for us , too , to produce documents on Turkey without worrying about how to address the question of Armenia .
It is necessary to remember the past in order to do better in the future .
Mr President , being one of the last to speak , I am in a strange situation in which basically everything has already been said , but not by everybody .
Nonetheless , I should like to comment on two points which I think are particularly important .
First , however , I should like to thank our rapporteur .
This is a superb report , couched in very moderate terms .
We can live with it quite nicely and , more to the point , it is a report which is conducive to consensus .
We must bear in mind that this is a progress report .
I think there will be a great many more progress reports to come on the question of Turkey 's pre-accession to the European Union .
Now to the points on which I should like to comment .
First , the question of the death penalty which has not , I think , been adequately evaluated in the House this evening .
The general political reforms which Turkey recently introduced are very promising and we fully acknowledge them .
However , we all know , and Turkey should also know , which is why we must say so loud and clear , that they represent enormous progress within Turkey itself .
Naturally , from our point of view , they are just a beginning .
I must say , we always get a bit carried away when it comes to Turkey .
But , perhaps , the means are basically the end at the moment , especially when we consider human rights .
But , to come back to the death penalty . We obviously feel that it must be abolished completely .
There can be no partial abolition of the death penalty from a democratic point of view .
There can only be complete abolition .
That this is difficult in Turkey at the moment for domestic political reasons is patently obvious .
The second point which I think is important is the fight against corruption within Turkey .
Because as long as sleaze runs public and social life in Turkey , the people will have no faith in politicians and as long as they have no faith in politicians , they will put more faith in the military .
But it is out of the question in a democratic community for the military , in the form of the national security council , always to have the last word , de facto , on parliament 's resolutions .
I think that a great deal of work is still needed on this within Turkey .
And that can only mean fighting corruption and ensuring that the people have faith in politicians .
Mr President , I want to thank Mr Lamassoure for his sterling work .
I wish to put the following question to the Commissioner with responsibility for enlargement , Mr Verheugen .
Is it possible for Turkey to become a member of the European Union in view of the continued Turkish occupation of Northern Cyprus , continued Turkish migration from Anatolia to Northern Cyprus and the documented destruction in that part of the island of the historic heritage in the form of monasteries , churches and cultural buildings ?
If , in the future , it is possible for a country , such as Turkey , to continue to occupy a part of another future EU country , namely Cyprus , and yet remain a Member State , what will have happened to that democracy and spirit of reconciliation that forms the very soul of European cooperation and the very values that underlie it ?
In that case , what will have become of our credibility in working for peace ?
I also think that it is necessary for Turkey , in the same ambitious way as Germany , to deal with the dark and sombre chapters of its twentieth century history .
It is not acceptable for Turkey to go on denying the Armenian genocide of one and a half million Christians .
It is not acceptable for it to deny that Christian Assyrians , Chaldeans and Syrians were also exposed to a genocide in which hundreds of thousands of people were murdered following a fatwa concerning holy war on the Christians , issued in 1914 by the top Muslim leader .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the broad agreement in this debate on Turkey 's progress .
I hope that we can use this common ground when assessing the work in store for us .
I should also like to emphasise that the Commission agrees with the conclusions and views expressed by the rapporteur , Mr Lamassoure , in his report .
Here , too , there is a broad agreement and this , too , will be helpful as we continue in our work .
Several speakers have said , and I should like to stress this , that Turkey has become more , rather than less , important to us .
And this does not only have to do with its geo-strategic position .
I have always warned about reducing Turkey to a locality of special geo-strategic importance .
I prefer to believe that Turkey 's uniqueness also lies in its cultural and historic heritage and in the political role which it can play at this global political interface .
The political elite in Turkey have demonstrated that they are absolutely determined to keep modernising the country and bringing it closer to European standards .
The constitutional reform which has now been decided is an important indication of this .
For me , this constitutional reform represents real progress .
Parliament adopted these important resolutions very quickly and with an overwhelming majority .
I think this large majority is particularly important , because it clearly shows that there is broad social consensus on the need for democratic and rule-of-law reforms .
These changes need to demonstrate that they are effective in practice , however .
The crucial question to Turkey is always , what has actually changed ?
Which is why everyone is right who said , during the debate , that the point now , as far as they were concerned , was to see how Turkey implements these promising constitutional reforms and what actually changes .
In this respect , the Commission agrees with the European Parliament 's appraisal that , the constitutional reforms and further legislative initiatives announced , notwithstanding , a great deal still needs to be done if human rights really are to be securely and permanently protected in Turkey .
Our relations have progressed well since Helsinki .
The pre-accession strategy has been implemented .
As with all the other candidate countries , the priorities for Turkey have also been set out in an accession partnership .
This year Turkey adopted a national programme for incorporating the acquis which also includes the timetable for new legislation which has been called for on numerous occasions here in the House .
This legislation will need to be in keeping with the acquis of the European Union .
We want to continue the pre-accession strategy for Turkey on the basis of the principles adopted in Helsinki .
This obviously means that there can be no talk of starting negotiations until the political criteria for accession have been met .
I would stress here that we are not in the business of offering discounts on the political criteria for accession to the European Union to anyone anywhere .
It is in keeping with the philosophy behind the Helsinki resolutions that , with the exception of negotiations , Turkey must be treated in exactly the same way in all other areas as the other candidate countries .
The Lamassoure report refers to the difficult economic situation in Turkey .
I should like to encourage Turkey to continue with the economic reforms agreed with the International Monetary Fund .
As for us , we shall release the first tranche of EUR 75 million from the European Union structural adjustment facility for Turkey as quickly as possible .
As far as Cyprus is concerned , we continue to abide firmly by the view that the peace process should be resumed as quickly as possible under the auspices of the United Nations .
Turkey has promised to support this process .
But I must say quite unequivocally that the European Union expects this support to translate into specific action and result in our actually resolving this problem .
I am confident that accession negotiations with Cyprus will be concluded during the course of next year , which is why it is particularly important that the parties involved make every effort to find a lasting political solution .
The components for a solution , which take account of the interests and concerns of all involved , are well documented .
What we need is the political courage to grab this opportunity and resolve the Cyprus question now .
The window of opportunity is open .
But , it must be said , it will probably not be open for much longer .
A solution to the Cyprus question will benefit future relations between the European Union and Turkey enormously .
Relations between Greece and Turkey have already improved considerably .
The Commission welcomes the confidence-building measures agreed .
I congratulate the two foreign secretaries , Ismail Cem and Georgios Papandreos on their initiative and their success .
Both foreign secretaries did a great deal to foster a climate conducive to further progress in the region .
As far as outstanding problems with European security and defence policy are concerned , I called on Turkey , just a few days ago , to help achieve a constructive solution as quickly as possible .
In all events , this problem should be resolved before the meeting of the European Council in Laeken in December this year .
A little extra effort and it should be possible , and I am convinced that it is possible , to reach an agreement .
We are fully aware of Turkey 's concerns , especially , as regards , possible action in its neck of the woods .
But I call on our Turkish partners to take a constructive attitude so that an agreement can be reached soon .
We should be able to expect a country which is a candidate for membership of the European Union to support rather than block one of the most important future projects of the European Union .
The Commission considers that it is important to improve relations between Turkey and Armenia in order to foster security and stability in the region .
The Commission therefore welcomes the very recent initiative by the civil society in the two countries to bring the two nations closer together and , with the help of independent historians , to reappraise the tragic events of the past .
I welcome the European Parliament 's position on the programme of financial assistance .
The proposed amendments are acceptable to us .
I particularly agree with the European Parliament that care must be taken to ensure that various sources of funding and programmes are properly coordinated .
It is true that we are probably now in a decisive stage of relations between the European Union and Turkey .
Once the Lamassoure Reports have been adopted we shall have all the elements needed for our pre-accession strategy to hand by the end of the year .
We can then go on to the next stage in which we shall have to focus mainly on stepping up and putting Turkish preparations for accession into practice .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Loading and unloading of bulk carriers
The next item is the report ( A5-0326 / 2001 ) by Rijk van Dam , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive establishing harmonised requirements and procedures for the safe loading and unloading of bulk carriers ( 7193 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0292 / 2001 - 2000 / 0121 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , our group supports the work carried out , thus far , by Mr Van Dam and the Council , together .
We feel that this recommendation is a major step forwards , particularly in the field of maritime safety , especially since the statistics of past years are extremely alarming : in the last 10 years , between 1990 and 1999 , we recorded the sinking of 146 bulk carriers and the deaths of 780 crew members , all of which occurred during the loading or unloading of these carriers .
The Commission ' s directive harmonises , at last , a field of legislation which has allowed too many , too dangerous exceptions in the past .
We are going to harmonise the loading and unloading procedures , the safety standards inside and outside terminals and the levels of responsibility on board vessels and ashore .
I welcome the fact that all this has served to improve quality , first and foremost ; we feel that quality must be an essential , basic condition if safety standards are to be satisfactory .
I welcome the fact that a balance was found quickly between Parliament and the Council ' s positions , a balance which , moreover , respects the spirit of the amendments proposed and adopted by Parliament as well .
At last , as of today , we are on the way to more stringent legislation , to a code of procedure which has the merit of courageously placing safety above all other concerns , including economic and financial concerns .
That is why we are totally satisfied with the final version of this report .
Mr President , I wish to thank rapporteur van Dam for the successful preparation of the report .
Increasing marine safety requires ongoing work .
Increasing the safety of loading and unloading of bulk carriers is an important aspect of work for the improvement of safety in the shipping sector .
As is the case in many matters concerning marine safety , these rules are also agreed at the International Maritime Organisation on a voluntary basis .
Since the regulations are currently being applied only intermittently , it is good that they are being incorporated into Community legislation .
Improving the loading and unloading of bulk carriers and the efficient performance of ports will also further the development of important intermodal transportations .
Along with a further tightening of the rules , care must be taken that the decisions made are realistic and feasible .
The biggest shortcoming in the position of the Council is that , as the rapporteur states , information need not be given on all damage caused to the structure and fittings of a vessel .
In addition , I wish to call attention to the fact that decisions to increase marine safety , which are made only within the Union , are not sufficient .
Questions of safety and liability must , as far as possible , be dealt with on a worldwide basis .
The matter needs to be given a rapid passage , even though the common position of the Council has not included all the proposals of the Parliament 's first reading .
Our group supports approval of the common position as it stands .
Mr President , the Commission is delighted by the report which has been drawn up by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , in relation to this proposed directive establishing harmonised requirements and procedures for the safe loading and unloading of bulk carriers .
I wish , in particular , to thank Mr van Dam for his report and for the help he has given the Commission in its efforts to increase the safety of bulk carriers .
This directive will transpose into Community legislation the code of the International Maritime Organisation , which is currently in force in relation to the safe loading and unloading of ships , as well as certain parts of the convention for the safety of life at sea .
This code , which is , in fact , a recommendation , was established by the IMO in 1997 , but , so far , it has not been widely applied .
As soon as its application becomes obligatory in all the Union ' s ports , this code will be much more widely used and will , therefore , contribute to the safety of all bulk carriers visiting the Union .
As the rapporteur has indicated , this directive is aimed at combating the phenomenon of the disappearance of bulk carriers , that is , the sinking of these ships , which suddenly break up in open sea and sink in a few minutes , thereby causing the loss of considerable human life .
As Mr Fava has said , these statistics are unfortunately quite clear : over the last ten years , these wrecks have caused the loss of 134 ships with 743 victims , and there is a consistent tendency in terms of the average age and the total annual dead weight of the ships which have disappeared .
It was , therefore , necessary to deal with this issue of the safety of bulk carriers , and it is known that bad loading and unloading methods are considered to be one of the main causes of these tragic accidents .
As the rapporteur has said , the directive is designed to ensure that the handling of cargo in our ports respects strict rules , so as to prevent damage to ships during loading or unloading of heavy bulk cargo .
Before and during loading and unloading , the crew on board and the dock personnel must be in contact and in agreement , and , furthermore , a plan must be agreed in advance in relation to the way the loading and unloading will be carried out .
Heavy equipment which is often used in these operations must be handled with caution , and , in the event of a disagreement between the two parties , the dock personnel and the crew on board , the competent authority must be able to intervene to suspend the operations in order to prevent possible damage to the structure of the bulk carriers .
The Commission is therefore very pleased that Parliament intends to accept the common position of the Council without amendments , because , if it is adopted rapidly , this directive will be able to enter into force very soon .
This also shows that , on sensitive maritime issues , the European Parliament and the Council are able to rapidly reach a decision with the greatest degree of cohesion , and the Commission hopes that the cohesion demonstrated in this case will also be demonstrated in relation to the other great issues which are currently on the agenda .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Reporting formalities for ships
The next item is the report ( A5-0327 / 2001 ) by Ari Vatanen , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on reporting formalities for ships arriving in and departing from Community ports ( COM ( 2001 ) 46 - C5-0051 / 2001 - 2001 / 0026 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , and those ladies and gentlemen who are still awake , the economic integration of Europe is an objective which many , even among those who oppose political integration , can swallow without indigestion .
The promotion of local shipping also enjoys broad favour , since preservation of the environment and a significant reduction of congestion on our roads are essential .
The Commission 's proposal for a common form for ports is a sensible step ( even though on this occasion it does not arouse political passions ) towards the simplification of port formalities .
It must be said that the forms in use at present vary greatly between Member States .
The proposed directive would mean that the International Maritime Organisation 's FAL forms would always be approved in our ports .
For once we are getting a proposal from the Commission which does not increase bureaucracy in any way .
It would be nice if this could happen more often .
This stems from the fact that the Member States are by no means obliged to demand any forms ; whereas , if a Member State regards it as necessary to obtain information covered by the proposed directive , it must always accept the FAL forms .
I support the Commission 's proposal , and take the view that we should welcome it with open arms .
I have made a few technical adjustments which are in line with the Council of Ministers ' preliminary position .
I believe that we can now , exceptionally , get by with a single reading .
I also thank the members of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , who succeeded in keeping the political animal which lurks in all of us under control , and did not churn out revisions of their own .
Putting our own stamp on everything must not lead to the objectives themselves being obscured and timetables being interfered with .
This time we neatly avoided this pitfall .
The general adoption of the IMO 's FAL documents will promote the efficient functioning of the common market , and it definitely represents a welcome improvement .
I do not , however , wish to overestimate its importance , since what is involved here is merely a very small part of a larger whole .
We will not bring dynamism to ports merely by standardising forms ; we need to introduce competition to ports as well .
The significance of my report does , in fact , largely hinge on the question of whether we will have the courage also to approve the Commission 's proposal for deregulating port services .
I hope that Parliament will continue the project of building Europe by dismantling monopolies .
And , in this context , I look symbolically and appealingly in the direction of my highly esteemed colleague Mr Jarzembowski .
Finally , I wish to give thanks once again for the cooperation of the Commission and of the Council .
Europe needs constructive action and less politically-motivated confrontation .
I trust that we will be able to improve the status of shipping by the action now proposed .
Ladies and gentlemen , the rudder is set .
Let us steer Europe in the direction of competitive ports !
Mr President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists supports both this Commission proposal and the report by Mr Vatanen , who , having already demonstrated his adventures as a driver on roads throughout the world , now amazes us with his knowledge of a subject as difficult as maritime transport and the certificates that have to be completed when ships arrive at , or depart from , our ports .
Very gradually , people like ourselves , here , today , in this House , Mr Vatanen , myself , and all of you , are building a common Europe .
We are now eighteen , it is true , years behind with regard to 1 January 1983 , which already seems like such a long time ago , when the Community institutions and the then ten Member States approved the Single European Act .
The standardisation of reporting formalities will , without a doubt , contribute to an improvement in maritime transport between ports situated in Member States , encouraging the promotion of short sea shipping .
By encouraging the transportation of goods by sea we will free up , to a certain extent , the amount of heavy traffic on our already saturated roads .
We can only regret that this proposal , as noted by Mr Vatanen in his explanatory statement , does not cover dangerous goods .
We ask the Commission not to limit this standardisation of reporting formalities to the Community .
The Community should press for this type of information to be common to the whole international community , promoting the International Maritime Organisation 's Convention on the Facilitation of Maritime Traffic .
We would also invite those Member States who have not done so , to ratify this Convention , although the Commission proposal does not oblige them to do so .
I would like to finish by congratulating Mr Vatanen on his excellent work .
Mr President , I , too , would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Vatanen , for his excellent preparatory work , which aims to ensure the rapid passage of this important business .
An efficiently functioning internal market requires smooth working and more standardised practices than previously in the transportation sector .
However , the reporting obligations of ships arriving in ports and leaving them vary greatly from one Member State to another .
Most Member States have already signed the IMO 's Convention on the facilitation of maritime traffic .
The proposal for a directive , now under discussion , is a good example of practices which are already internationally recognised as being good ones .
In my opinion , besides the safety of shipping , it is important to facilitate practical procedures .
By clear , uniform yet flexible procedures , shipping will be made a more attractive alternative mode of transport .
There may be a particularly positive impact on local shipping .
Improving the effectiveness of port practices will also facilitate the development of important intermodal transportation systems .
Since several forms are in use , attention needs to be given , in the future , to how electronic communications can be better utilised .
A positive aspect of this proposal is that the directive is intended to pass into law within a rapid timetable .
The rapporteur has made good revisions to the proposal for a directive .
Our group supports the approval of the report and its rapid passage through the legislative process .

Mr President , once again , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Vatanen on this very good report , and to thank the other speakers in the debate , and also welcome the fact that all the institutions have studied this proposal within a very short timescale , and that it will be possible to reach an agreement in due course on this subject as we did on the previous one .
This demonstrates the importance which we all now attach to short sea shipping .
For several years , the Community has been implementing a complete strategy aimed at making short sea shipping a viable and realistic alternative to purely road transport .
This strategy has , furthermore , been reinforced in the White Paper on European transport policy until 2010 .
One of the elements of this strategy is to remove the obstacles preventing the development of short sea shipping .
Our recent exercise in recording these obstacles showed that the complexity of the administrative documentary procedures was considered to be one of the main bottlenecks .
Mr Vatanen was kind enough to say that the Commission was dealing with the paperwork , for once .
I give credit for this U-turn to him .
The Commission has therefore presented a proposal aimed at simplifying certain documentary procedures .
We have chosen to deal with the routine procedures which ships have to go through each time they enter or leave a port .
The procedures currently in force are not in themselves unreasonable , but the methods for conforming to them are so different from one Member State to another that they often lead to confusion amongst shipowners and operators .
Moreover , the International Maritime Organisation has produced a number of standardised forms in order to harmonise these procedures , and we therefore believed that standardisation was necessary , so that ships may know what information they need to present to the authorities and the way in which they must do so , whichever port they are visiting .
Given that there are already internationally recognised standardised forms , we have opted for the simple solution of using them .
This will probably lead to the worldwide application of the IMO forms .
This proposal , therefore , simplifies the necessary complex documentary procedures in the field of maritime transport .
It does not impose new obligations on shipowners . Instead it allows them to carry out certain obligatory declarations in a harmonised and simplified fashion .
Since these declarations will be identical regardless of the flag or sector of activity , there is no reason to exclude any of them from the scope of our proposal , which therefore applies to both short sea shipping and ocean navigation , and which will not distinguish between flags .
Thank you , once again , to Mr Vatanen .
Thanks to the amendments which he has presented in his report , we believe we will be able to reach an agreement with the Council with a view to adopting this proposal at first reading .
This is good news and we are grateful for it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Accession to the WTO
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports :
( A5-0366 / 2001 ) by Per Gahrton , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council decision establishing the Community position within the Ministerial Conference set up by the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation on the accession of the People 's Republic of China to the World Trade Organisation ( COM ( 2001 ) 517 - C5-0487 / 2001 - 2001 / 0218 ( CNS ) ) ;
( A5-0367 / 2001 ) by Per Gahrton , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council decision establishing the Community position within the Ministerial Conference set up by the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation on the accession of the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan , Penghu , Kinmen and Matsu ( Chinese Taipei ) to the World Trade Organisation ( COM ( 2001 ) 518 - C5-0488 / 2001 - 2001 / 0216 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , the accession of the People ' s Republic of China to the WTO is , without doubt , one of the major ventures and experiments of our time .
The People ' s Republic of China , which is still a country formally governed by a Communist party , is now to be a part of what might be called the stronghold of the free market economy , the WTO .
If the Commission is to be believed , that is a huge victory from the EU ' s point of view .
It is said that this is a one-way market opening process .
It is thought that , for the EU , China ' s accession to the WTO will signal an enormous gain in enforceable rights , with no significant change in the EU ' s own commitments towards China .
It is really quite a one-way process that is described in the Commission ' s proposal .
China must adapt .
The EU does not need to do very much .
Certain China-specific quantitative restrictions are to be phased out .
However , these are of relatively little importance .
If the Commission ' s description in Paragraph 13 is to be believed , accession to the WTO will be good for China ' s economy .
I have a number of doubts on that score .
Clearly , the Commission has to look after the EU ' s interests , but the issue is whether , in the era of globalisation , we might not have passed the point at which trade policy could be judged as if it were a football match , in which winning is everything and there is complete indifference to how things are for the other side .
I therefore think it is quite remarkable that , in its proposal , the Commission does not say so much as a word to hint that accession might nonetheless lead to problems for the other party , namely the People ' s Republic of China .
I must briefly relate a number of facts to indicate that there may be certain problems for this large , but , nonetheless , still underdeveloped , country .
Criticisms are being made in China .
When , in connection with my official visit as chairman of the European Parliament ' s China delegation , I recently visited China , I was able , on the fringes of this visit , to meet authors of books which are very highly critical of China ' s accession to the WTO .
Both books are published by legal publishing houses and , obviously , in Chinese .
One of the books is known in English translation as Collision : Globalisation and China ' s Reality Choice .
The author , who is an economist at Beijing Aeronautic University , maintains that China will lose to a system that is dominated by transnational companies .
His sympathies are with the lower social classes , he says , and he believes that Chinese companies will be swallowed by transnational giants .
This will hit those groups of people in China which have little in the way of wealth .
His main argument is that China is not ready for accession to the WTO .
The Chinese economy is not strong enough , and it will be the poorest classes that will have to pay a heavy price in the form of unemployment and social insecurity .
This book attracted a certain amount of attention in China when it was published last year .
A relevant article was published in the journal belonging to the Ministry of Foreign Trade , and the book received many positive reviews .
The second book is known in English as China in the Shadow of Globalisation and constitutes a warning to the effect that accession to the WTO might cause China to split into five parts .
That is one of the things that the Chinese leaders fear most .
The fact that the chaos which might result from accession to the WTO could lead to the division of the country touches a sensitive point in China ' s understanding of itself .
In spite of the fact that China is not a democracy and , to put it mildly , does not allow complete freedom of expression , and despite the fact that the Chinese government is in favour of accession to the WTO , a book of this type was nonetheless allowed to be published .
That means that there is uneasiness , considerable uneasiness , in Chinese society .
This uneasiness is , in all likelihood , about the possible consequences within the governing party , too .
You only have to log on to the Internet .
There are many web sites : China Online , South China Morning Post and such like .
There is a lot of information about what different commentators , including those outside China , believe might happen because of accession to the WTO .
China Online reported , for example , in August of this year , that approximately 18 per cent of the total number of employees within the State sector are estimated to be surplus to requirements .
It is said that they will be still more surplus to requirements following accession to the WTO .
Unemployment in city areas is already estimated at over 15 per cent .
This report from China Online also maintains that unemployment will increase further in connection with accession to the WTO .
The prospects for new jobs are very limited because those who are made redundant are often older , unqualified workers .
According to China Online , an estimated 30 % of the agricultural labour force is surplus to requirements , meaning that 120 million farmers will have to look for jobs in the cities .
Agriculture was one of the most important areas raised by China in the negotiations .
China received certain concessions .
Many commentators still believe , however , that accession will lead to enormous changes in the countryside and have enormous consequences when China is opened up to imports of food and agricultural products from , for example , the United States .
China has nine hundred million people employed within agriculture .
The Chinese government itself , which does not exactly exaggerate the difficulties , estimates that , because of cheaper grain imports , 9.7 million farmers will lose their jobs within seven years of Beijing joining the WTO .
I could go on at length quoting and referring to different sources indicating the difficulties for China , but I think these examples suffice .
The point of the quotations is that I , again , wanted to emphasise how odd I think it is that the Commission should be presenting the Council and Parliament with a document in which there is not a single word to suggest that accession to the WTO might lead to difficulties in the world ' s most heavily populated country .
That is an odd information policy , in my opinion .
China ' s accession to the WTO may , of course , lead to problems for ourselves , too , if stability in China is seriously undermined .
What conclusions do I draw , then ?
I do not draw the conclusion that we must say ' no ' .
Even if China is not a democracy in our sense of the word , I think it would be unreasonable for us to try to assume the responsibilities of the Chinese government and say that , what the Chinese government has judged to be correct might , in actual fact , be wrong .
Nonetheless , I believe that we should be aware of the fact that we are embarking upon an incredibly risky game .
It places great demands upon European companies to be responsible and not misuse the opportunities they are given when they now go into China with the freedom granted to them by the latter ' s membership of the WTO .
In spite of this serious criticism and these serious misgivings , I naturally recommend that we vote in favour of China ' s membership .
I only have a small amount of speaking time left to devote to Taiwan .
That was intentional , because Taiwan is in a quite different situation .
Taiwan is a developed modern democracy , a developed modern market economy and industrial state and the world ' s tenth largest trading power .
I cannot see any real problems with Taiwan ' s accession to the WTO .
We are concerned there , with an entirely different set of problems with which no comparison can be drawn .
Taiwan will be accorded a local collective agreement with China and become a member the day after China has become a member .
I have no comment other than that we naturally ought to vote in favour of Taiwan ' s membership .
Mr President , our group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left supports the two proposals presented without question , both for the People ' s Republic of China and for the customs territory of Taipei , and agrees with all the arguments and pertinent issues put forward by Mr Gahrton , who has a profound knowledge of this issue .
For this reason , we think it is of fundamental importance that the European Union should take an extremely responsible attitude when facing this momentous challenge for the world .
The People ' s Republic of China ' s accession to the World Trade Organisation will have repercussions in China itself , as we have already seen .
They have now had many years to prepare for and take control of the possible consequences .
There will also be significant repercussions for the European Union : I am aware , for example , of what could happen to us with regard to agriculture .
There will also be repercussions for the functioning of the World Trade Organisation , which is going to be completely restructured , although it must be said that this is already a matter of some urgency .
For this reason , although we are aware of the whole range of problems , dangers and possibilities that this accession brings , our group supports these two proposals without reservation .
Mr President , Commissioner , what a pity that such an important issue is again being debated at such a late hour and , needless to say , before almost empty benches , because the repercussions of the accession of the People 's Republic of China to the WTO are of global significance in every sense of the word and therefore deserve even more attention .
The history of the creation of the World Trade Organisation can be traced back a long way , to a time when the Second World War had left a trail of destruction in its wake and there was a great deal of uncertainty as to what shape peace would take in the future .
The key elements for a peaceful world , and this was as clear then as it is now , are freedom , security and stability , democracy and human rights .
We have used these basic principles to lay the ghosts of the past in Western Europe and finally bring about an era of peace of which , in my view , we can be proud .
But we have to defend this peace anew every day , a painful lesson each and every one of us now has to learn .
Today we are on the threshold of major enlargement of the European Union .
In a few years , we shall live in a Europe which can be an area of stability and freedom .
But how shall we achieve this ?
We shall achieve it through integration .
Integration means inclusion , unification , political , as well as economic , completion .
I do not think anyone disputes the fact that this is an absolutely winning recipe for peaceful development and that this does not just apply to Europe .
Other parts of the world have not been blessed with peace in the last 50 years .
The Cold War was synonymous with conflict and discord for numerous regions in the world .
We must bear this in mind if we are to understand the significance , today , of an organisation , such as , the WTO .
Here , too , the watchword is integration .
The more countries commit themselves to the peaceful principles of trade , the more stable and peaceful the world can become .
For these reasons , I expressly welcome the accession of the People 's Republic of China to the WTO .
For the same reason , I also welcome the accession of Taiwan to the World Trade Organisation .
We want to integrate , not leave part of the world standing on the doorstep .
The EU has clearly formulated the important objectives in its strategy on Asia .
Political dialogue with the People 's Republic of China should be stepped up , the transition to an open society should be supported and China should be further integrated into the global economy .
This last objective is now within reach .
Only with China , both the People 's Republic and Taiwan , will the WTO become a real world trade organisation .
I can assure you that we shall not lose sight of the other objectives and I would also stress that this includes dialogue about human rights .
The numerous negative aspects of China 's accession to the WTO , which you choose to identify in your explanatory statement , Mr Gahrton , cannot be supported by us in the PPE-DE Group in their present one-sided and , in my view , somewhat disproportionate wording .
I think the advantages to all sides of these accessions outweigh the disadvantages .
The award of the 2008 Olympic Games to Beijing became as acute a topic of discussion as the accession to the WTO is now .
But I am positive that we are on the right path , the path of integration , not segregation , the path of inclusion , not isolation , the path , I trust , towards a more peaceful world , which we need , today , more than ever .
We are still in shock from the horror of 11 September .
And that is another reason to stand together .
Mr President , my thanks to the Commissioner for the work which he has carried out .
Of course we welcome China and Taiwan , because I think we should be pleased , as the previous speaker said , that China and Taiwan are joining .
A whole host of reforms is being initiated , as the Commission has rightly pointed out .
For the rest , China will take up a key position within the WTO and this will also bring about considerable changes for the West .
I am fairly certain that this will present the Commission with further challenges .
For the rest , we are supporting the accession of China with considerable funds and I think we should do more here .
For the first time , Parliament has been consulted .
This is a result of excellent collaboration with the Commission and , of course , with the Council .
But I have one thing to say to Mr Gahrton : it is true that accession to the WTO is not without its opponents in China .
But I think that to overemphasise this in the report without , at the same time , trusting in the fact that China is more than capable of evaluating whether or not it is in a position to cope with accession is to underestimate China 's capabilities considerably .
I rather think that the doomsday scenario which you have conjured up in your report is highly exaggerated .
I would like to see you evaluate matters in a somewhat fairer and more balanced manner in the future .
Mr President , after fifteen years of negotiations , we are now in the final stage of China and Taiwan ' s accession to the WTO .
The Commission submitted the accession conditions to you for your opinion .
I would like to thank the House , in particular , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and the rapporteur , Mr Gahrton , for your willingness to treat this subject as a priority .
If you accept the recommendation of your rapporteur , the Union will be in a position to give the green light to China ' s accession at the next Ministerial Conference of the WTO , which , as you know , will take place in Doha on 9-13 November .
The documents you have been issued with , will have informed you of all the technical elements of the negotiation .
I will not return to them today , but I would like to share with you some thoughts of a more political nature , at the same time giving my reaction to Mr Gahrton ' s document and speech ; they both warrant it .
I would , firstly , like to stress the special nature of negotiations for accession to the WTO and try to correct the impression - created by your report , Mr Gahrton - that it is something which we have handled in an excessively unilateral fashion .
An accession to the WTO is not negotiated within a traditional multilateral framework , where concessions are made on the basis of the principle of reciprocity .
On the contrary , in an accession negotiation , at least to the WTO ( I say that prudently , since this seat was occupied by Günter Verheugen less than an hour ago ) , a country puts itself forward as a candidate to join a club whose members have already negotiated commitments amongst themselves .
The candidate country must therefore pay for entry into that club by offering commitments in terms of access to markets which reflect what the members have already accepted amongst themselves .
On several occasions your report points out , and with a degree of reproach which has not escaped me , the positive tone taken by the Commission to describe the results we have achieved after fifteen years of negotiations .
Even if , contrary to what the report says , the Commission ' s report is not jubilant , I nevertheless believe that we can be satisfied with these results as a job well done .
Our task was primarily to defend the interests of the Union in these negotiations , and that is what we have done .
It is also the case , however , that this agreement is not some kind of unilateral victory for the Union , which is something , if I have understood correctly , that you rather reproach us for .
If there has been any victory , I am tempted to say that it is a multilateral one , since it is the multilateral system as a whole which has been strengthened as a result .
We cannot claim that the WTO has a global vocation if it excludes a country which represents more than 20 % of the world ' s population .
The issue was not , therefore , whether China should join the WTO , but rather when .
Well , after fifteen long years of negotiations , the different parties involved , China and its trading partners , have reached the conclusion that that time has arrived .
One of the Union ' s main objectives was that these negotiations should lead to a strengthening of the multilateral system .
It was therefore necessary for China to accept what we could describe as the multilateral acquis , and I will not make any controversial parallel here either , in other words , the advances made within the framework of GATT and then the WTO over the last half a century .
We have ensured that the level of Chinese commitments offers this guarantee .
But this accession to the WTO is also a victory for China , since we believe it to be an essential condition if she is to continue her exceptional economic development .
Chinese external trade has increased by an average of 15 % per year over the last twenty years .
It is , therefore , literally an explosion . And accession to the WTO ensures China a stable framework for her commercial policy by guaranteeing the outlets which are crucial to her .
Her status as a member will also allow her to defend her commercial interests by participating fully in the round of negotiations .
At the end of the day it is clear that accession to the WTO is only one element , perhaps an essential one , but , nevertheless , only one element in the reform process launched by Deng Xiaoping in 1978 and continued by his successors .
More than an end in itself , accession is a consequence of these past reforms and a springboard for new reforms to come .
The justification for these reforms does not lie in accession to the WTO , and I feel that it would probably be presumptuous to try to distinguish between , what would result from accession itself , and , what is connected to the reform process taking place in China .
This close connection between the timetable for internal reforms and accession to the WTO has been recognised by China ' s trading partners , the Union , in particular , by means of the acceptance of transitional periods for the implementation of certain obligations .
In fact , our objective was more the eventual result rather than the speed with which that result comes about .
Mr Gahrton , you referred to two works which stress the dangers which may arise in China as a result of accession to the WTO in terms of regional tensions or social problems .
I do not believe that these problems are being underestimated by the Chinese authorities , whose fundamental political objective seems to me , to be to guarantee the stability and integrity of their country .
From the conversations I have had with them , I understand that China sees accession to the WTO as an essential element in the continuation of these twenty years of reforms , and , therefore , a continuation of this growth which has allowed internal tensions to be kept under control , here or there .
China ' s per capita GDP has multiplied by four over these twenty years .
This is therefore a classic , if specific , case of the relationship between commerce and development .
We all know , and I have often said to you , that commercial liberalisation is a good thing , as long as it is accompanied by the means to translate growth into sustainable development , that is to say , internal social and environmental policies , without which the beneficial effects of commercial liberalisation are not enjoyed .
From this point or view , we believe that China ' s accession promotes that type of better internal policy .
I believe that this accession will strengthen the rule of law in China .
The fundamental principles of transparency , non-discrimination , efficient administration and independent judicial control , which are included in the acquis of the WTO , will contribute , we believe , to the positive evolution of China ' s economic , legal and social systems .
In any event , for our part , we have been concerned , throughout the process of negotiations , to propose progressive measures which will prevent any particular section of the Chinese economy from being exposed to foreign competition overnight .
In conclusion , I would like to insist on the fact that the result of these negotiations is balanced .
It is true that we have defended European interests , and our document to Council and Parliament reflects that strategy .
No , we have not ignored the consequences for China and for the WTO .
Yes , accession will have a positive impact in terms of the quest for economic development in China , and therefore on the quest for internal reforms .
In any event , it is the Chinese themselves who have chosen to integrate themselves into the international economy , and so much the better .
At the same time we can only rejoice at the fact that , for the first time , Taiwan is becoming a full member of an international organisation , in a way which reflects its economic development and its status as an industrialised country .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will end by saying to the House that these two results are due to the wisdom of my predecessor , Sir Leon Brittan , who had made these two accessions one of the priorities of the Union ' s commercial policy .
All I have done is finish the work which he had largely and judiciously started .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.15 p.m. )
Address by His Holiness the XIVth Dalai-Lama
It is a great honour to speak and share some of my thoughts and feelings with you .
As my prepared statement is in Tibetan , I want to read in Tibetan to show respect for my own unique , separate language .
So I will speak Tibetan .
( Loud applause ) Recently , in Calcutta , at a function , at the beginning , as usual , I spoke in Tibetan and then in my broken English .
The next day a local newspaper reported very favourably on my remarks but said that the Dalai Lama spoke at the beginning in Chinese .
So I hope you will realise that this is not Chinese , but the Tibetan language .
( Laughter and applause )
( The speaker continued in Tibetan , what follows is a translation ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
It is a great honour for me to address the European Parliament .
I believe the European Union is an inspiring example for a cooperative and peaceful co-existence among different nations and peoples and deeply inspiring for people like myself who strongly believe in the need for better understanding , closer cooperation , and greater respect among the various nations of the world .
I thank you for this kind invitation .
I consider it as an encouraging gesture of genuine sympathy and concern for the tragic fate of the Tibetan people .
I speak to you today as a simple Buddhist monk , educated and trained in our ancient traditional way .
I am not an expert in political science .
However , my life-long study and practice of Buddhism and my responsibility and involvement in the non-violent freedom struggle of the Tibetan people have given me some experiences and thoughts that I would like to share with you .
It is evident that the human community has reached a critical juncture in its history .
Today ' s world requires us to accept the oneness of humanity .
In the past , communities could afford to think of one another as fundamentally separate .
But today , as we learn from the recent tragic events in the United States , whatever happens in one region eventually affects many other areas .
The world is becoming increasingly interdependent .
Within the context of this new interdependence , self-interest clearly lies in considering the interest of others .
Without the cultivation and promotion of a sense of universal responsibility our very future is in danger .
I strongly believe that we must consciously develop a greater sense of universal responsibility .
We must learn to work not just for our own individual self , family or nation , but for the benefit of all mankind .
Universal responsibility is the best foundation both for our personal happiness and for world peace , the equitable use of our natural resources , and , through a concern for future generations , the proper care for the environment .
Many of the world ´ s problems and conflicts arise because we have lost sight of the basic humanity that binds us all together as a human family .
We tend to forget that despite the diversity of race , religion , culture , language , ideology and so forth , people are equal in their basic desire for peace and happiness : we all want happiness and do not want suffering .
We strive to fulfil these desires as best we can .
However , as much as we praise diversity in theory , unfortunately often we fail to respect it in practice .
In fact , our inability to embrace diversity becomes a major source of conflict among peoples .
A particularly sad fact of human history is that conflicts have arisen in the name of religion .
Even today , individuals are killed , their communities destroyed and societies destabilised as a result of misuse of religion and encouragement of bigotry and hatred .
According to my personal experience the best way to overcome obstructions to inter-religious harmony and to bring about understanding is through dialogue with members of other faith traditions .
This I see occurring in a number of different ways .
In my own case , for example , my meetings with the late Thomas Merton , a Trappist monk , in the late 60s , were deeply inspiring .
They helped me develop a profound admiration for the teachings of Christianity .
I also feel that meetings amongst different religious leaders and joining together to pray from a common platform are extremely powerful , as was the case in 1986 during the gathering at Assisi in Italy .
The recent United Nations Millennium World Peace Summit of Religious and Spiritual Leaders held last year was also a laudable step .
However , there is a need for more of these initiatives on a regular basis .
On my part , to show my respect for other religious traditions I went on pilgrimage to Jerusalem - a site holy to three of the world ' s great religions .
I have paid visits to various Hindu , Islamic , Christian , Jain and Sikh shrines both in India and abroad .
During the past three decades I have met with many religious leaders of different traditions and have discussed harmony and inter-religious understanding .
When exchanges like these occur , followers of one tradition will find that , just as in the case of their own , the teachings of other faiths are a source of both spiritual inspiration and as well as ethical guidance to their followers .
It will also become clear that irrespective of doctrinal and other differences , all the major world religions help to transform individuals to become good human beings .
All emphasise love , compassion , patience , tolerance , forgiveness , humility , self-discipline and so on .
We must therefore embrace the concept of plurality in the field of religion , too .
In the context of our newly emerging global community all forms of violence , including war , are totally inappropriate means of settling disputes .
Violence and war have always been part of human history , and in ancient times there were winners and losers .
However , there would be no winners at all if another global conflict were to occur today .
We must , therefore , have the courage and vision to call for a world without nuclear weapons and national armies in the long run .
( Loud applause ) Especially , in the light of the terrible attacks in the United States the international community must make a sincere attempt to use the horrible and shocking experience to develop a sense of global responsibility , where a culture of dialogue and non-violence is used in resolving differences .
Dialogue is the only sensible and intelligent way of resolving differences and clashes of interests , whether between individuals or nations .
The promotion of a culture of dialogue and non-violence for the future of mankind is a compelling task of the international community .
It is not enough for governments to endorse the principle of non-violence without any appropriate action to support and promote it .
If non-violence is to prevail , non-violent movements must be made effective and successful .
Some consider the 20th century a century of war and bloodshed .
I believe the challenge before us is to make the new century one of dialogue and non-violence .
Furthermore , in dealing with conflicts too often we lack proper judgment and courage .
We fail to pay adequate attention to situations of potential conflict when they are at an early stage of development .
Once all the circumstances have progressed to a state where emotions of the people or communities involved in disputes have become fully charged , it is extremely difficult , if not impossible , to prevent a dangerous situation from exploding .
We see this tragic situation repeated time and again .
So we must learn to detect early signs of conflict and have the courage to address the problem before it reaches its boiling point .
I remain convinced that most human conflicts can be solved through genuine dialogue conducted with a spirit of openness and reconciliation .
I have therefore consistently sought a resolution of the issue of Tibet through non-violence and dialogue .
Right from the beginning of the invasion of Tibet , I tried to work with the Chinese authorities to arrive at a mutually acceptable , peaceful co-existence .
Even when the so-called Seventeen Point Agreement for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet was forced upon us I tried to work with the Chinese authorities .
After all , by that agreement the Chinese government recognised the distinctiveness and the autonomy of Tibet and pledged not to impose their system on Tibet against our wishes .
However , in breach of this agreement , the Chinese authorities forced upon Tibetans their rigid and alien ideology and showed scant respect for the unique culture , religion and way of life of the Tibetan people .
In desperation the Tibetan people rose up against the Chinese . In the end in 1959 I had to escape from Tibet so that I could continue to serve the people of Tibet .
During the past more than four decades since my escape , Tibet has been under the harsh control of the government of the People ´ s Republic of China .
The immense destruction and human suffering inflicted on the people of Tibet are today well known and I do not wish to dwell on these sad and painful events .
The late Panchen Lama ' s 70,000-character petition to the Chinese government serves as a telling historical document on China ' s draconian policies and actions in Tibet .
Tibet today continues to be an occupied country , oppressed by force and scarred by suffering .
Despite some development and economic progress , Tibet continues to face fundamental problems of survival .
Serious violations of human rights are widespread throughout Tibet and are often the result of policies of racial and cultural discrimination .
Yet they are only the symptoms and consequences of a deeper problem .
The Chinese authorities view Tibet ' s distinct culture and religion as the source of threat of separation .
Hence as a result of deliberate policies an entire people with its unique culture and identity are facing the threat of extinction .
I have led the Tibetan freedom struggle on a path of non-violence and have consistently sought a mutually agreeable solution of the Tibetan issue through negotiations in a spirit of reconciliation and compromise with China .
With this spirit in 1988 here in Strasbourg at this Parliament I presented a formal proposal for negotiations , which we hoped would serve as a basis for resolving the issue of Tibet .
I had chosen consciously the European Parliament as a venue to present my thoughts for a framework for negotiations in order to underline the point that a genuine union can only come about voluntarily when there are satisfactory benefits to all the parties concerned .
The European Union is a clear and inspiring example of this .
On the other hand , even one country or community can break into two or more entities when there is a lack of trust and benefit , and when force is used as the principal means of rule .
My proposal which later became known as the ' Middle Way Approach ' or the ' Strasbourg Proposal ' envisages that Tibet enjoy genuine autonomy within the framework of the People ' s Republic of China .
However , not the autonomy on paper imposed on us 50 years ago in the 17-Point Agreement , but a true self-governing , genuinely autonomous Tibet , with Tibetans fully responsible for their own domestic affairs , including the education of their children , religious matters , cultural affairs , the care of their delicate and precious environment , and the local economy .
Beijing would continue to be responsible for the conduct of foreign and defence affairs .
This solution would greatly enhance the international image of China and contribute to her stability and unity -- the two topmost priorities of Beijing -- while at the same time the Tibetans would be ensured of the basic rights and freedoms to preserve their own civilisation and to protect the delicate environment of the Tibetan plateau .
Since then our relation with the Chinese government has taken many twists and turns .
Unfortunately , I must sadly inform you that a lack of political will on the part of the Chinese leadership to address the issue of Tibet in a serious manner has failed to produce any progress .
My initiatives and overtures over the years to engage the Chinese leadership in a dialogue remain unreciprocated .
Last September , I communicated through the Chinese Embassy in New Delhi our wish to send a delegation to Beijing to deliver a detailed memorandum outlining my thinking on the issue of Tibet and to explain and discuss the points raised in the memorandum .
I conveyed that through face-to-face meetings we would succeed in clarifying misunderstandings and overcoming distrust .
I expressed the strong belief that once this is achieved then a mutually acceptable solution of the problem can be found without much difficulty .
But the Chinese government is refusing to accept my delegation till today .
It is obvious that Beijing ' s attitude has hardened significantly compared to the eighties when six Tibetan delegations from exile were accepted .
Whatever explanations Beijing may give concerning communications between the Chinese government and myself I must state here clearly that the Chinese government is refusing to talk to the representatives I have designated for the task .
The failure of the Chinese leadership to respond positively to my Middle Way Approach reaffirms the Tibetan people ' s suspicion that the Chinese government has no interest whatsoever in any kind of peaceful co-existence .
Many Tibetans believe that China is bent on complete forceful assimilation and absorption of Tibet into China .
They call for the independence of Tibet and criticise my ' Middle Way Approach ' .
Others are advocating a referendum in Tibet .
They argue if conditions inside Tibet are as the Chinese authorities portray it to be and if the Tibetans are truly happy , then there should be no difficulty holding a plebiscite in Tibet .
I have also always maintained that ultimately the Tibetan people must be able to decide about the future of Tibet as Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru , the first Prime Minister of India , stated in the Indian Parliament on December 7 . 1950 : " ... the last voice in regard to Tibet should be the voice of the people of Tibet and nobody else . "
While I firmly reject the use of violence as a means in our freedom struggle we certainly have the right to explore all other political options available to us .
I am a staunch believer in freedom and democracy and have therefore been encouraging the Tibetans in exile to follow the democratic process .
Today , the Tibetan refugees may be among the few communities in exile that have established all the three pillars of democracy : legislature , judiciary and executive .
This year we have taken another big stride in the process of democratisation by having the chairman of the Tibetan Cabinet elected by popular vote .
The elected chairman of the Cabinet and the elected parliament will shoulder the responsibility of running the Tibetan affairs as the legitimate representatives of the people .
However , I consider it my moral obligation to the six million Tibetans to continue taking up the Tibetan issue with the Chinese leadership and to act as the free spokesman of the Tibetan people until a solution is reached .
In the absence of any positive response from the Chinese government to my overtures over the years , I am left with no alternative but to appeal to the members of the international community .
It is clear now that only increased , concerted and consistent international efforts will persuade Beijing to change its policy on Tibet .
Although the immediate reactions from the Chinese side will be most probably negative , nevertheless , I strongly believe that expressions of international concern and support are essential for creating an environment conducive for the peaceful resolution of the Tibetan problem .
On my part , I remain committed to the process of dialogue .
It is my firm belief that dialogue and a willingness to look with honesty and clarity at the reality of Tibet can lead us to a mutually beneficial solution that will contribute to the stability and unity of the People ' s Republic of China and secure the right for the Tibetan people to live in freedom , peace and dignity .
Brothers and sisters of the European Parliament , I consider myself as the free spokesman for my captive countrymen and women .
It is my duty to speak on their behalf .
I speak not with a feeling of anger or hatred towards those who are responsible for the immense suffering of our people and the destruction of our land , homes , temples , monasteries and culture .
They too are human beings who struggle to find happiness , and deserve our compassion .
I speak to inform you of the sad situation in my country today and of the aspirations of my people , because in our struggle for freedom , truth is the only weapon we possess .
Today , our people , our distinct rich cultural heritage and our national identity are facing the threat of extinction .
We need your support to survive as a people and as a culture .
When one looks at the situation inside Tibet it seems almost hopeless in the face of increasing repression , continuing environmental destruction , and the ongoing systematic undermining of the culture and identity of Tibet .
Yet I believe that no matter how big and powerful China may be she is still part of the world .
The global trend today is towards more openness , freedom , democracy and respect for human rights .
Sooner or later China will have to follow the world trend and in the long run there is no way that China can escape from truth , justice and freedom .
The consistent and principled engagement of the European Parliament with China will accelerate this process of change that is already taken place in China .
Since the Tibetan issue is closely related with what is happening in China , I believe there is reason and ground for hope .
I would like to thank the European Parliament for the consistent display of concern and support for the non-violent Tibetan freedom struggle .
Your sympathy and support have always been a deep source of inspiration and encouragement to the Tibetan people both inside and outside Tibet .
The numerous resolutions of the European Parliament on the issue of Tibet helped greatly to highlight the plight of the Tibetan people and raise the awareness of the public and governments in Europe and around the world of the issue of Tibet .
I am especially encouraged by the European Parliament ' s resolution calling for the appointment of an EU special representative for Tibet .
I strongly believe that the implementation of this resolution will enable the European Union not only to help promote a peaceful resolution of the Tibetan issue through negotiations in a more consistent , effective and creative way but also provide support for other legitimate needs of the Tibetan people , including ways and means to preserve our distinct identity .
This initiative will also send a strong signal to Beijing that the European Union is serious in encouraging and promoting a solution of the Tibetan problem .
I have no doubt that your continued expressions of concern and support for Tibet will in the long run impact positively and help create the conducive political environment for a constructive dialogue on the issue of Tibet .
I ask for your continued support in this critical time in our country ' s history .
I thank you for providing me the opportunity to share my thoughts with you .
( The House rose and accorded the speaker a standing ovation )
As you can see , your Holiness , we are all very moved and I would like to thank you , on behalf of the European Parliament , for the great , noble message you have just addressed to us .
You have been kind enough to point out that the European Parliament has always supported your action and your people .
We have seen that you are well acquainted with the resolutions we have voted for in Parliament , always by a huge majority , if not practically unanimously , including as recently as last February .
It is true that we realise , as you have pointed out , that the Tibetan people are being deprived of their fundamental freedoms , threatened with the destruction of their monasteries , which forge their moral and spiritual souls , and are threatened by a policy of marginalising the Tibetan people .
You have reminded us of all these things , and you have told us very frankly that , unfortunately , the hand held out to the Chinese authorities has so far been ignored , and we have also noted , your Holiness , that you have never lost hope .
You have this concern , but at the same time the great hope that the day will come when China , on opening up to the rest of the world , will finally hear your appeal , and that is a wish which we passionately share , but we can only join you in your desire , your Holiness .
We have clearly heard the powerful appeal you have made to us .
You have told us that if the international community , in this case the European Community , can join you in your efforts , perhaps the result we all wish to see could be within reach .
I would simply like to assure you that you can count on the active support of our European Parliament , on the active support of our political groups , on the active support of the intergroup which , as you know , has been created precisely to further strengthen our friendship with the Tibetan people .
You can count on our support , you can count on our indestructible loyalty so that , in the spirit of your proposals , Tibet can regain its freedom .
Thank you again , your Holiness , for your presence and your message .
( Loud applause ) ( The formal sitting was closed at 12.25 p.m. )
Madam President , I should like to put a point of order before Parliament today , at a time when we are about to vote on the most important act we are called upon to approve , that is , the budget .
Nine people died yesterday in the St Gotthard tunnel because of a road accident .
This places a greater onus on us when - under the heading of ' infrastructure ' - we come to vote on the much-needed and now ever more pressing engineering works which must be Europe ' s response to the problem of traffic across the Alpine passes .
Today we shall be debating the reopening of the Mont Blanc tunnel , with all the economic and environmental problems that involves .
Let us also remind ourselves of this : the incident in the St Gotthard tunnel was caused to a great extent by the additional volumes traffic that the St Gotthard , Brenner and other Alpine passes have had to absorb as a result of the closure of the Mont Blanc tunnel .
We must therefore vote with conviction for the infrastructure funding to speed up the procedure involved in rebuilding the Brenner rail tunnel and the Fréjus rail tunnel , and move road vehicles onto trains , with benefits for the safety of those who travel and also for the surrounding environment .
Let us remember that when we vote .
Of course , Mr Santini .
VOTE
Madam President , I am against this oral amendment .
( With more than twelve Members standing , the oral amendment was not considered ) Following the vote
Madam President , there has just been some enthusiastic applause because this vote has ended .
I can understand why , as this is always a protracted event .
However , I would like to ask you to put one other amendment to the vote .
I should have said this at the beginning , but we were already proceeding with the voting .
It is about the Court of Auditors .
We have now voted on an amount of 1 million in the line to build an extension for the Court of Auditors .
As the Committee on Budgets , we would like to ask for another EUR 6 million to be entered in the reserve so that additional capital can be injected during the coming year .
This will ultimately produce considerable savings for the taxpayer and will also create extra scope in future budgets .
I would also like to ask you to put this last amendment to the vote , which entails entering a further EUR 6 million in the reserve in budget line 206 .
( Parliament gave its assent )
Report ( A5-0330 / 2001 ) by Mr Costa Neves , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002 ( C5-0300 / 2001 - 2000 / 2324 ( BUD ) ) and Letter of amendment No 1 / 2002 ( 12733 / 2001 - C5-0495 / 2001 ) to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002 ( Section III - Commission )
Following the vote
Madam President , the vote has now been taken , but during the vote on the budget , we spoke against this idea and , as a result , this item was removed from the budget .
We are now voting in favour of this paragraph , which is not how we voted on the budget .
There is , therefore , a contradiction now , of which the House must be aware .
The fact is , however , that the vote has been taken .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0329 / 2001 ) by Mrs Buitenweg , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002 ( C5-0300 / 2001 - 2000 / 2325 ( BUD ) ) and Letter of amendment No 1 / 2002 ( 12733 / 2001 - C5-0495 / 2001 ) to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2002
Section I - European Parliament
Section II - Council
Section IV - Court of Justice
Section V - Court of Auditors
Section VI - Economic and Social Committee
Section VII - Committee of the Regions
Section VIII ( A ) - European Ombudsman
Section VIII ( B ) - European Data Protection Supervisor
With regard to Paragraph 39
Mrs Buitenweg , you have an oral amendment , I think , on Paragraph 39 , following the vote on the budget .
Would you be so kind as to explain this to us once more , so that we can proceed to the vote ?
I will do it in English .
It is about what I originally said about the conditions under which we will release the amounts or the items which we entered in the reserve in the last vote .
These are the conditions specified in Amendment No 73 of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
This is in accordance with what we discussed earlier , and this is the most straightforward way .
We must therefore amend the text in the way we have just voted .
It says :
" The money can be released after a favourable opinion from Parliaments ' committee responsible for the relations with the Court of Auditors , once the Court has given updated information on its current staffing problems and on how additional staff would enable the Court to assess the performance of financial control systems in the candidate countries , improve its cooperation with the national audit institutions ( requirement of Treaty of Nice ) and establish more detailed specific DAS assessment . "
( The President noted that there was no opposition to the oral amendment being considered )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , on Tuesday Mrs Morgan raised the issue of the letter that the Bureau sent to Mr Prodi on reform of the Commission , taking a very different stance from the position taken by the Commission .
We have just voted on the report by Mrs Buitenweg and have approved Amendment No 4 by Mr Elles , which reiterates Parliament 's wholehearted support for the Commission reforms .
Will you now write to Mr Prodi and convey to him the reconfirmed , wholehearted support of this Parliament for radical reforms of the Commission 's staff regulations ?
Madam President , I think that we have all noticed from your tone of voice that you have shown a great deal of personal stoicism in presiding over this part-session despite your ill health .
I would like to say , on behalf of all the ' budgeteers ' and in the name , I believe , of all my fellow Members , that we are very grateful to you for presiding over the votes on the budget in the first and second reading .

Madam President , I of course share the sentiments expressed by Mr Bourlanges .
However , we have to look into the question asked by Mr van Hulten , because , when it was raised by Mrs Morgan earlier on this week when Mr Provan was in the chair , he said he would examine whether it was possible to see what was going to happen .
Therefore , maybe you could respond to Mr van Hulten ' s question and possibly discuss this matter with the Bureau , that will meet to clarify the situation .
Mr President , I am sorry Mrs Fontaine had to leave , so perhaps you would pass on my remarks to her .
As the House will know , I spent a great deal of time studying the reform process on behalf of the House last year and continued to follow it through the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
I understand exactly the points that Mrs Fontaine made but , I ask you , on behalf of all Members of this House , to keep us better informed of the process .
This was the point that I raised back in September when I asked the presidency to give us the same level of information about the progress of the reforms as we are receiving from the Commission .
Mr Kinnock has given us a comprehensive timetable about the progress of the reform discussions .
This House , these Members , have no information whatsoever from the Bureau about the reform process .
I ask you to be much more transparent and to give us a progress report on these reforms .
Your request will be passed on , but you will understand that , given the votes that have yet to be taken and that will take up much time , I cannot extend this debate any longer .
Have courage . Mrs Fontaine showed hers in remaining in the chair despite her state of ill health .
Mr Fatuzzo still has much work to do this morning , so we should all take heart .
Report ( A5-0342 / 2001 ) by Mr Seppänen , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft ECSC operating budget for 2002 ( SEC ( 2001 ) 827 - C5-0233 / 2001 - 2001 / 2100 ( BUD ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0686 / 2001 ) on EU strategy at the Marrakesh conference on climate change
On Paragraph 9
Mr President , on behalf of my colleagues in the Socialist and the Christian Democratic Group I would like to make an oral amendment to paragraph 9 .
It should read as follows : " ... welcomes the fact that the Commission came forward with the announced packet of the three climate change proposals " .
The Commission came forward the day before yesterday with the three proposals , we have to correct that .
I also want to congratulate the Commission for doing this before the very important climate change conference in Marrakesh , COP 7 .
( The President noted that there was no opposition to considering the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0326 / 2001 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position on the adoption of the directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing harmonised requirements and procedures for the safe loading and unloading of bulk carriers ( 7193 / 2 / 2001 - C5-0292 / 2001 - 2000 / 0121 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr van Dam )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Report ( A5-0327 / 2001 ) by Mr Vatanen , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on reporting formalities for ships arriving in and departing from Community ports ( COM ( 2001 ) 46 - C5-0051 / 2001 - 2001 / 0026 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0338 / 2001 ) by Mr Lamassoure , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council regulation on pre-accession financial assistance for Turkey ( COM ( 2001 ) 230-C5-0219 / 2001 - 2001 / 0097 ( CNS )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0343 / 2001 ) by Mr Lamassoure , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the 2000 Regular Report from the Commission on Turkey ' s progress towards accession ( COM ( 2000 ) 713 - C5-0613 / 2000 - 2000 / 2014 ( COS )
On Amendment No 8
Mr President , by agreement with the rapporteur I would like to make an oral amendment .
I only have the English text with me now .
It should read : " Insists on the immediate abolition of the death penalty ... " instead of " Reiterates its call for the immediate abolition of the death penalty ... "
( The President noted that there was no opposition to considering the oral amendment ) On paragraph 10
Mr President , for the sake of compromise here , too , we would like to propose the following , which is submitted with the rapporteur ' s cooperation and agreement .
It should read : " Urges Turkey to propose in the coming year a precise timetable ... " , in other words we would insert : " in the coming year " .
( The President noted that there was no opposition to considering the oral amendment ) ( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0366 / 2001 ) by Mr Gahrton , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council decision establishing the Community 's position in the Ministerial Conference set up by the accord creating the World Trade Organisation , with regard to the accession of the People 's Republic of China to the World Trade Organisation ( COM ( 2001 ) 517 - C5-0487 / 2001 - 2001 / 0218 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0367 / 2001 ) by Mr Gahrton , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council decision establishing the Community 's position in the Ministerial Conference set up by the accord creating the World Trade Organisation , with regard to the accession of the separate Customs territory of Chinese Taipei ( Taiwan , Penghu , Kinmen and Matsu ) to the World Trade Organisation ( COM ( 2001 ) 518 - C5-0488 / 2001 - 2001 / 0216 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0695 / 2001 ) , by Mr Wurtz , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the conclusions of the Ghent European Council of 19 October
Mr President , I want to make a point on the European Council in Ghent .
It is a suggestion from the ELDR Group , the Greens and the Socialists on paragraph 7 , where we each have tabled an amendment , Amendments Nos 13 , 9 and 5 respectively .
The suggestion is an oral amendment to merge all of them to add at the end of paragraph 7 : " which adequately represents women , respects their human rights and ensures that Afghan women participate fully in building such a future " .
The only problem , Mrs Ludford , is that we are at present dealing with a resolution by our Group .
We have not yet moved on to the joint motion for a resolution , so you are jumping ahead .
We must first ascertain whether or not there is a majority on the first resolution .
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the results of the informal meeting of the European Council held at Ghent on 19 October 2001 .
Mr President , I would like to ask for an explanation as to whether , when the amendments are merged , the word " commitment " should be kept in the text as set out in the Socialist amendment .
In other words , it would be " a commitment " to do this .
I think the implication is that this is the case , that the word " commitment " should also appear in the merged text .
Mr President , one of the reasons that I was motivated to suggest this oral amendment which brings the three together is that in the English text , the Socialist amendment does not read very well .
When it says we should include a " compromise in favour of Afghan women " , that , in English , could be read as suggesting that we compromise the interests of Afghan women .
It is not a happy wording in English .
It means a settlement .
" Compromise " is not a good translation of " compromis " .
That was one of the reasons why I ventured to suggest that we try to merge the three and therefore , in English , we get rid of the word " compromise " , which is ambiguous .
Mr President , I would just like to make a correction of a linguistic nature .
The translation into English of the Spanish word ' compromiso ' is ' commitment ' and not ' compromise ' .
( The President noted that there was no opposition to considering the oral amendment ) ( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0308 / 2001 ) by Mr Poos , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on Council reform ( 2001 / 2020 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0689 / 2001 ) , by Mr Gallagher , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the European Union 's approach to the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation in Doha , Qatar
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution ) Joint motion for a resolution on the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0331 / 2001 ) by Mr Désir , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on openness and democracy in international trade ( ( 2001 / 2093 ( INI ) )
On Amendment No 6
Mr President , I would like to point out that we , the Group of the European People 's Party / European Democrats , tabled Amendment No 6 to recital A and that we want the words " supply constraints " in the fourth line of the English text to be replaced by the word " quotas " because that is the correct term .
( The President noted that there was no opposition to considering the oral amendment ) On Amendment No 3
Mr President , I want to move an oral amendment , with the agreement of the rapporteur , to tidy up Amendment No 3 so that it now reads : " ... calls for a commitment by the world leaders gathered at the WTO to coordinate measures to help developing countries tackle the impediments to growth ... " , etc .
Are any Members opposed to this oral amendment being considered ?
Mr President , by agreement with the proposers I would like to ask that we keep " looks to the Member States " and add " and the Council " .
Is there any opposition to the addition of " and by the Council " ?
There seems not to be .
We will therefore include this oral suggestion .
( The President noted that there was no opposition to considering the oral amendment ) On Amendment No 15
Mr President , I have been requested to put an oral amendment .
In the spirit of compromise and in order for this amendment to passed , I suggest that we add on the end of paragraph 37 : " and to assist in the fight against terrorism " .
( The President noted that there was no opposition to considering the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
General Budget for 2002
. ( NL ) During the vote on the 2002 draft budget , the delegation of the Dutch People ' s Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) in the ELDR group stated that it was against the increase in the category 2 payment appropriations .
The European Commission stated that these increases could not be absorbed by the corresponding budget lines , and furthermore that these increases would result in higher contributions for Member States .
The VVD delegation therefore does not regard this increase in payment appropriations as necessary .
Nevertheless , the delegation did vote in favour of the increase in the category 2 commitment appropriations because it is of the opinion that proper programming of the structural funds is needed .
We have generally voted against the Committee ' s proposal to increase the agricultural expenditure in category 1 .
We think it unreasonable that approximately half the EU ' s total annual budget should go on subsidising the production and export of agricultural products .
Today ' s common agricultural policy is not only expensive for the EU , it also contributes to higher consumer prices .
The agricultural sector is , moreover , well protected from competition from foreign imports .
This has a very distorting and destabilising effect on the world economy .
The EU ' s common agricultural policy constitutes , above all , a problem for the developing countries , for agriculture is an area in which the developing countries are competitive in relation to the industrialised world ' s producers .
The EU ' s common agricultural policy presents major obstacles for the developing countries , partly due to the fact that the agriculture concerned is subsidised and protected against competition in the form of imports .
The fact that the EU also subsidises tobacco cultivation is particularly anomalous .
Subsidies for tobacco cultivation should be abolished as soon as possible .
The EU ' s activity and budget should instead be directed at cross-border problems which the Member States themselves cannot solve .
The common agricultural policy shows a lack of solidarity with the developing countries and must be reformed immediately .
Costa Neves Report ( A5-0330 / 2001 )
Mr President , the radical Members have a certain reputation for efficiency which my explanation of vote will go some way towards dispelling , as we made a mistake , a serious mistake , in the Budget vote , in respect of Amendment No 75 on the contribution to the funding of European political parties .
Whilst being signatories to this amendment , which was intended to abolish the Budget line in question - because we not only believe that the idea of funding of European political parties is not at present justified , but there is no legal basis for it - we voted against the amendment which we had ourselves proposed .
My explanation is therefore intended to correct , as far as possible , the result of the vote .
We have already asked for the record to be adjusted .
There is a mistake in our list of votes , which we are keen to put right .
Otherwise , we judge the Costa Neves report in a positive light , but we were keen to emphasise this minor technical error with regard to Amendment No 75 .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
Thank you , Mr Dell 'Alba .
The House had been wondering .
Now it is completely enlightened .
Mr President , should I give up making explanations of vote just because I have lost my voice ?
With regard to the budget , I should like to say something about the section on the Commission .
I voted for it , but this will be the last time , because I want to get some light on how the Commission works .
On 1 January 2002 I shall set off on a long journey , like Odysseus when the Trojan War ended , through the maze of bureaucracy in the 13 523 offices of the Commission and its 33 728 staff .
It will be a long , hard and difficult journey : I shall meet Polyphemus , I shall meet Circe , the sorceress , and perhaps in the end I shall see Penelope looking like our President Prodi .
It will certainly be a shock , but I hope to be able to vote for it again next time .
. ( FR ) As is the case every year , the second October part-session is principally devoted to the adoption of the Community Budget .
This is the only area in which Parliament can influence Community policy , as it possesses the power of codecision with the Council and , above all , has the right of veto .
In a Europe where technocracy reigns and the democratic deficit prevails , it is , therefore , one of the few powers exercised by representatives elected by universal suffrage .
Just like last year ' s budget , the 2002 budget is a reflection of the free-market .
As a Budget , it is characterised by austerity ( 0.3 % of European GDP ) , with an overall lack of financial resources , especially for employment policy , enlargement , and the management of crises , whether they be in food supplies , Afghanistan , Palestine or the Balkans .

The rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves , rubber-stamps these tendencies as a whole by proposing an increase in payment appropriations - which is something of a positive step - but , at the same time , proposes the allocation to reserve of structural funds and somewhatobscure transfers from operations to administration - which is rather a backward move
For these reasons , we cannot support either the report or the 2002 draft Budget .
Buitenweg Report ( A5-0329 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for Mrs Buitenweg ' s report on the budget , but I should like to stress very strongly and loudly here in Parliament , with so many members present on this occasion , that the Pensioners ' Party - which I have the honour to represent in this House - believes that the European Parliament , which now legislates on fifty per cent of all national laws , which are adaptations to the directives that we approve here , should have greater funding and better organisation in order to function as befits a supranational Parliament , a Parliament with so many important duties .
- ( FI ) I , together with my group , supported the change over to a reimbursement system based on receipted costs with regard to reimbursement of travel expenses , secretarial costs and office costs .
My group interprets the wording used in the first amendment to mean that there is now no proper procedure at all .
At the same time , the amendment totally ignores the fact that the decision is now in the hands of the Council .
Parliament has proposed the procedure intended by this amendment and is prepared to adopt it , but the Council has not been able to give the necessary approval .
On the basis of the above , my group feels that the amendment puts Parliament in a bad light , unduly and unfairly .
Budget debates are great moments for Parliament because they afford us an opportunity to make a comprehensive review of past and future policy .
Unfortunately time does not allow me to do so .
I would therefore like to confine myself to just one point , that is the situation in the border regions of the Member States adjoining the candidate countries .
It is beyond question that today ' s border regions will benefit from European Union enlargement in the long term since there will be totally new opportunities for economic , cultural , social and administrative regional cooperation .
Nevertheless , in the short term there will be tremendous pressure as they adjust to specific problems arising out of the very different levels of development , especially in the social field .
I need only point out that the earnings gap between East and West is around 60 % .
This raises questions that did not arise with earlier enlargements and which take on a new dimension .
The anticipated problems on the local labour and service markets will not be overcome without a great deal of effort .
Large numbers of daily commuters will put enormous pressure on an already tight labour market - in Brandenburg and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania alone unemployment rates in excess of 20 % are quite common .
Cheap services with wage costs around 60 % lower will be a tremendous challenge for SMEs and craft trades .
Local and regional governments and administrations believe that the Commission ' s proposed programme of assistance to border regions fails to match the scale of the challenge .
I therefore welcome the inclusion of a special budget line for border regions .
But I also call for additional Union funding to be made available as quickly as possible to reassure the border region citizens affected that their concerns and needs are not going unnoticed .
We need a basis in law , and the Commission must create it very quickly .
Seppänen Report ( A5-0342 / 2001 )
. ( FR ) As is plain to see , we voted against the ECSC budget , which , as it will do until the expiry of the ECSC Treaty , continues to pump subsidies to shareholders in the steel industry .
Substantial sums have already been handed out to the bosses in this sector , allowing them to move over to lucrative new sectors , while many of the workers whose jobs have been abolished are still unemployed .
This report proposes the integration of social security assistance into the Budget of the European Union ; but there is a need to guarantee , as a minimum , that all the workers affected by future job losses will receive the whole of their salary up to the age of retirement .
van Dam Report ( A5-0326 / 2001 )
Mr President , you know - as , I believe , everybody does - that in the early years of my working life I was a seaman .
I am therefore particularly concerned about safety and the safeguarding of human life at sea , and not only at sea but also when freight is being unloaded from ships in port .
This document is attempting to do something to improve safety for the lives of the seamen who work in ports .
Ports are very important for Italy - especially the port of Genoa , where I was born , and the port of Livorno , where I was a short time ago .
All ports are important , like the port of Marseille and those on the other coasts of Europe , which is the union of countries that has the largest number of seafaring people .
We must continue to do everything possible to safeguard human lives at sea , as we are doing in this document .
Vatanen Report ( A5-0327 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for the report by my friend Mr Vatanen , who will be disappointed at having been the rapporteur of a document that can do so little for transport ; it does , however , do something for bureaucracy .
Well , I would like to tell him : we have not managed to get rid of bureaucracy - and not just in sea transport - but can we manage to get rid of bureaucracy at least in the payment of pensions and the granting of pensions ?
Mr President , there are pensioners who die because of bureaucracy , without having drawn their pensions .
Of course , they go to Heaven ; they know when they get there .
These pensioners deserve to go to Heaven , as all pensioners do , but it would be better if their pensions arrived while they were still alive !
Lamassoure Report ( A5-0338 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for the report on aid to Turkey , but I want to say that the Pensioners ' Party and I personally ask the European Union to be braver .
The 12 countries that have applied to join the European Union should all be admitted in 2004 without any further conditions , because this would be a courageous political act : they have been waiting for fifty years to feel really European .
Did the six countries that signed the Treaty of Rome , Mr President , have to include the Community acquis in their own statute books before signing ?
There was no Community directive , but even so a great Europe was formed through an important political act .
I tell you : we can let in all 12 countries in 2004 , whatever their legislative situation may be .
. I have voted against the Report on Turkey .
Turkey has not yet taken the necessary measures to fully restore the political rights of the Kurdish people , suppress torture and abolish the special security courts and prisons that drive prisoners to go on hunger strikes which have claimed more than 70 victims already .
Turkey has not even fixed a precise timetable for fulfilling the political criteria of Copenhagen .
We are giving up human rights for geopolitical and military reasons .
That is not admissible in a democratic Parliament .
. ( NL ) Some politicians are keen to bring Turkey into the European Union before that country has radically changed .
They are therefore prepared to turn a blind eye to a number of extremely negative consequences .
Admitting a country like this , which is an exceptional case , will have a fundamental impact on the existing standards for democratic freedom and human rights in the EU .
The rapporteur wanted to create the impression that in Turkey it was a question of minor deficiencies which could be resolved quickly and easily .
Fortunately , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy has adopted a more critical stance , but still not critical enough by far .
In fact , the announced reforms are heading in the right direction , but do not yet go very far at all .
The release of prisoners and the abolition of the death penalty apply to criminal prisoners but not yet to political opponents , whose rights they refuse to recognise .
The mass murder of Armenians is still denied or justified as a normal way of suppressing opposition , which they want to continue to be able to use in the future .
The displaced populations from 3 500 destroyed Kurdish villages in the south-east are not being allowed to return to the area .
Fear of what is called " separatism " results in a language , songs and writings being punishable .
This country is still a long way from being en route to the EU .
. ( FR ) The issue of Turkey brings us back with a jolt to the question of what kind of Europe we want .
If the question is framed in terms of membership of a monolithic bloc , the Turkish question will be extremely difficult to resolve .
It will suffice to consider the example of our shared external frontier .
On the hypothesis that Europe will develop steadily towards variable geometry , nothing , then , prevents the involvement of Turkey in certain European policies in fields where there is a real commonality of interests .
If , on the contrary , we hold fast to a rigid conception of the European Union , the only outcome , in the long term , will be the reversal of the decision made at Helsinki and the resumption of an association process with Turkey of the same kind as those we are developing with the other Mediterranean States which geography and history have placed outside Europe .
I am , by the way , astonished to learn , from the Turkish Ambassador , that the rapporteur , Mr Lamassoure , was opposed to the amendments referring to the Armenian genocide , whilst the political group to which he belongs played an active part in having this crime recognised as such by the French National Assembly .
Could this be a case of ' doublespeak ' ?
Lamassoure Report ( A5-0343 / 2001 )
.
( FR ) We voted against the Lamassoure Report " on Turkey 's progress towards accession " as we cannot see how the rapporteur manages to reconcile Turkey 's inclusion and his conception of a federal Europe with strong supranational powers .
The rule of law must in fact relate to the identity of a people , and the practice of democracy falls under this heading .
To date we have still not found a European people .
What chance then of a Turco-European people ?
In fact , the Lamassoure report 's sole merit is that it brings into the cold light of day the contradictions of present-day Europe .
If it proves necessary to establish firm cooperative links with Turkey , this cannot under any circumstances come about through a supranational power enacting regulations uniformly applicable to all , but must result from dialogue between one nation and another , within the European variable-geometry structure .
Moreover , the Lamassoure Report finesses with the recognition of the Armenian genocide of 1917 , doubtless aiming to appease Turkey .
We believe there is a need to be more frank and to ask Turkey to acknowledge that the genocide took place .
Obviously it is difficult , but it would not be the first country to regret a dark episode in its history .
Turkey would then have to act consistently with the objective of true peace-making by re-establishing diplomatic relations with Armenia .
.
( FR ) There are questions that will not go away ; nor will the historic wounds that remain open in the Armenian community throughout the world .
In its resolution in June 1987 , the European Parliament asked Turkey to have the courage to look at its past with open eyes in order to be able to look towards the future .
Democracy is guaranteed by historical truth , which cannot be bought or sold and cannot suffer at the hands of special interests , be they financial or economic .
What is at issue today is not recognition of the Armenian genocide 's reality , as this House has already had occasion to declare that in 1987 .
In asking that the Lamassoure Report should make reference to the genocide , I was not seeking to revive ancestral hatreds or to blow on the embers of intolerance , but to echo the legitimate concerns expressed in Armenian communities .
The children of Armenia who were exiled to our countries at the beginning of the century expect today an act of justice .
They want a ' moral resting-place ' for their ancestors .
Remembrance is an even more pressing duty at this time when the last witnesses to the exile , the last to escape the carnage , are themselves quietly dying away .
I am convinced that joining the EU implies adherence to the fundamental principles in accordance with which it was created ; democracy , respect for human rights and for the rights of minorities .
Such a step invites each one of the candidate countries to take up the burden of its past in order to be able to make its peace with its own history .
I regret that this House has not followed me in doing this .
. ( FR ) I abstained on this motion for a resolution .
I regret that the European Parliament has not felt able to show consistency in rejecting the amendments asking Turkey to continue dialogue on acknowledgement of the Armenian genocide .
In fact , last year , Parliament openly committed itself to calling upon the Turkish government to recognise this period of its history .
Today , under a cloak of expediency , this House has demonstrated its hypocrisy .
As regards Turkey 's possible accession to the European Union , I would remind you that the real question of the frontiers of Europe is still an open one .
At a distance from the peoples involved , we carry on discussing the hypothetical accession of this country to the EU without putting the real question , which is to do with the identity and outline of Europe .
The Commission and Parliament would be better advised to explore ways by which Turkey can be associated with the EU rather than directly integrated into it .
) , in writing . ( FR ) This report on progress towards accession to the European Union is being presented in a very specific context .
Firstly , Turkey is weighed down by the burden of its foreign debt ( over EUR 120 billion ) and in consequence has to set aside almost 70 % of its budget to service it .
The spiralling debt results in a programme of austerity and structural reform which has brought in its wake massive unemployment and broad cuts in social security expenditure .
As well as economic difficulties , there is a worsening political situation , especially for prisoners of conscience , a persistent denial of the rights of the Kurds , failure to acknowledge the Armenian genocide , and in more general terms a lack of regard for the democratic rights of Turkey ' s population .
Despite the fact that the report takes account of the social repercussions of the prolonged economic and financial crisis , pleads in favour of rapid payment of EU financial aid to accompany reforms especially in the social sphere , especially as regards the establishment of the rule of law and the promotion of civil society and even though it considers the - admittedly increased - amount of aid granted to Turkey not yet to reflect the importance attached to Turkey 's trade relations with the EU ; and insists on the need for Turkey to equip itself with modern legislation on the right to strike and on collective negotiation , it is not for European governments or for the Turkish Government to determine the conditions for membership .
It is for the people of Turkey to decide and they must be consulted by means of a referendum .
It is for these reasons that we did not vote in favour of this report .
Gahrton Report ( A5-0366 / 2001 )
. ( NL ) Given the characteristics of the World Trade Organisation , I wonder how a large and poor country hopes to benefit from it .
I would advise China to stay out of it and to rather rely on self-support than participation in world trade .
But I also agree that China ' s accession should not be refused if she asks for it herself .
The People 's Republic of China was internationally isolated for many years and was not recognised by most countries .
Since it was ultimately recognised , the territory on the island of Taiwan that is controlled by the successors to the government driven out in 1949 is regarded as a non-recognised state , which is something we should now try to find a solution for .
On the one hand , there are economic and military ties , and on the other , some people act as if she does not exist .
It is just as contrived to automatically allocate Taiwan to China as it was to allocate China 's territory to Taiwan in the past .
The two territories have grown far apart over the past 50 years or more , and there have always been ethnic differences anyway .
I reluctantly endorse the proposed structures , but they will not solve the real problems .
Ghent European Council ( RC B5-0696 / 2001 )
. ( EL ) The leaders of the European Union found yet another opportunity at the interim summit in Ghent to side with American imperialism and support their audacious plans in central Asia , which involve bombing and murdering the Afghans .
They clearly stated that they intend to prepare a regime ( obviously which meets with their approval ) to succeed the Taliban and are willing to help " reconstruct " Afghanistan , thereby revealing their ulterior motive of ensuring that they are involved in sharing out the booty when the time comes .
In addition , they are planning close collaboration with the USA on a whole series of issues , including judicial assistance .
As regards the " enemy within " , the summit is planning to speed up anti-democratic legislative arrangements on a common definition of terrorism and a common European arrest warrant at a speed which is revelatory of their intentions .
As for the Middle East , the summit confines itself to a few general pronouncements on a Palestine state and talks of stopping the violence , without making any reference to Israeli aggression .
This is a summit which , just like previous summits , is brimming with anti-grass roots measures and aggressive action against the people ; a summit which should give the people of the Member States and of the entire world cause for concern and every reason to step up their fight ; a summit which confirms the imperialist nature of the European Union yet again and should be a lesson to all those who proclaim that the ÅU can act as a counterweight to American aggression .
The joint motion contains nothing more than sickening praise for the summit 's decisions and shows absolutely no sign of sensitivity to the consequences which these decision will have both within the EU and in the world as a whole , which is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against it .
.
( FR ) The European Council in Ghent has just taken note of a Commission report on the preparation for the changeover to euro notes and coins , which presents forty " good practices " suggested to banks , governments and retailers in Member States " in order to make up for lost time " .
This parenthetical remark by the Commission must surely pull us up short .
Why has time been wasted , although the date for the changeover of notes and coins has been set for a long time , and governments had all the time in the world to prepare themselves ?
The most probable explanation is this : the authorities seem to have thought that private citizens , being in any case caught in the trap , would be obliged to adapt themselves .
Under these circumstances , why should they tire themselves out ?
This attitude says much about the thinking behind an operation which was deceitfully presented as being entirely centred on the improved comfort of citizens .
In addition , when you look down the list of the " forty good practices " , you notice that they are minor low-level gimmicks - ranging from the early labelling of prices in euros to longer opening hours at bank counters - whose effect can only be marginal .
But major actions that could conceivably lessen citizens ' difficulties , whether financial ( reimbursing tradesmen and small businesses for their efforts at adaptation ) or technical ( stating both the euro value and the value in the national currency on notes and coins ) , have been firmly excluded .
It is true that dual-denomination notes or coins would have required thought at an earlier stage and for that there would have had to be a real concern to lighten the burden on private individuals .
Nothing , though , could be more foreign to the inventors of the single currency .

Perhaps - as , after all , clouds do have silver linings - citizens will see at the beginning of next year that in fact they had counted for little in the introduction of the single currency . And then they might learn a few truths about the true nature of Brussels .
Although we welcome some aspects of the resolution that has been adopted today by the European Parliament , we must express our reservations and criticism of some very negative aspects , specifically its support for the war strategy that the USA is implementing in Afghanistan , which will not only fail to resolve any problems but will actually worsen the humanitarian crisis and incidences of racism and xenophobia .
We are also critical of the relentless political pressure to speed up the militarisation of the EU and the communitisation of aspects of ' justice and home affairs ' , through the ' creation of a genuine European judicial area . '
What is particularly worrying is the fact that proposals have been tabled for creating a ' European search and arrest warrant ' or the controversial and dangerous common definition of terrorist acts as well as measures that represent a serious attack on fundamental freedoms , guarantees and rights linked to the coordination and effectiveness of law enforcement in the framework of cooperation with the USA .
Nor can we fail to mention the symptomatic absence from the resolution of any critical reference to the Ghent Council decisions on confirming compliance with the ' Growth and Stability ' pact , with maintaining the policy of wage moderation , or the reform of the labour markets , the processes of liberalising public services - of which the recent decision on postal services is one example - the reform of public services in social provision or the Council ' s announcement of the launch of a new round of negotiations at the WTO .
These measures will have a serious effect on the interests of workers and of the communities in the various countries of the EU .
With regard to the creation of a ' preparatory convention ' for the new IGC , we feel its prime objective is an attempt to limit or impose conditions on the sovereign decisions of governments and national parliaments .
This is why we have voted against this motion for a resolution .
.
( FR ) Like its predecessors , the informal summit in Ghent showed the disagreements that exist between the various Heads of State , which have been the subject of a great deal of comment in the media .
Over and above this apparent discord , though , there has been unanimity on one essential point : the EU is well and truly at war and it is going to back up its commitment to join in combat .
Its repressive arsenal is moving ahead by leaps and bounds :
The Rapid Strike Force will become reality ;
A European Judicial Area will allow the creation of one public prosecution authority and harmonise punishments ;
The prerogatives of Europol are going to be strengthened .
Without doubt , the most immediate threat to citizens ' liberties is the introduction of a European arrest warrant , which , by creating an exceptional law for all the supposed terrorists , will make greater repression possible across the whole of the EU .
The definition of a terrorist has been made broader , and will be able to be applied to all who resist an unjust and intolerable order .

There was clearly no space at this summit for a social Europe ; on the contrary , the summit demanded pay restraint and far-reaching reform of the labour market .
In Ghent , social Europe was on the streets - in the demonstrations organised by the young and by the workers .
Therefore , out of support for these events , we will be voting against this resolution on the results of the Ghent Summit .
. ( IT ) The fundamentalist terrorist attacks have not only destroyed the ' twin towers ' in New York but also seem to have played a major part in demystifying two other ' pillars ' on the eastern shores of the Atlantic : the common defence policy and the European foreign policy .
The devastating success of this latest attack was helped by the theatrical contribution of certain European governments . Throwing aside years upon years of declarations of intention to define a European foreign policy and good proposals for military integration , they have raised their banners as ' national powers ' without even having either any real power by themselves to address the world crisis or the credibility to ensure European security .
The three-sided mini-summit , held an hour before the informal Summit of the Fifteen , was a demonstration of the collapse that has also hit Europe .
The statements on fighting terrorism handed out for signing at the end of the informal Summit are worthless .
We have be accustomed to reading wonderful final declarations for decades now , but these contradict the facts and create genuine bafflement about this ' non-existent Europe ' , which unites around statements and then vanishes immediately when it comes to operating and acting in unity to address the crises that threaten world peace .
Given these conditions , I believe the promotion of the European Union as a political entity is the principal task we need to address .
The Ghent ' triumvirate ' , which did not even invite the High Representative for European foreign policy , did not have this objective , concerned as they were - and are - with fighting for their leadership or the next elections .
One of them spoke of ' a new leading role in foreign and defence policy for Germany ' , forgetting to add - as has been the case for 56 years now , as an attentive leader writer pointed out - ' within Europe ' .
Just an oversight as regards ' precedents ' , or clear national political will ?
This ' triumvirate ' would not deserve any critical mention if there were not another triumvirate looming up on the horizon , a really heavyweight one this time , formed by the USA , Russia and the People 's Republic of China .
The Ghent triumvirate - ' an affront to Italy and Europe , ' as Mr Prodi has said - with a Europe deprived of strength , will be a featherweight in the international ring and , what is more , will weaken the little bit of Europe that exists .
In its place there should , instead , be a new , strong Europe , proud to be so , and seen as essential in maintaining regional balances of power .
The forthcoming European Council in Laeken must cancel out the ambiguities and contradictions found in Ghent .
To achieve this goal , it must issue itself a momentous challenge : to turn words into deeds and initiate ' enhanced cooperation ' in the sphere of a political Europe .
This will also benefit economic and financial stability , because it would also correct the anomaly of a European central bank without a European government behind it .
With the current situation in tatters , however , is such a challenge feasible ?
I cannot help thinking that the road of integration will lead to greater cohesion of the parties involved .
15 countries acting more cohesively in the area of security and defence - and therefore with a definite foreign policy - will , without doubt , be a much more effective force in the fight against international terrorism and in peacekeeping .
Having said that , and expressing a reservation about the ' convention ' method for drawing up the institutional reform project , I vote for the resolution , in the hope that declarations will , at last , be followed up with deeds .
Twenty million Afghans are being hit hard by bombings being carried out for reasons over which they have had no influence .
The UN Commissioner for Human Rights has appealed for a necessary suspension of the bombing in order to get food out to the population before the winter .
Three years of drought have made the supply situation untenable .
I have therefore supported Amendments 2 and 3 in the vote on the resolution concerning the European Council ' s informal meeting in Ghent .
A further prerequisite , however , is that the Taliban should allow supplies to reach those who need them .
We also appeal to Pakistan to allow the refugees to be afforded protection .
Poos Report ( A5-0308 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for the report but , both personally and on behalf of the Pensioners ' Party and as a convinced Europeanist , I ask that the Council should have less powers and Parliament have more powers .
We know that the Council is elected by those elected by the citizens , but the European Parliament is elected directly by the citizens .
We are Europe !
Parliament should have the power to legislate , and the Council can have some little legislative duty that affects all the Member States , like defence and foreign policy , but not too much .
I therefore insist that everything possible should be done to give the European Parliament all the power it deserves , as against the Council , whose powers should instead be reduced , since it does not deserve them .
We note that you want to pension the Council off , which is fairly normal in view of your political career .
The reason why ' the role of High Representative for the CFSP and that of the Commissioner responsible for external relations should be merged and assigned to a Commission Vice-President ' is that it will be difficult in the long term to maintain the double channels of command that apply to policy in the second pillar .
It is problematic - from the points of view both of clarity and of the budget - for the EU to maintain two external relations administrations for the purpose of implementing foreign policy .
That does not however mean that we in any way support supranationalism within the areas of the second pillar .
We do not therefore want the CFSP to be incorporated into the first , or Community , pillar .
The above position also applies to the relevant passage in paragraph 3 of the report on the progress made in implementing the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( A5-332 / 2001 Rapporteur : Mr Brok ) .
. ( FR ) The Poos Report sets out some interesting technical reforms to enable Councils to work better " in a permanent legislative framework " without amending the Treaties .
It is , though , surprising that we do not find there the most obvious reform to make the work of the General Affairs Council easier and reduce the overload on it which is the main problem today : its division into a General Coordination Council ( dealing with the general organisation of work , and issues concerning the EU institutions ) and a Foreign Affairs Council , which would obviously be of a purely inter-Governmental nature .
This simple and practical reform is not endorsed by the federalists , fearing as they do that it would draw the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy from the new Foreign Affairs Council , whereas they want to bring him into the bosom of the Community by installing him at the Commission , thereby giving it powers in terms of foreign policy .
Their proposal is not realistic .
More broadly speaking , the Poos Report does not seek to anticipate what the Europe of tomorrow will be like and to work out from that how the Council should evolve .
It will be a Europe with many and diverse Member States , so it will have to be a variable-geometry Europe .
For the same reason , it will be a Europe in which the Community method will often be seen as too rigid , and in which there will be a lot of room for the intergovernmental approach , hence a Europe in which the distinction between the " pillars " of the Treaty will have long-term validity .
It will , finally , be a Europe in which the present-day appropriation of power by Brussels will have come to an end - at least let us hope so - and in which national democracies will again make their voices heard .
These broad strokes lead us to design a future central position for the Council , one which should give it a greater initiatory role ( although the task of drafting legislation will have to be better shared ) and one of coordinating the pillars , the various circles , the national and European levels .
It would now be useful to begin discussing these ideas .
. ( FR ) The fact that we have voted against Council reform does not imply that we prefer the way it works at present .
It is not the constitutional form of the Council that is important - although much could be said about its anti-democratic character - but its essence .
The basic reason for the Council 's existence is to manage the collective affairs of the property-owning classes in the various European countries , so that their respective interests do not conflict and that a general consensus may be established .
The European Council , though , no more represents the interests of the majority of the EU 's population than the various governments represent the real interests of their own peoples .
The apparently democratic way in which national governments are appointed after elections does not prevent them being at the service of their countries ' big bosses .
All the more is this true of Europe 's executive , which is not even obliged to seek election .
We do not guarantee the present or the eventually reformed functioning of the European institutions .
. ( PT ) The Poos report on the reform of the Council is controversial and contradictory and , albeit rather timidly , further clears the way for European federalism .
On the one hand , it contains positive aspects on improving transparency , not to mention the concept of change in the institutions in an enlarged European Union , in its references to the workings of the Council and to greater participation by national and regional parliaments in EU policy .
On the other hand , it puts forward some highly controversial ideas , specifically transferring the responsibilities of the High Representative of the CFSP to the Commission , thereby reducing the powers of the Council and further communitising this important policy , which we must , of course , oppose .
At the same time , it puts forward working methods for the Council that could have a damaging effect on the role of national governments , moving towards greater federalism , which include : strengthening the General Affairs Council , so that its meetings are held regularly , weekly even , attended by ministers ; and a distinction being made between the legislative and executive Council , which must operate openly , which would seem to be moving towards the creation of some kind of European Union Senate .
Therefore , in voting against this motion , we confirm our opposition to this path to federalism without undermining the report ' s positive aspects .
.
( FR ) Council reform ?
Public opinion throughout Europe plainly sees evidence that this is needed , as also evidence of the democratic deficit in European structures .
The absolute requirements of this reform should be the reinforcement of democracy and transparency , the involvement of citizens and control by them .
One should also beware of explaining , as the rapporteur does , that all the dysfunctions result from disregard of the Treaties or even from the loss of power by the Commission and the " General Affairs " Council .
Over and above structural improvements such as the strengthening of Parliament 's role , control and monitoring of the Commission and the Council , greater power being given to citizens , whether directly or indirectly - by way of associations , trades unions , etc - there is the need today to discuss the direction of this European project which is dominated by free-market thinking , the very antithesis of democracy and of provision for social needs .
New institutions for another Europe - that is what should be the topic put forward for the peoples of Europe to discuss and vote on .
It is for this reason that we have not voted in favour of the Poos Report .
.
I was delighted to cast my vote in favour of the excellent report by Mr Poos .
As a representative of Scotland and a member of the European Free Alliance section of my Group , I particularly welcome paragraph 13 of the report , calling for the involvement of " national parliaments and , in federal or highly regionalised States , the regional authorities including participation in the Council itself according to Article 203 of the EC Treaty . "
For Scotland and similar countries this will only be a start , but it will be an important one .
This Parliament is concerned about the democratic deficit .
To remedy this , let us seek to secure a greater role for devolved parliaments in making European law .
If parliamentarians at all levels in Europe are to be engaged effectively , there must be open and public legislative debate in the Council .
We must highlight the need for publicity and openness in the Council , as stipulated in paragraph 26 of the report .
The reforms urged in this report all go in the right direction .
. ( NL ) As former Luxembourg minister , Mr Poos knows how the Council works , and he has put this to good use .
He is right to raise the matter of meeting behind closed doors , which is inconsistent with the principles of democracy and openness .
He also proposes that joint committees only prepare resolutions instead of taking them themselves .
He also wants the strange new post of High Representative for the common foreign and security policy , which is developing into a European super-minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence , but which cannot be called to account politically in this area , to be integrated into the European Commission 's portfolio for external relations .
Mr Poos limits himself to what is feasible within the existing treaties and the current power relations , because this would be able to be achieved quickly .
I support him in this . However , even if these reforms are implemented , the Council remains an absurdity , a remnant from the early days of the three European Communities , which is backing out of national parliaments and the EP .
National ministers used to act as negotiators on the formation of an interest grouping and were also entitled to exercise their veto rights .
They no longer have this in their current function , in which they act as a senate which cannot be called to account and a government at the same time .
The national parliaments must take over their task .
The continued existence of the Council will have an adverse effect on parliamentary democracy .
World Trade Organisation ( RC B5-0691 / 2001 )
.
( FR ) We have voted against the joint resolution submitted by the European People 's Party and Socialist Groups on the forthcoming ministerial conference of the WTO in Qatar in November , as it seems to us that it is yet again trapping us by agreeing to the opening of new international trade negotiations without adequate clarification of what the ground rules are and what objectives are in view .
Commissioner Lamy 's speech yesterday leads us to conclude that , even though he is striving to present a wide range of objectives for future negotiations ( liberalisation , regulation , the involvement of developing countries , the taking into account of sustainable development ) , liberalisation is still indeed the primary objective .
Moreover , the WTO 's reference documents , which are centred on too strictly commercial a view of trade , inherently tend towards the adoption of this objective .
Matters would be made worse still if the negotiating mandate included investment among the WTO 's competencies , as this would risk the revival of the Multilateral Agreement on Investment ( MAI ) , of infamous memory .
We would , though , not wish to suggest that liberalisation is in itself bad , as a party of the Left thinks .
We do think , though , that there is now the need for a pause .
Time must be found to draw up a clear balance sheet on the Uruguay Round .
On that basis , negotiations must indeed be opened , but with this primary mandate : to consider how to guarantee to every society , to every national democracy , the right to choose how to live .
Liberalisation will produce all its benefits only if we have first provided a definite answer to this question .
. ( EL ) The demonstrations in Seattle , Prague and Genoa were an expression of the increasing anxiety at grass-roots level about the consequences of globalisation .
This massive popular reaction shows that even the regulations of the WTO are socially unacceptable .
The demonstrations , which were attended by demonstrators from around the world , were one of the deciding factors in bringing down the talks .
The WTO , the main objective of which is to fully liberalise trade , is basically promoting a process of neo-colonialism and is now one of the mainstays of the new world order .
The rules of the WTO serve to promote the interests of dominant multinational companies which already monopolise certain international markets and are therefore the stuff of nightmares for developing countries and workers as they watch their rights being eroded .
The large countries are promoting the interests of their multinationals , at the expense of the less developed countries , without so much as a word about the long-standing request of these countries to have their debts cancelled .
In the agricultural sector , rapid restructuring is being called for in order to concentrate the land in a few hands and forge another link in the chain controlled by the network of multinationals .
Furthermore , the liberalisation of trade and the abolition of duty and subsidies have hit agricultural production directly , reducing farmers ' incomes , decimating farming and increasing unemployment .
Agricultural production in Greece - and elsewhere - is being sacrificed in order to protect and corner a larger share of the international market for processed products from central and northern Europe .
We believe that , rather than defending the interests of the people , the EU will again endeavour at the new round of talks to stake a bigger claim for the European monopolies , in competition with the other imperialist centres , i.e. the USA and Japan .
The rules which govern international economic relations and trade should serve the interests of the workers , leave their fundamental social rights untouched , help to develop less developed countries , respect the environment and respect the rights of all nations to exercise control and decide on their future themselves .
The WTO is , by its very nature , an imperialist structure interested in the maximum possible return on capital and more secure , flexible and unimpeded ways of moving capital , especially from trade and the stock exchange , impoverishing huge swathes of the world 's population and contaminating and destroying more and more of the natural environment in the process .
Under this new world order , which uses every possible means to impose the law of the jungle and where might is right , people are beginning to understand that the only solution is resistance and counterattack .
The movement against globalisation and the WTO may be uncoordinated and disparate , but it is the first counterattack on the dictatorship of the monopolies and economies of interest .
It is sending out a message of resistance and counterattack to the millions of workers , unemployed , small and medium-sized farmers and other victims of the capitalist world order which the WTO is trying to impose .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the motion because most of it sides with the major corporations planning to bring about unbridled liberalisation , plunder even more poor countries , wipe out farming and attack the achievements of the workers and the rights of the people throughout the world .
. ( FR ) I regret that Commissioner Lamy was not more explicit yesterday about the discrepancies between the Council 's negotiation mandate and the draft declaration by the Ministers at the Doha conference .
I thought I heard - the Commissioner was speaking sotto voce - that they particularly related to the new reduction in external protection and internal support for our agriculture which certain States had demanded .
I also regret that the joint resolution that Parliament has just voted on commits the sin of incoherence by remaining silent on Community preference , whilst rightly emphasising the right of WTO members to apply agricultural policies adapted to their needs and conditions and especially the right of EU Member States to defend a European model of agriculture founded on family holdings , safe and high-quality food , protection of the environment and a balance between town and country .
Food safety constitutes a strategic dimension , on which the tragic events of 11 September throw a new light .
It is not feasible that the European Union should depend long-term on imports - some 75 % of its requirements - of a family of products as important , vital and strategic as oilseed proteins .
How can the European Union condemn itself to zero growth in a crucial sector in which production worldwide is increasing by 5 % per annum ?
What would happen in the event of weather hazards in the Americas ?
It is therefore imperative that the fatal error of Blair House , the absurd and severe self-limitation agreed to in Marrakech be put right in the next round of negotiations .
The complete elimination of animal fats makes it all the more necessary to be able to support the development of Community-wide production of vegetable proteins : this objective must be a priority for the European negotiator .
We will be extremely watchful on this issue .
Désir Report ( A5-0331 / 2001 )
I have , of course , voted for this report , Mr President , on democracy in international trade , but I should like to do more .
As the representative of the pensioners that I have had the chance to meet over these two and a half years , I should also like to launch a new slogan here today : ' Pensioners of the world , unite ! '
Pensioners are citizens who have more money than young people and would be able to influence the trade and economy of the whole world .
I therefore appeal to all pensioners and all elderly people throughout the world to unite in an organisation that can make its weight felt - a weight they are entitled to have because of their numbers - so they can influence international trade to make it more humane and friendlier to those in need , as we all hope .
. ( FR ) We voted in favour of the report on " Openness and democracy in international trade " in order to assert our demand for a reform of the World Trade Organisation towards greater transparency and fairness ( especially in regard to the settlement of differences ) and also the strengthening of control by the peoples .
A double ambiguity , though , exists in this regard , both at European level and at the level of the WTO .
As regards the European Union , successive reforms of the Treaties have practically excluded the national parliaments from control and ratification of the common trade policy .
The Nice Treaty , which is currently in the process of being approved , effectively completes the work while excluding them from negotiations touching on services and intellectual property .
Neither de jure nor de facto does the European Parliament take over , and in any case , even if it did gain a real right of ratification , the end result would still be the overall enfeeblement of democratic control , because of the abolition of any direct power on the part of national democracies , which are closest to the peoples .
From this point of view , the European Parliament 's proposal that a consultative parliamentary assembly should be created within the WTO looks like the beginning of work on another level of dispossession .
Such an assembly would in fact risk giving greater legitimacy to the disregard of the opinions of national democracies , and the putting in place thereby of " regulations " the effect of which would be to confine them even more .
There is then a need to assert most clearly that the objective of the consultative assembly is to improve information , but not under any circumstances to replace the national parliaments in any way .
For us , in fact , the first of these " regulations " to retain , is that each and every people , expressing itself directly or through its national parliament , has the right to choose what kind of society it wants to be and what laws shall apply within it .
. ( FR ) The rapporteur cannot be naïve enough to think that the terrible inequalities in world trade are due to the fact that most member countries of the WTO " are marginalised because of non-inclusive working methods or because they are not , or not effectively , represented in Geneva " or even due " to practices inherited from the GATT " .
Economic relations between countries , and trade relations in particular , obey only one law - the law of the strongest - and certainly do not involve the type of " democracy " that the rapporteur would like to see .
The imperialist countries impose their law on third world countries and the United States impose their own , even on second-ranking imperialist powers .
Clearly , giving the poorest countries a few extra posts within the WTO or in any other international body is not going to change the balance of power .
The report ' s real motives are to be found in the fact that international trade , whose laws resemble the law of the jungle , is giving rise to protest and demonstrations .
Although it does not have the power to change the substance of the matter , the European Parliament is invited to put a democratic spin on a type of relationship that is poles apart from a relationship of equality and democracy .
We have not , of course , given our support to this playacting and have voted against the report .
. ( NL ) The existence of a World Trade Organisation could perhaps be useful if it were limited to helping individual states to set up trade contacts with other , remote states .
Unfortunately , the pretensions of the current WTO go much further than that .
It is trying to impose standards on Member States in which the protection of jobs , the environment and public services is subordinated to freedom of trade and the protection of big multinational companies .
The WTO has become a kind of alternative United Nations , but one in which it is not the power of the number of inhabitants but the power of money that counts .
As a result of the imposed globalisation , the gulf between rich countries who export expensive , high-tech products and poor countries who are dependent on exports of cheap raw materials from agriculture and mining is widening .
The profits from investments in these countries flow back to the richest countries .
This WTO is trying to maintain these abuses , and in doing so forms a threat to welfare , the environment and democracy .
Mr Désir is making a creditable attempt to promote openness and democracy in international trade .
I support him in this , but I fear that it will be insufficient without further changes .
Brok report ( A5-0332 / 2001 )
Mr President , while I was on the plane taking me from Bratislava to Prague and then on to Malpensa , on my way back from my visit to Slovakia , I was reading the Brok report to decide on how to vote when , as often happens to me , I fell asleep .
I had a dream .
Knowing that Mr Brok is so good at foreign policy , Mr President , I dreamt that he had become Foreign Minister in the Europe of the future .
I also dreamt that on the plane , as well as Mr Brok , there were some beautiful blonde hostesses from the Czech Republic .
I woke up , Mr President .
I am sure that the beautiful blondes will remain a dream , but will Mr Brok as Foreign Minister come true ?
. ( EL ) I have to admit that our rapporteur , the German Christian Democrat Elmar Brok , does not mince his words .
Both the motion for a resolution and the explanatory statement are exercises in militaristic , aggressive cynicism about the substance of the CFSP ( common foreign and security policy ) and the CSDP ( common security and defence policy ) .
He considers that , especially from mid-2001 onwards , the common political will to act at the operational level has been visibly in evidence and cites " crisis management " in the Middle East and the FYROM as examples of successful autonomous intervention on the part of the European Union .
The report then includes a long-winded list of means and institutions currently available to the European Union to carry out its " God-given " job of " conflict prevention " and " crisis management " ( crises which the EU will be sure to provoke ) throughout the world : the rapid reaction force , the primary objective of which is to create a Euro-army by 2003 , initially with 60,000 troops , measures for the rapid flow of resources , non-military - but armed - crisis management ( by creating a corps of 5,000 police officers ) , the ( new ) Situation Centre and the Policy Planning and Early Warning Unit ( both of which come under Mr Solana 's department ) and so on .
Russia , the Ukraine , Moldavia , Africa , Latin America and so on are all seen as military partners outside our area .
The stated aim is to impose policies which serve imperialist interests , to get these countries to accept the rules of the capitalist market and - naturally - to respect human rights , or rather what the ÅU understands by human rights .
Furthermore , " global responsibility for peace , stability and sustainable development " is used to justify the need , highlighted in the report , for the EU to develop its strategic plans in Iran , China , Korea and Indonesia .
In other words , the Brok report cynically illustrates the imperialist nature of the ÅU which - necessity being the mother of invention - wants to promote its interests in glorious collaboration with the USA , using NATO resources .
The report is crystal clear on the division of roles between the two imperialist powers , viz. the USA and the ÅU , which will act in concert with the USA , where possible , or on its own if the USA is not willing or prepared to act .
This position marries perfectly with its wholehearted support for the USA in the new imperialist war in Afghanistan and Eurasia in general , fronted by the coalition against international terrorism which has come along , like manna from heaven now that the USSR and the Warsaw Pact have broken up , to give the imperialists an alibi , a modern day " red under the bed " to justify intense arming , curtailing the rights of our people , fortifying their system every which way and any type of intervention - military or otherwise - anywhere in the world .
Mr Brok 's statement during his presentation to plenary captures the tone of the report perfectly .
He said that , if we want to be convincing and reliable in our foreign policy , we need to demonstrate on a daily basis that we are prepared to use military means to enforce what is not accepted using other means .
Who today can dispute the Marxist tenet that war is in the nature of capitalism and , even more so , in the nature of imperialism ?
That is why the people cannot afford to rest on their laurels .
The peace movement at national , European and global level against the warmongering imperialists is the only prospect of survival for mankind .
. ( NL ) The existence and maintenance of an army is always justified by the argument that it was necessary in order to defend the freedom of the country 's own territory and to discourage potential occupying forces .
Because nobody likes to be occupied , the existence of such an army is accepted by a majority of people , albeit often with doubt or reluctance .
Action by armies outside their own borders , on the other hand , is always rightly regarded as a form of aggression and imperialism .
In recent years , there has been an offensive to justify the action of armies outside their own territory .
This happened in Iraq and in Kosovo , and it is now happening in Afghanistan .
When Mr Solana took up office , I heard him say that he knows of many places outside the territory of the EU where an army could be deployed .
Mr Brok wants a decision on the operational readiness of a European ' Rapid Reaction Force ' to be reached soon .
I reject this part of his proposals , although I do share his views on the struggle against money laundering and against the international drugs trade , finding a humanitarian and political solution for Chechnya , strengthening the peace-building capacity of the United Nations and making aid for Macedonia dependent on the implementation of the agreed amendment to the constitution .
. ( FR ) One cannot fail to be struck by the huge disparity between Mr Brok ' s report and the new course taken by international relations since 11 September .
The rapporteur does , admittedly , mention that date but fails to draw any conclusions from it with regard to taking the CFSP in a new direction .
Instead , he clings to the reassuring dogmas of the old school of thought , organised around the concept of ' everything for the Community ' : the High Representative of the CFSP must be communitised , decisions on joint action must be reached by a majority , and so forth .
The new international landscape that is emerging as a result of the ongoing fight against terrorism forces us to act on two levels : the national level , the sovereign prerogatives of which will prove crucial in this new type of war , and the world level , which is the only level appropriate for the large-scale cooperation that is necessary .
The European level is only an intermediate phase , all too often too limited to lay hold of the global circuits and networks of international terrorism .
In times of tension , decisive cooperation tends to take place directly between States .
This was the case with the significant military contribution that the United Kingdom made to the United States ' action , the tripartite Ghent Summit , and the bilateral cooperation between France and Germany .
The CFSP will have to adapt rapidly to the new diplomatic climate .
The focus for the necessary coordination between the various pillars , as well as between the intergovernmental approach and the Community aspects , must be the Council , which is the only institution capable of playing a pivotal role .
The same requirement for effectiveness must lead to the creation of a specific ' Foreign Affairs ' Council , separate from the Council .
This is a point that Commissioner Barnier made in his speech .
Unless these changes are made , the CFSP is in danger of being rapidly marginalised and relegated to role of merely issuing declarations .
. British Conservatives strongly support European cooperation in foreign policy and the use of EU civil instruments in conflict prevention , where shared interests exist .
However , they insist that national governments must retain absolute sovereignty over foreign and defence policy .
We do not , therefore , support movement towards establishment of an EU diplomatic service or the " communitarisation " of foreign policy ; the extension of Europol competence into operational areas ; or measures that will lead to the development of a European Army .
We believe that NATO should be the international organisation of first resort , not just for collective defence , but for all relevant crisis management tasks requiring the use of military assets .
COM in sheepmeat and goatmeat
The next item is the report ( A5-0340 / 2001 ) by Mr Adam , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in sheepmeat and goatmeat [ COM ( 2001 ) 247 - C5-0214 / 2001 - 2001 / 0103 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , the present organisation is manifestly unsatisfactory to all the parties involved , particularly the sheep and goat farmers , but also to Member States and the Commission .
It has allowed the income of sheep farmers to fall behind the general levels of income of other sections of the farming community .
This widening gap is a serious matter when considering that large areas of the Community are highly dependent on sheep and goat farming .
The method of calculation of the premium is complicated and statistically suspect .
The figures on which the eventual sheep premium is agreed cannot be justified in a satisfactory manner because it requires detailed information of what is happening in the market and that cannot readily be obtained nor easily substantiated .
Another drawback is that the premium is based on deficiency payments .
This is not acceptable to the WTO and is therefore a barrier to negotiations in agricultural issues generally .
For farmers there is uncertainty over a 12-month period as to what annual premium will be paid eventually .
Because of this uncertainty the premium does not allow effective management planning .
All these drawbacks were recognised by the Commission and are largely reinforced by a study that was carried out prior to the preparation of the proposals which we are now debating .
The Commission proposal , in essence , is simpler , less bureaucratic and will be easier to understand .
The fundamental difference is that it is based on a fixed annual payment .
This is less objectionable to the WTO and therefore will help with the overall agricultural negotiations in which the Commission is involved .
More importantly , from the farmers ' viewpoint , the premium will be known in advance and this will make farm business decisions easier .
My discussions in contact with the sheep and goat farmers of the Community confirm that the proposals are broadly acceptable to them .
The information that I have from Member States is that it is broadly acceptable to them as well .
There is agreement that it is desirable to agree the revision in time for 1 January 2002 so that the benefit to the farming community can come in as quickly as possible .
The principle of the Commission 's proposals is broadly acceptable to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , though there are differences in emphasis .
The committee proposes a premium 50 % higher than that put forward by the Commission .
The lower premium for milking-sheep and goats is rejected and a higher supplement proposed for sheep and goats in less favoured areas .
There are strong pressures within the committee that the market organisation should make greater provision for national differences . A number of proposals have been put forward .
They cover such matters as extensification , de-stocking and the buy-out of premium rights .
There are also proposals which would allow Member States to make additional headage and area payments .
These would be based on objective criteria which could cover , inter alia , environmental considerations , tagging and traceability .
Sheep farming has not made the productivity advances seen in other agricultural sectors .
Amendments have been introduced calling for Commission support for increased marketing promotion .
Targeting young people to encourage consumption will be important for success .
The committee recognises that this is an interim stage and looks forward to reports from the Commission on environmental impact , traceability and pasturing techniques .
It is anticipated that this will lead to wider reforms in the Agenda 2000 mid-term review .
The Agriculture Committee looks to the Commission for a positive response to the amendments it has proposed .
Mr President , my report on behalf of the Committee on Budgets is brief , because the Committee on Budgets was asked to give its opinion on the proposal by the Commission .
We were broadly supportive .
First of all , it streamlines the policy , making it simpler and much more defensible within the GATT negotiations , thereby providing longer-term security for farmers engaged in sheep and goat farming .
We proposed an amendment in relation to individual tagging .
We did not propose in that way to enter into the area of food safety , or indeed the business of the Committee on Agriculture .
We simply wanted to ensure that premiums were paid on sheep and goats that actually existed and that we had a means of ensuring that the animals could be counted and accounted for .
Since I am responsible to the Committee on Budgetary Control for animal products , I felt it my duty to insert that amendment .
Speaking for myself , I can say that the Committee on Budgets has its responsibilities .
This is largely a neutral proposal by the Commission , but the Committee on Agriculture has its responsibilities to farmers .
I support the position it has taken in this respect .
I support the Doyle amendment which was passed by the Committee on Agriculture .
As regards costs , the Committee on Budgets added approximately EUR 400 million in horizontal cuts that the Council deducted from the budget so we added EUR 400 million this morning .
We added another EUR 400 million in relation to animal health measures .
The budget this year is 2 % more in real terms than we started with last year , and in real terms it is more than 5 % , when you consider the outturn .
It is my opinion , and the opinion of EPP members in the Committee on Budgets , that there are sufficient funds to meet the request of the Committee on Agriculture : if the Doyle position is accepted by this Parliament and by the Council there are sufficient resources to finance the policy .
It will be a shift of money from the rich areas to the poor areas , from the bigger farmers to the smaller farmers .
It is a social and regional measure that we could do with .
Mr President , I reiterate what my colleague , Mr McCartin , has just said .
He is speaking on behalf of the Committee on Budgets .
There is money there to support the proposals that were passed by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , for a EUR 30 fixed rate premium and a EUR 9 supplement premium .
There is money there .
I appeal to colleagues to support the views of the Agriculture Committee .
I fear tonight 's vote - on a Thursday night - may be unrepresentative of the large majority decision at the Agriculture Committee on this particular issue .
The Community average income of sheep and goat producers is generally amongst the lowest of all sectors , especially in northern Europe where lambs are reared in meat production systems .
I quote the words of the Commission : " Unlike beef and other commodities , the Community is deficient in sheepmeat and , under the present regimes , there is a major exodus from sheep production , especially in northern Europe .
The beef regime unwittingly also supports this exodus from sheep production as ewes are counted for extensification payment under this regime but are not paid for , thereby encouraging farmers who have the option to decrease their sheep and increase their cattle on a holding to draw down more extensification payments . "
The most cost-effective solution from a common agricultural policy point of view is to ensure that the sheep and goat regimes , together with the impact of the beef regime , encourage as much land as possible to be kept in Europe in sheep production .
It is at least four times as expensive to support a livestock unit of beef , compared to that of sheepmeat .
While beef producers need all the support they are getting , given their present difficulties , it is not in their interest either to have competition generated between dry stock sectors by imbalance in the respective regimes .
The main proposal for a fixed , single annual premium I fully support , at EUR 30 . I fully support it , in place of the unfair , uncertain and - from a WTO perspective - unacceptable present deficiency payment system .
We support the flexibility amendments to send a message to the Commission that there is room for different treatment in some Member States in relation to this regime , providing that it does not come from the flat rate payment .
We cannot support the identification and traceability amendments because this is a matter for DG V , not because we do not support the principle but because it is for another DG , and for that reason solely .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like , first of all , to welcome the work of Mr Adam , our rapporteur , and to congratulate him on his desire to give some hope to sheep and goat farmers , who are , by and large , at the lower end of the scale of agricultural earnings .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has used its vote , as you quite rightly pointed out , to confirm the principle of a basic deficiency payment , of a rural premium and of a supplementary flexibility premium based on the criteria of produce quality , the environment or financial management .
It is also the case that the levels set by our committee will have to be readjusted in plenary if Parliament hopes to influence Council and , therefore , maintain credibility .
The Commission recommended a maximum of EUR 28 per head but the Committee on Agriculture raised the amount to EUR 44 , which far exceeds the expectations of rearers and could , furthermore , prove difficult to reconcile with the room for manoeuvre provided by the budget .
On behalf of my group , I have , therefore , retabled two of the rapporteur ' s amendments designed respectively to reset the basic premium at EUR 25 per head and the premium for milk herds - ewes or she-goats - at EUR 20 .
In the ' meat ' sector , the maximum aid per head would therefore , be EUR 39 , which would ensure equal treatment in terms of public premiums per hectare for sheep breeders and milk-cow breeders .
I would say that this is a totally logical approach , because these two types of production often exist side by side in the same regions and areas and even within the same holdings .
In terms of the markets , we now have two situations at variance with one another : a surplus of beef and veal and a deficit of sheepmeat .
If per-hectare premiums are set at an equivalent level , this could restore the balance of production , with the choices made by producers being influenced by market conditions .
Furthermore , I recommend maintaining a difference between the basic premium for the ' meat ' sector and the premium for the milk sector because to do otherwise would leave the sheep and goat milk sectors with no future , which nobody wants to see .
This is why I hope , ladies and gentlemen , that this evening you will support these amendments , which I think are both realistic and responsible .
Mr President , on behalf of the liberal group , I can say that we broadly support the Commission 's proposals .
We find the new system better than the old system , which was more or less a system of deficiency payments .
We also find the amounts specified by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development excessive .
We will therefore support Mr Garot 's and Mr Adam 's amendments , which are slightly more modest but which do in fact provide a good negotiating position in respect of the Council .
My group has submitted new amendments which relate to the identification of the animals .
We consider it to be of the utmost importance that when money is being distributed - animal premiums and suchlike - the control system is spick and span and there is very little wrong with it .
The Commission should therefore introduce a new identification system as soon as possible .
Finally , and I am saying this on behalf of the group , I have tabled amendments stating that dikes and salt marshes in Europe will also be regarded as least favoured areas .
I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on his very hard work on this difficult report .
Farming has taken a blow over the past year in the United Kingdom , and sheep farming , of course , is no exception .
Given the fact that 80 % of my own nation - Wales - is designated by the EU as less favoured and that sheep farming is the only available method of farming in many part of Wales , this report has far-reaching implications for Wales and its hill and upland farmers , as indeed it has for their European counterparts .
I therefore welcome additional financial support for farmers situated in less-favoured areas such as Wales and I urge fellow MEPs to support additional payments for these areas .
Now although this premium will not solve overnight the immediate crisis , we need to get the proposal through as quickly as possible to ensure that the sheep annual premium payments will be in place by January 2002 .
The original proposal was disappointing , and a lot of hard work has been put in to get the best deal possible for farmers in this regard .
Of course , I want to see farmers get the fairest and highest possible premium .
However , we have to work within the budget , and this is why I fully support Mr Adam 's proposal of EUR 25 and am confident that the Council will consider this proposal as a very viable option given the constraints .
Pitching the figure higher than this would lose money to other sectors including rural development .
I will be voting against Amendment No 21 , as I believe the wording to be too vague , and I would like to see a clause stating that any money put back into the national reserve from a region or country within a Member State should be ring-fenced to ensure the benefit of this fund is maintained for that particular area - that is a very important point .
We must protect our sheep-farming industry because to lose more farmers from the industry would have a catastrophic effect on the make-up of rural communities where small family farms play such a vital role .
Seldom have I seen a greater degree of unanimity on the need for reform of the sheep and goat sector .
The rapporteur , the Commission , Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and farming organisations are all at one on the need for reform .
It is now down to this Parliament and the Council to give meaningful effect to this consensus .
There is , however , one important bridge to be crossed if this desired objective is to be achieved .
Unless we succeed in reaching a fair consensus on the level of financial support for sheep farming , this attempt at reform will fail and the decline of sheep production will lead to a significant imbalance in the European meat sector , thereby putting greater pressure on the beef sector as farmers switch from one enterprise to another .
So , it makes good economic sense to get the balance right now .
There will not be another bite at this cherry .
We talk a lot about the sustainability of European agriculture .
To me it means maintaining a reasonable balance between all sectors , including the profitability of each .
I do not have to remind the House of the relevance of sheep farming in areas not suited to other agricultural enterprises and the importance , from a rural development perspective , of sustaining farm families in those areas .
I do , however , wish to acknowledge the positive aspects of the Commission proposals , including the findings of the Evaluation Committee report , the simplification of procedures and the introduction of a single premium .
Here , however , I differ with the Commission on its method of calculation , based on averaging .
This does not fairly reflect the difficulties experienced by the sector over a longer period .
During the debate , I tabled a number of amendments .
My proposal for a flat rate premium of EUR 32 was not supported ; it was based on a fair and thorough evaluation by agricultural economists of the level of support necessary to restore equity to the sector .
On behalf of my Group , I then supported proposals for EUR 30 - a figure which I believe is the very minimum necessary to close the gap and help restore profitability to the sector .
I ask the House not to deviate from this figure , which can be accommodated within the existing guidelines , and also to support amendments on compensation for extensification , the rural world premium and funding for market developments .
Like all Members of this House , I am conscious of the budgetary implications of reform .
I caution against reform of sheepmeat at the expense of other sectors , particularly beef .
Those who take pleasure in pointing out that agriculture takes up almost 50 % of the budget should keep in mind that this general support is as much a subsidy to consumers as it is support for the farming community - the people who are expected to guarantee food supply and quality and at the same time maintain the rural environment .
Those who believe that agriculture is oversubsidised should take note of the continuing decline in the number of farm families and ask themselves why this is happening .
We should note , in my view , with alarm the reluctance of young people to take up farming and ponder the consequences for food security and employment in the agricultural food sector .
In evaluating the relevance of agriculture to the European and world economy , you cannot apply the same economic criteria as we apply to other sectors .
Mr President , I apologise for my absence .
The report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is an improvement on the Commission proposals but , for all that , it does not make any significant changes in the sheep and goat farming sector .
For example , we agree that it is good idea to increase premiums and special aid , which have not risen since 1993 and have since been eroded by inflation .
We also agree that it is a good idea to make the conditions for payment of supplementary aid more flexible .
However , we do not agree that it is a good idea to maintain the difference between mixed meat and milk production subsidies , which the report justifies on the grounds that mixed production unit holders generate additional income from milk production .
This is not comparing like with like because meat production units , which are mainly located in northern countries , are large operations which afford a satisfactory income and profit to their owners , while mixed production units , which are mainly located in the Mediterranean countries , are family-run holdings in the most barren areas which do not afford their owners a viable income , with the result that they are declining year on year and these areas are being abandoned .
The headage payments in Greece for each holding have not risen since 1989-1991 .
The report accepts the philosophy of quotas and even tries to add to it with management quotas , despite the fact that the European Union 's self-sufficiency in sheep- and goatmeat is around 80 % , sheep and goat farms are to be found in the poorest areas of the European Union , where no alternative form of farming is generally possible , and sheep and goat farmers are the poorest social group in the European Union .
If we really wanted to provide income support for these regions and for sheep and goat farmers , we would abolish quotas , increase subsidies and provide other additional incentives .
This sort of policy would help to reverse the rate of abandonment of mountain and mainly barren areas and , at the same time , make the European Union self-sufficient in sheep- and goatmeat .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis besetting livestock farming in Europe is of an unprecedented scale .
If it is not checked it will have terrible consequences for our economies , our societies and for life in our territories .
In the beef and veal sector , despite the mollifying proposals that Commissioner Fischler has put to us - he would have us believe that the crisis is now behind us - we are still in a slump .
In my own country , for example , producers can no longer find takers for their animals even at tragically low prices , which no longer cover production costs .
Despair is gaining ground .
Every day , livestock breeders are being forced out of business in the most tragic way .
Waiting patiently for our remaining producers to go out of business would be a suicidal policy .
I repeat , there is a considerable deficit in the European Union ' s sheepmeat sector and looking at the average age of livestock breeders , which is increasing , it is not hard to predict that this deficit will increase in coming years .
Sheep-farmers ' incomes are amongst the lowest in agriculture , as the Commission itself acknowledges .
In the current economic climate , we also see many producers in desperate situations and who are forced to stop farming because their income is insufficient .
Apart from the human and social tragedy that this represents , it is also an ecological tragedy because sheep breeding and goat breeding are often the last defence against desertification in regions where farming is difficult .
This is why your Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development felt that it was crucial to make some slight improvements to the Commission ' s proposal for a regulation , in order to simplify , to be able to forecast and to increase aid to a sector that is suffering harshly , whose economic , social and ecological impact is so important and which gives cattle farmers the opportunity to convert , if it is increased sufficiently .
The very coherent proposals that have been presented attempt to bring the system of aid for the sheepmeat sector into line with aid for milk-cows , whilst complying with budgetary constraints , because the COM in the sheepmeat sector is relatively cheap due to the number of customers for each producer .
These proposals also comply with our international commitments , since the proposed reform aims to separate aid and an income insurance system , which could act as a safety net .
The sheepmeat sector today needs to be stabilised and supported , otherwise it will disappear from many regions .
It requires a reform which is both generous and responsible , and this is what Parliament ' s Committee on Agriculture has proposed .
I hope that the House will support us and that the Council will listen .
Mr President , the Commission proposal to create a single annual premium is to be welcomed because it will simplify farmer ' s incomes and provide stability .
Nevertheless , it contains various loopholes and shortcomings .
The first is the unsatisfactory level of the proposed premium of EUR 21 , which continues to reflect the discrimination against the small ruminants sector in favour of large ruminants .
The proposal of EUR 30 that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development approved will , therefore , resolve this discrimination .
Nevertheless , if this proposal does not have the support of the majority of this House , I will , of course , support any other level that contributes to this objective .
The second shortcoming lies in the continuing discrimination between sheep bred for meat on the one hand and ewes and she-goats on the other , with the latter receiving only 80 % of the premium given to meat sheep .
The proposals approved by the Committee on Agriculture will also remedy this unfairness , by making all premiums the same .
The third shortcoming concerns the non-inclusion of flexibility mechanisms that would enable the Member States to make adjustments to national and regional situations .
In this sense , the Committee on Agriculture ' s amendments , which are intended to create an additional premium in certain situations , will be of enormous benefit to the implementation of the COM and will make the scheme more realistic and more feasible .
As the Commission itself acknowledges in the explanatory statement , sheep and goat breeders have the lowest incomes of all meat producers with the additional disadvantage that 80 % of the animals eligible for premiums are located in parts of the European Union that are both remote and poor .
For this reason , and also because there is a deficit in this sector , which can only meet 80 % of domestic consumption , it is becoming very important to make the changes I have just outlined and to increase the supplementary premium for Objective 1 regions .
I therefore hope , that the House approves the Commission proposal and that when the Ministers for Agriculture meet in Council , they do their job properly , and accept the positions of this House .
Lastly , I wish to pay tribute to Mr Adam , who has been an excellent rapporteur , who has put in a great deal of hard work and whom I thank for his generous support .
Mr President , in addition to congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Adam , on his magnificent report , I would like to tell the Commission that some of the terminology in their proposal needs to be amended in order to take account of gender differences .
That is to say , that it constantly forgets that there are female producers and stockbreeders .
I would ask the Commissioner to make these terminological amendments to this proposal and , Commissioner , you can also do this for all of your other proposals , and please inform your staff that this must be done .
Behind this seemingly formal request is my firm determination that , from now on , we recognise female farmers for the important role they play .
Secondly , Commissioner , your proposal contains a renationalisation , which is the cause of a great deal of suspicion , because , to a certain extent , it sets a precedent in this field .
To avoid these suspicions escalating into protests , you should compensate for this shortcoming in your proposal by increasing premiums .
We ask for this unanimously ; I hope that Parliament ' s proposals will not fall on deaf ears .
Lastly , I have to say that we all recognise that this ' safety net ' initiative to compensate the fall in income suffered by farmers and producers of both sexes in times of crisis is a great success .
Mr President , Commissioner , I also wish to thank the rapporteur on his work for a new organisation of the market .
There are two basic factors here supporting all those speeches which express the desire to raise the status and underline the importance of these professions .
The first one is that this is especially important for the regions - absolutely vital for large regions . The other is that we can produce a lot more - as we have heard here - because there is underproduction in this area .
For that reason , all attempts to help and revive these products and this production trend , and highlight their importance , is work done for the common good - the cheapest and most economical of regional policies - and this is an area where agricultural sector has quite obvious shortcomings .
Here , if anywhere , a certain sort of Robin Hood policy will be especially good and useful .
I hope that when it comes to the vote , those of the opinion that we should start to move these matters forward , through greater investment , will win .
Mr President , the Commission proposal dwells on the strategy of separating production aid and prices with the argument that this will simplify the current Organisation of the Market .
The problem is that the level of the per head premium is clearly low , given that the basic price base has not increased since 1993 .
Furthermore , although the current system does need to be simplified , we must also take account , as the rapporteur stated , of the fact that sheep and goat breeding is of particular importance to the Community ' s least-favoured areas , in which they are concentrated . The prime objective of any reform of this COM must , therefore , be to improve the income of sheep and goat farmers .
Furthermore , we must consider the fact that , in recent years , the relative position of sheep and goat farmers has seen a decline .
We therefore welcome the per head aid increases to EUR 30 and the additional aid of EUR 9 for the least-favoured regions , because this is a sector whose production is concentrated in poor areas , in which the viability of farms is more precarious , despite the fact that they play a major role in preserving the rural fabric of these regions and , in certain cases , are even the only economically possible activity .
Also to be welcomed is the removal of the distinction between sheep bred to produce milk and those bred for their meat and that the same increase is to be applied to goats .
I am also happy to support the new aid of EUR 5 , given the difficulties that this sector is experiencing , although we must bear in mind the danger of renationalisation that the creation of national packages entails .
I hope , therefore , that the House - and especially the Commission - will respond positively to this report and that some of the main demands of sheep and goat farmers will be met .
Mr President , there is unanimity in the House about the importance of this reform , about how simplification is a good thing and how vitally important the sheep industry is .
In all those things Mr Adam has done a good job .
But I have to take issue with him in one contentious area which is : what is to be the level of support for sheep farmers ?
I am deeply disappointed that the socialists , the liberals and the nationalists are telling the House that they all intend to vote to cut the recommendation of the Committee on Agriculture by EUR 5 at least in relation to each animal .
They put that forward on the basis of the budget , but in the part of the UK that I represent , Wales - just like Mr Wyn who is sadly no longer in his place - we have seen a huge amount of stock slaughtered because of the foot-and-mouth epidemic .
We see a crippled industry .
We see a situation in which there is no confidence at all in the farming industry today and , as has rightly been said , if you look to an area like Wales , it is no good talking about diversification .
It is no good talking about putting money into Community schemes and improving public transport in rural areas .
We must ensure greater financial support for sheep farmers who have no economic alternative .
Today there are sheep farmers in my constituency who are raising questions about whether they should even restock after foot-and-mouth .
I say to Mr Adam this his government is not helping them by indicating that the compensation scheme that was previously in place is one that they do not intend to continue with , whilst , at the same time , not saying what they intend to put in its place .
That adds to the existing desperation in the countryside .
So , yet again , we hear warm words about the industry , but farmers want deeds , and this means supporting the recommendation made by the agricultural industry for the maximum amount of support for our hard-pressed sheep farmers .
Mr President , the Commission proposal is satisfactory because it clearly attempts to simplify matters by replacing the variable premium with a single premium , meaning that the sector will now know in advance the amount it is to receive and will no longer have to suffer from the uncertainty it has had to endure up until now .
We naturally support the idea that the premium should guarantee an income that is acceptable to the producer and my personal opinion is that this income should be the same for producers of both heavy and light lambs , as approved in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The market in sheep ' s milk is not regulated in the same way as the market in cow ' s milk and income from milk is balanced by a lower level of income from meat production , especially in Mediterranean countries where mixed farms that produce wool , milk and meat slaughter these animals at lower weights , once again , largely in accordance with eating habits .
With regard to the supplementary premium that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development proposed and approved , I have to say that the Commission should be very vigilant that this supplementary premium should in no case be used to reduce the linear premium , the headage premium or the premium for rural development .
The Commission should understand that Parliament ' s Committee wants to see an increase in the premium , comprised of three parts : a headage premium , a premium for rural development and a supplementary premium , in order to be able to help States implement the principle of flexibility .
However , I would strongly urge that this introduction is not , at the end of the day , used to achieve a reduction in the headage premium or in the premium for rural development .
Finally , I would like to say , and the Commissioner is well aware of this , that this sector makes an important contribution to land-use planning and to all the environmental services that we say we are going to defend in this new future common agricultural policy .
However , I think that that truly guaranteeing an income in both this COM and this sector that could pay for the non-food services that this type of livestock farming provides throughout the Community would send an important political signal .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to congratulate the Commission on the proposal it has put forward , mainly because it will simplify the COM and will give security and stability to the sector , and also the rapporteur , because he has been able to reconcile the various political sensitivities in this House , sparing no effort to achieve this .
I would ask the Commission to listen to the political message from this Parliament , which is asking for an increase in the premium . This premium is much needed , because it has remained unaltered since 1994 ; in fact , it has stagnated .
This is the reason why this is one of the sectors that receives the least aid and is the most discriminated against within the COM at the present time .
I think that the proposal from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is reasonable .
However , we will not give our support to amendments put forward a posteriori , because we think that some , such as those put forward by Mr Mulder , should be dealt with in another context , although , it must be said , we are not against what he is saying .
Others run counter to what has already been discussed and on which consensus has been reached in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and would , consequently , blur the political message of this Parliament .
I would ask the Commission , in its debate with Council , to make the necessary effort to give the sector what it needs .
Given that it has already made such an effort when putting forward the proposal , by simplifying the premiums , on the subject of the single premium , and on the possibilities of the Member States managing these premiums , it should make a reasonable budgetary effort - which the Committee on Budgets is not against - so that the objective the sector considers necessary can be achieved .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to expressly welcome the Commission ' s proposal for reforming the market organisation for sheep and goat meat .
The previous speakers have already given all the reasons why we so much welcome this proposal .
I would also like to thank our rapporteur most sincerely for his work .
I believe the revision of the premiums is one of the most important points .
The introduction of a fixed rate premium is a major step forward .
But I would like to stress that the figure proposed by the Commission is much too small .
This premium must also be an incentive for sheep and goat farmers and that means EUR 30 and no less .
The premium must also be the same for farmers regardless of whether they produce ewes or milking ewes .
A distinction between the two cannot really be justified .
I also believe that the EUR 9 supplementary premium for ewes and she-goats is particularly justified under the more difficult conditions in the less-favoured areas .
Beef and veal and sheep meat prices generally follow the same trends , which means there is no justification for treating the two sectors differently as regards the premium .
On the contrary , there is a deficit in sheep meat in Austria and in many other countries of Europe .
If we fail to create reasonable conditions and security for this sector , we shall drive sheep and goat farmers into other areas , such as beef and veal , or they will go out of production altogether .
Such a policy would be ill-advised .
Finally , I would like to say that sheep and goat farming should not be supported only in areas that have no alternative , but also in those where sheep and goat farming is traditional .
I therefore hope , Mr President , that the Commission and Council will follow these sensible proposals from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Mr President , first of all I would like to welcome the proposal .
It is perhaps long overdue , but certainly welcome .
I also take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report on this very important subject .
Sheep production is important especially in hill areas , not only because of the environment there and the role it plays in keeping the social fabric of society together , but because it has proven through the centuries to be one of the most important aspects of production in the agricultural sector .
In the United Kingdom because of foot-and-mouth , sheep farmers have suffered greatly .
I recognise that in Northern Ireland we have had a distinct advantage over our colleagues in the mainland UK , including the prices we have been receiving recently .
Our producers have been very lucky .
Over recent years , farmers have been getting less for their sheep than they were 15 years ago and they are receiving less support .
Is it any wonder that young farmers and sheep farmers are actually leaving the industry ?
We have to ask ourselves how best we can support them .
I want to make it very clear : I will support the EUR 30 in the amendment in the vote in this House this afternoon .
I hope all of you will be here to vote in favour of this amendment because we must give the political leadership this requires .
For far too long , the sheep sector has been the poor relation .
It has been the poor relation with respect to the milk , beef , tobacco and wine sectors .
It has been the poor relation because it has been deemed to lack a strong voice in Europe .
I would like to congratulate the Commission in coming forward with this proposal because it will be fairer than the present system .
Yes , there will be some budgetary problems but we can get over them .
I ask this House for its support .
Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by sincerely thanking you , Mr Adam , for producing the report and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their contributions to the discussions in committee and also for today ' s debate .
I am also very grateful because it is important that we press ahead with this proposal quickly and take a vote on it soon so that it can then hopefully be adopted by the Council as quickly as possible and this reformed market organisation for sheep and goat meat can come into force on 1 January next year and the premiums can then also be paid under this new regime next year .
As many of you have also emphasised , the most important point of the proposed reform is the replacement of the variable deficiency payments by a fixed-rate form of aid .
That has a number of important advantages .
This new aid is stable .
It can also be calculated in advance .
This means that farmers can also plan with certainty .
Above all , it is also a lot less bureaucratic because none of the expensive market intelligence on which the deficiency payments are currently based and all the complex calculations involved will any longer be necessary .
Moreover , it is also of course much , much easier for sheep and goat farmers to understand .
It allows producers to respond correctly to the needs of the respective markets because the support is not affected by changing prices .
The Commission proposal also guarantees budget stability and in particular is also more consistent with WTO objectives over all .
I believe there is broad agreement about these principles , as the debate has shown .
Let me turn briefly to the most important amendments .
Some are concerned with improving the text and are extremely welcome .
I would , for example , be very pleased to accept Amendment No 11 because a more precise definition of the terms " producer " and " holding " will help to make the regulation much easier to understand .
I can also support Amendment No 16 , which proposes that premiums be paid not later than 31 March instead of 30 June .
That will mean that producers will get their premiums even earlier .
I also welcome the proposal to change the definition of producer in less-favoured areas , but I think the term could be simplified even more here .
The wording of the amendment therefore needs to be made even more precise in this respect .
On the other hand , I do not think it is necessary , as proposed in Amendment No 44 , to specify the supplementary premium for dykes and salt marshes .
They ought to be covered by the rule for less-favoured areas .
So I do not really think this amendment is necessary .
I also consider Amendments Nos 1 , 6 , 9 , 22 , 36 and 37 superfluous or pointless in the context of the regulation .
Other amendments are concerned with the need for a degree of flexibility that would enable Member States to provide additional support for the sector or , more especially , to manage the various Member States ' individual quotas better and more actively .
The questions that were raised in the discussions in this connection are concerned with a number of aspects and possibilities , ranging from extensification and environmental concerns to the development of quality products , improvement of marketing structures and the creation of producer groups .
I would like to say to you in this connection that while I cannot accept the proposed amendments directly , I do understand very clearly the message they are intended to convey .
I would therefore like to pursue further the concern that lies behind them in order to find solutions that will take better account of the different requirements of the sector in the individual Member States .
But they must be simple solutions .
I do not think we should be creating a new bureaucracy .
The same also applies for Amendments Nos 25 to 30 concerning the national financial frameworks , which should also be placed in the context of the proposals for greater flexibility .
We must ensure that these framework provisions are also practicable and consistent with the objectives stated in the amendments in question .
Amendments Nos 12 , 13 and 15 are in fact the ones with the greatest direct effects .
They are concerned with the question , discussed here , of increasing the premium to EUR 30 for all producers and increasing the supplementary premium for producers in less-favoured regions to EUR 9 .
If these proposals were accepted , expenditure would rise to EUR 2.7 billion .
Even the more moderate amendments , as you termed them , Nos 45 and 46 , would still entail additional expenditure amounting to EUR 385 million .
We based our proposal on the financial framework agreed in Berlin , and I regret that I cannot therefore go along with your suggestions , especially in view of the fact that at virtually every summit the Heads of Government stress the importance and immutability of that financial framework .
I must also reject the suggestion that producers of sheep ' s milk and goat ' s milk be paid the same aid as farmers who only produce meat .
On the other hand , I was interested to note Amendments Nos 31 and 35 proposing additional premiums in the event of a price crisis .
But the draft regulation does already provide for a kind of safety net to come into effect if falls in prices disrupt the market .
I cannot therefore agree to those amendments .
The proposal in Amendment No 20 that the first 15 sheep livestock units should be disregarded for calculating the stocking density for the beef and veal arrangements refers to a problem that actually belongs not in the context of this regulation but in the context of the market organisation for cattle , and I must therefore reject this proposal in this connection .
But I would willingly agree to return to this point in the Midterm Review when we shall be discussing the question of the beef and veal arrangements and how they work .
Amendments Nos 5 , 7 and 33 are concerned with imports from third countries .
Unfortunately , these amendments run counter to our international obligations and cannot therefore be accepted for that reason .
Traceability is another important aspect .
Amendment No 8 proposes that the report on the environmental effects of sheep and goat farming to be prepared by 31 December 2005 should also look into this question .
I understand that and fully share your concerns , but I believe that this problem really needs to be solved sooner and that we cannot wait until 31 December 2005 .
The first step towards better origin safeguards requires the creation of a reliable marking and registration system .
Since such a proposal requires a different basis in law , the proposed amendments are simply outside the scope of this regulation because under this regulation the relevant legal basis would be lacking .
But I do think that part of Amendment No 42 , which links the granting of premiums to compliance with the marking and registration rules , seems a sensible approach .
I shall at any rate put such a proposal before the Council .
Amendment No 19 is concerned with allowing Member States to show greater flexibility when setting application periods .
This question will be settled in the implementing provisions .
A Council decision is not therefore required here ; it falls within the competence of the Commission .
To avoid cases of fraud , however , an efficient marking and registration system ought to be operative for that reason , too .
Finally , I would like to thank you again for the report and the amendments .
In some areas there is a consensus , in some I shall pass your concerns on to the Council even though I cannot formally accept the amendments in their present form , and unfortunately there are also amendments which I am unable to accept because I do not have the authority to approve the funding .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Reopening of Mont Blanc Tunnel
The next item is the statement by the Commission on the reopening of the Mont Blanc tunnel .
Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , the tragic accident in the St Gotthard Tunnel yesterday morning reminds us of the tragic fire of 24 March 1999 in the Mont Blanc Tunnel .
But before I say anything about the reopening of the Mont Blanc Tunnel , I would like on behalf of the Commission to express my deepest sympathy to the families of those who have lost their lives and also to extend our sympathy to the Swiss authorities and the Swiss people .
Even if the causes of the accident are not yet known , this event again raises in a most pressing and dramatic manner the question of the safety of long road tunnels .
The reopening of the Mont Blanc Tunnel does not require Commission approval .
This decision is the sole responsibility of the French and Italian authorities .
The imminent reopening of the tunnel has , however , revived a number of controversies .
First and foremost is the question of the tunnel 's possible closure to heavy goods vehicles , something that the people living in the Chamonix valley had been calling for long before the disastrous fire .
However , the Commission takes the view that safety criteria alone should determine the reopening of the tunnel and the only condition should be that all the safety requirements are satisfied .
According to information available to the Commission , the tunnel has now been equipped with modern safety devices under French and Italian responsibility .
An electronic control centre has been set up , the electrical installations completely renewed , the ventilation system modernised , ventilated refuges created every 300 metres and emergency stopping bays every 100 metres .
In addition , the training of operating personnel and emergency services has been greatly improved .
As an additional safety measure , new rules have been introduced for the minimum distance to be observed between vehicles using the tunnel .
Finally , the two original operating companies , ATMB in France and SITMB in Italy , have been replaced by a single administrative structure , an important step bearing in mind that , according to a number of technical reports produced after the fire , the large number of casualties was due , among other things , to poor coordination between the two operators .
The Commission has contributed EUR 22.5 million to the repair work , which cost around EUR 200 million .
As a result of this disaster and the two subsequent fires in Austria - the fire in the Tauern Tunnel on 25 May 1999 caused by a pile up that claimed 12 lives and the fire in the Kaprun glacier railway on 11 November 2000 that cost 156 people their lives - the Commission decided that , together with experts , it should also examine how tunnel safety might best be optimised .
Our conclusions form part of the White Paper on transport policy up until the year 2010 .
Knowing that tunnels are important features of many cross-border transport links , the Commission is planning European rules .
These are intended to create the necessary conditions for guaranteeing users of road and rail tunnels , especially tunnels forming part of trans-European networks , a high level of safety .
The Commission will pass a proposal to this effect to the European Parliament and the Council early in 2002 .
The most recent accident once more underlines the fundamental importance of controlling transalpine traffic flows .
The Commission considers it an absolute priority that the two rail links already mentioned in the 1996 guidelines for the trans-European transport network , namely the Lyons-Turin link and the section across the Brenner , should be developed and taken into service without delay .
It has informed the competent ministers of this on many occasions , urging them to take the necessary measures to expedite these projects and in particular to give thought to how they will be funded , not excluding public-private partnerships .
Apart from creating new infrastructures to cope with the bulk of freight transit traffic in the region , the Commission will be formulating minimum requirements for safety in tunnels , as announced in its White Paper .
In the White Paper , the Commission also proposes a new scheme for transport infrastructure charges to take greater account of the external costs of the various transport operators .
This new charging policy should make a major contribution to creating a balanced relationship between transport operators , especially in sensitive regions like the Alps , favouring the most environmentally friendly among them .
As part of its strategy for sustainable mobility , the Commission will also be proposing revision of the Euro-toll disc directive to allow cross- financing for new railway infrastructures .
Accordingly , the Commission has also proposed signing the transport protocol to the Alpine Convention on behalf of the European Community , which will be a political signal for the creation of a balanced relationship between transport operators , even if the corresponding provisions may in some cases be handled with a degree of flexibility .
In general , the Commission intends to make European transport systems sustainable and to take into account medium and long-term environmental objectives when doing this .
A Communication to be presented by the Commission next year , will discuss this in greater detail
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot begin a debate on this subject without remembering the ten latest victims claimed by the St Gotthard tunnel , and Mr Fischler was quite right to pay tribute to them , but we must also remember that , this very morning , yet another incident took place in the Petit St Bernard tunnel .
It seems almost to be an unfortunate coincidence , placing a greater onus on us , now that we are preparing to debate the proposal and the timeliness of whether or not to reopen the Mont Blanc tunnel .
As I shall say later , I have no doubts on the matter , but there are many considerations I must air before I make this statement .
First of all , the St Gotthard accident is directly connected with the one in the Mont Blanc tunnel , where , as everyone will remember , 39 people lost their lives on 24 March 1999 , but there is an even more direct link than just the similarity between the two accidents , which it is only right to recall .
It is a link of cause and effect : it seems clear to everybody that the mass of traffic that the Mont Blanc has not been able to cater for during the two and a half years or so since it closed has inevitably shifted to other Alpine passes , starting with the St Gotthard itself , which in turn is now closed , and then the Brenner and the Tarvisio and the whole Alpine arc , which , in short , has absorbed the surplus traffic that used to go through the Mont Blanc tunnel before it was closed .
It is clear , therefore , that the cause of the accident can be quite easily identified and predicted , given the situation . Alongside the negative effect of the accidents , however , there is , of course , another negative effect , which is the impact on the environment .
Heavy vehicles , especially those crossing an Alpine pass , certainly have an environmental cost that nobody would want to pay .
Quite rightly , therefore , people have started discussing the subject of the Mont Blanc tunnel , particularly in the last couple of days , and proposals have been made to try to prevent the tunnel from reopening and thus protect the land around it .
I must say that I totally disagree with this proposal , although I understand the legitimate aspirations of those living in a particular area to protect their environment .
This proposal , however , not only contravenes the Treaty - in that it would violate a fundamental principle , that of the free movement of goods , persons and so on - but I would say it is also an ethical violation .
By closing the Mont Blanc tunnel or keeping it closed , one is in fact just shifting an ecological problem from one part of the Alps to another ; we would just be shifting the problem from the Mont Blanc region to the Fréjus region , to Switzerland , and to the Brenner and Tarvisio routes , as I said before , which does not seem right to me .
I ask those who advocate this solution : what kind of proposal is this ?
What has become of the spirit of Alpine solidarity ? What has become of the feeling of belonging to the Community , to the European Union ?
On the other hand , as the Commissioner has also reminded us , the opening of the Mont Blanc tunnel will certainly be accompanied by special safety arrangements .
It goes without saying that , in addition to the environmental damage , there is also the economic damage that we have a duty to consider here : during the two and a half years that it has been closed , it has been calculated that Italy alone has lost EUR 1 500 million , and the Val d ' Aosta region will have seen its own regional gross domestic product fall by 10 % .
France , too , has probably had losses comparable to these : perhaps Mrs Grossetête will tell us , as I know she is to speak afterwards and she lives in that part of the world .
We must not be ashamed to talk about the economic aspect as well , since the Mont Blanc tunnel , like all passes through the Alps , responds to demands which are not solely economic but may be expressed in economic terms , and which need to be met to enable the various nations , citizens and groups operating in the fields of industry , trade and tourism to carry on their activities .
All this serves not only the countries on either side of the border but also and especially more distant countries - I am thinking of the United Kingdom , the Netherlands and Germany - whose traffic inevitably has to cross the Alps , which are today almost closed off and practically impassable .
It is also clear that the Italian and the French authorities have , at last , found a common language in which to propose solutionsand have invested almost EUR 300 million , the burden being shared equally by the two countries , to ensure safety .
It is said that once this tunnel has been restored - which I hope will be very soon - it will be the safest in the world , with features that I will not repeat now because they have already been mentioned by the Commissioner himself .
Now we need to take one further step : to speed up the bureaucratic and technical process to complete the Munich-Verona link , which means the Brenner tunnel , and the Lyon-Turin link , which means the Fréjus tunnel .
These are priority projects .
I shall end , Mr President , by reminding the House that there is a new proposal that might help : the Aosta-Martigny rail link , which starts in Milan , is not one of the European priorities but could be included if France and Italy take the matter up .
By the way , I shall close with some news : tomorrow the Italian Minister , Mr Lunardi , and his French counterpart , Mr Gayssot , will be meeting to agree on a date to reopen the Mont Blanc tunnel , which I hope will be very , very soon .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the opening of the Mont Blanc Tunnel is a European event , a happy European event , just as the accident in the St. Gotthard Tunnel is a tragic , sad European event .
Transport knows no borders .
It makes no difference whether you are a member of the European Union or not .
We need transport that connects the regions of Europe , but we also need transport that respects the environment .
I believe the Commission ' s approach is correct in seeing the question of tunnel safety in the overall context not only of transport policy but also of environmental policy .
The Commissioner mentioned , for example , the transport protocol to the Alpine Convention .
I just wonder - the Council is not here - where the ministers are who signed it because it is high time the governments took action here .
Secondly , the Commissioner spoke of a shift from road to rail , where that is possible and worthwhile .
Here , too , a number of European governments - the Austrian government among them - have been slow in putting that into effect .
The plans are good .
But the financial resources must also be made available if the measures in question are to be taken .
I also know that in many countries the railways have the capacity to carry more freight than they do at present .
The White Paper that was mentioned and which the Vice-President of the Commission has presented , is a very positive and important step in the restructuring of transport policy .
Our Group strongly supports it and I hope that the announced presentation of the amendment to the Euro-toll disc directive and the infrastructure costs directive will not be delayed , and that we shall be able to discuss the Euro-toll disc revision very soon .
Finally , there has been a lot of talk recently of a fast-track procedure .
We have talked about it a great deal and very often , and this is a subject where we really could introduce a fast-track .
I am sure it is right that it is not only a question of overriding transport policy but also of the level of safety .
We welcome the Commission ' s intention of prescribing safety standards here because if the tunnels we travel in are unsafe we are all affected .
A number of things have been mentioned .
I would like to add that the question of working hours is particularly important for lorry drivers , as is the matter of controls , because it does not matter how good the rules are that we adopt if these things are not enforced .
This , too , is a matter for the individual countries to act on .
My Group and I are quite clear in our own minds that this is not about pitting one country against another .
France , Italy , Germany , Austria and all the other countries of the EU have a right to the free movement of goods .
But the people who live in the Alpine regions also have a right to a healthy environment .
Some people may laugh or smile at the fact that the UN has designated next year the year of mountains .
However , it really is high time special attention were paid to the environmental situation , in the Alps and the Pyrenees in particular .
Now , Mr President and Mr Commissioner , I must ask to be excused .
I am going to be rude and leave the room now because I am going to Romania on Parliament ' s behalf .
But we nevertheless endorse these principles of a really environmentally-friendly transport policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted this debate is happening at last .
As the Member for the Val d ' Aosta , I have been calling for a moment ' s reflection in this House for many months , because I believe these issues should be resolved through institutional channels , this is the true alternative to futile protests .
It is sad that this should happen on the day after the accident in the St Gotthard tunnel , which used to be referred to as one of the safest of tunnels , and , what is more , in Switzerland , which is the only European country - not yet part of the European Union - that has truly embarked on a policy of transferring freight from road to rail .
Mont Blanc has always been a symbol : it has been the symbol of mountaineering and also the symbol of road transport , with this tunnel built in the 1960s , which for many years was the most important tunnel in the Alps .
Nobody could ever have imagined that we would see such intense growth in road transport , and I must say that 24 March 1999 was , for those who saw it , like me , a tragic day : the sight inside the tunnel was truly appalling .
I believe that all these events should serve to make it clear that extreme positions on both sides are useless . The extremist approach adopted by those who say ' stop the HGVs ' is unrealistic .
It offloads HGVs onto someone else and proposes a utopian world without transport and without mobility ; naturally , however , we must also say no to those who call for ' unlimited transport for all : the economy needs it . '
I believe this is an unsustainable position for mountain peoples like those in the Val d ' Aosta , whom I represent , just as a pretence at a setting a limit would also be unsustainable .
In fact , we are asking for a daily ceiling on HGV numbers - a genuinely effective serious limit .
On the eve of this meeting , Società Autostrade , the motorway operator , told us that , according to the tunnel calculations , traffic will be 30 per cent lower than before the tragedy .
I do not know if this will suffice , but I must say that the right approach is in the White Paper , the Alpine Convention transport protocol and the Swiss model . Under the swiss model , it was decided to agree to HGVs if they pay a tax and to invest the revenue , together with other capital , in rail tunnels .
We want rail tunnels : we want the Turin-Lyon tunnel ; we also want the Aosta-Martigny tunnel , this rail project that may acquire vital , decisive importance .
In the meantime , however , we want real , serious limits for the sake of safety and the environment .
Mr President , Commissioner , the St Gotthard disaster , which has caused many victims , incontrovertibly belies the arguments that prevailed in Mr Gayssot ' s decision to reopen the Mont-Blanc tunnel .
We cannot limit ourselves to lamenting the victims .
We must finally take action to definitively stop this flood of disasters and we have good reasons for demanding this in Parliament .
From the environmental point of view , reopening the Mont-Blanc tunnel goes against the commitments given by the European Union and its Member States on reducing greenhouse gas emissions .
What is the point of our voting in favour of sustainable transport and switching from road to rail if , at the first opportunity to show determination to reverse the ' everything by road ' trend , this option is removed ?
In the two years of work on the tunnel , rail freight transport has not increased .
It has remained static at 10.5 million tonnes per year , whereas additional rail capacity does exist and the 13.5 million tonnes that transit every year through the Mont-Blanc tunnel could have been absorbed by rail if capacity had been doubled for transit through Mont-Cenis , through the link that runs south of Lake Geneva and through the Dijon-Valorme link .
It is incomprehensible that this rail solution should have been ignored , since it represents a transit capacity of up to 20 million tonnes per year via trans-Alpine routes .
I should like the Commissioner to take note of this point , because I am giving him very practical proposals .
It seems , however , that he is not interested .
I would , therefore , like to say to him that we completely disagree with his analysis of the safety of the Mont-Blanc tunnel .
This is another reason why we do not accept that it should be reopened .
The EUR 200 million ' s worth of work that has been undertaken , without an impact assessment or a public inquiry , does not meet the highest safety requirements .
The tunnel is still a narrow ( seven metres wide ) single-direction tube that has no tarmac-covered and , therefore , fire-resistant surface , central escape hatch or parallel evacuation tunnel .
The old ventilation duct will be used for evacuation .
Safety must be of primary importance for all forms of transport and not only , as you stated , for air transport .
The Commission must , therefore , reject the reopening of the Mont-Blanc tunnel and accept the proposals that the Commissioner has ignored , but which are perfectly appropriate alternative proposals , which seek to use the railways for transit through the Alps .
Mr President , this debate comes just a few hours after another terrible tragedy in the St Gotthard tunnel , with ten people known to have died and eighty missing , according to the latest news .
This tunnel has the same specification as the tunnel rebuilt under Mont Blanc : substantially the same technical specification as regards safety , with the same carriageway width of about seven metres , or even worse , in that the Mont Blanc tunnel has no parallel service tunnel .
Having heard the Commissioner , I have come to the following conclusion : more disasters will have to happen in order finally to persuade the European Commission to give up its policy of White Papers , which no longer apply , and the associated illusion that technology can solve any problem , and make it realise that a 40-tonne lorry in a seven-metre-wide tunnel is a lethal weapon .
Commissioner , we must ask the governments involved to delay the reopening of the Mont Blanc tunnel so that we can seriously reconsider what kinds of vehicles should be allowed to use it .
We must say no to large HGVs ; we should place a strict limit on the number of HGVs that can go through each day and we should ban dangerous loads .
This is the only way we can prevent further disasters .
Mr President , the events of yesterday morning have , unfortunately , plunged us once again into the Mont-Blanc tunnel disaster and this debate that we are having today has become more topical than ever .
I totally agree with Mr Santini when he says that closing a link such as a tunnel beneath the Alps causes real economic problems , and I fully understand this , but nor do I feel that we can call for it to be reopened unless all safety guarantees are met .

Furthermore , even today we still do not know the real causes of the accidents that take place in these tunnels , any more than we know what guarantees we may be given that they will not happen again .
I am sorry first of all that the Council is not present to hear this debate , even though the Commissioner made it quite clear that this concerns a principle of subsidiarity .
I am sorry that the Council is not here to say what it intends to do within the framework of a land-use planning policy .
We are never given answers to our questions on the real trans-European networks , be they railways or roads .
Incidentally , Mr President , Commissioner , I should like us to jointly put pressure on the Council to give us answers .
We cannot keep on asking the same questions , when terrible accidents unfortunately occur , which are still unanswered two or three years later .
I would , therefore , say that it is now crucial that we question the Council and that we should have a real land-use planning policy that takes account of the railways and which plans the trans-European road networks so that such disasters cannot happen again .
Mr President , allow me to add my condolences to those expressed to the families of the victims and the citizens of Switzerland in general for yesterday ' s terrible accident in the St Gotthard tunnel .
Road tunnel accidents have been on the increase in recent months , and this makes it particularly urgent for safety measures not to be delayed any further with White Papers and vague proposals .
The reopening of the Mont Blanc tunnel , already well behind the schedule agreed on by the Italian and French Governments in January 2001 , must take place within the framework of a number of conditions to ensure traffic safety and reduce environmental problems to a minimum .
In concrete terms , it is a matter of putting into operation traffic control mechanisms inside the tunnel , so that , with the application of new technologies and the constant presence of surveillance personnel , any accident will be picked up straight away .
Traffic must also be regulated to prevent too many heavy goods vehicles being in the tunnel at the same time ; such vehicles could be allowed through in only one direction at a time , for instance , and there could be tighter speed limits and other similar measures .
A definitive list should be drawn up of goods banned from being transported through the tunnel , and , in this respect , let us remember that the St Gotthard incident would not have been so serious if one of the HGVs had not been carrying material as flammable as tyres . We should also adopt any other provisions that will help distribute commercial vehicle journeys evenly among the all-too-few road tunnels linking Italy to Europe .
We will only find a solution to the many problems posed by road tunnels if , of course , there is a definite shift of freight from road to rail , and it is in this direction that the Union should be directing its efforts .
Such a shift , however , is a process that takes time , and so it seems rather unrealistic for those people , who are without doubt moved by the best environmentalist intentions - which we all share - to call today for the total closure of the Mont Blanc tunnel to commercial traffic .
It should be noted that in Italy , at least , those same people are also protesting at the building of a new , faster high-speed railway line between Turin and Lyon , designed precisely to help distribute goods transport more evenly , which just shows how contradictory or even absurd such positions , held by certain Italian political groups , can be .
While , therefore , we share the environmental concern to protect the alpine environment of the Val d ' Aosta , we must not fail to take into account the economic interests - including jobs - that the tunnel implies , particularly for the valley itself and also for Italy as a whole .
These legitimate interests are in fact reflected in surveys carried out in the valley , according to which the great majority of the citizens want the tunnel to reopen .
What we ask is for the tunnel to be reopened with the safety measures mentioned above implemented , and , at the same time , for there to be a decisive international initiative to develop a new rail infrastructure , including , in particular , the new Turin-Lyon line , improved commercial traffic handling on the Turin-Bardonecchia-Amberieu line , and the widening of the Col di Tenda tunnel and the Aosta-Martigny tunnel .
We call on the Italy-France intergovernmental commission , set up under the January 2001 declaration , to report to the European Parliament on all this as soon as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , so despite the proven risks , despite the hostility of the communities of the valleys , it has been decided to reopen the Mont Blanc tunnel to heavy goods vehicles , deliberately sacrificing the alternative of rail transport .
The Maurienne valley , the Fréjus tunnel , the valleys of Briançon , the Mont Genèvre pass and the Chamonix valley deserve a better fate than being merely HGV fodder ' , as the Savoy League put it .
Alas , it seems that the road transport lobbies come before the health of the inhabitants , the safety of travellers or respect for sites of outstanding beauty .
What have the countries concerned done since March 1999 to replace road with rail ?
Not a thing .
Between the first half of 2000 and the first half of 2001 , rail freight between Italy and France fell by 8 % and combined transport by 10 % .
In face of such lack of foresight , I can only support the request from the Savoy League for an independent international agency - which could be the Commission - to draw up a report on the Alpine passes between France and Italy and for , in the meantime , the Alpine tunnels to be reserved for tourist traffic and regional and inter-valley traffic , with strict limits on size and tonnage .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in 1999 we had the Mont Blanc tunnel disaster .
Yesterday , we had another tragedy , in the St Gotthard tunnel .
This chapter of disasters is certainly not coincidental , it is the human price we pay for basing our goods transport system on HGV transport and pursuing the maximum profit , which creates terrible risks .
Since the Mont Blanc tunnel was closed , the Maurienne valley has had to absorb the weight of all the traffic and is suffocating as a result .
The St Gotthard tragedy will lead to even more re-routed traffic for the valley to absorb .
Even in normal times there are not enough crossing points .
So we need to tackle the problem of transit transport .
We have to look for global solutions .
In this context , reopening the Mont Blanc tunnel would mean ensuring that the correct distances between vehicles are observed , that road traffic is regulated , that partial traffic bans are observed , that ceilings on lorry numbers are imposed and observed , that the limits laid down for lorry-drivers ' working hours are observed and that safety rules are continuously monitored .
Finally , it would mean undertaking to develop ' piggybacking ' and making immediate use of the existing transverse lines , which are under-used .
We urgently need to review the entire policy of goods transport in Europe .
The Union must finance adequate investment to that end .
I think that in sensitive areas we should give up road goods transport , which means that , as of now , we have to mobilise the necessary resources for speeding up the development of piggybacking .
The European Union must now show the political courage to make new and bold choices .
Thank you .
Mr President , the recent tragic accidents have again made us all aware that we have a lot of catching up to do in road transport in particular , especially when it comes to developing infrastructures for intermodal transport systems .
I do not want to prolong the debate unnecessarily , but I would like to ask a very open question . Which way will the traffic go if the Mont Blanc Tunnel , the St Gotthard Tunnel and the St Bernard Tunnel are closed ?
I am very much afraid - and that fear is shared by the population of Austria and the population all along the Alps - that the traffic will then go over the Brenner Pass and that we will have major problems in that highly sensitive region of the Alps , problems that will affect not only North and South Tyrol but also Trentino .
I therefore implore you to be really forward looking in tackling this issue because it is not only a matter of road safety but of the environment in which many people live .
Mr President , I was told I had three minutes ' speaking time but no matter .
I would like to say briefly , now that another accident has occurred in the St Gotthard tunnel , that I think there is a difference between learning lessons from that accident and exploiting its emotional charge for political ends .
If we use the deaths in the St Gotthard tunnel , which , of course , we all deplore , as a pretext for saying that we must not reopen the Mont Blanc tunnel , then we should also close the Fréjus tunnel , the Arlberg tunnel and the Brenner Pass .
In fact , we should close every Alpine tunnel that presents the same accident risks .
Clearly , that would totally paralyse southern Europe because , quite simply , we no longer have a choice today .
As everybody here knows , the railways are not ready either institutionally , technically or economically to take over from the roads .
Therefore , it seems to me that we have to take two kinds of measures , short term and long term .
In the short term , we must make the tunnels safer and take urgent measures , whether in Mont Blanc , where this has now been done , or in other tunnels , to regulate the traffic , ensure that no hazardous materials are carried through , strengthen the security , safety and intervention systems and speed up the adoption of a European directive on tunnel safety .
This is much talked about but it has not yet materialised , so we must put it on the agenda very soon .

That aside , like everyone else here I believe that , in the long term , we should quite simply be able to ban , once and for all , heavy goods vehicles in tunnels because they are , in fact , the most dangerous vehicles , but that assumes that alternatives exist , and the Commission has , indeed , presented them in its White Paper .
There are other projects too that need to be speeded up , including , in the case of the Alps , the two rail tunnels , the one between Lyon and Turin and the Brenner tunnel ; there are similar projects in the Pyrenees , where the traffic situation is even more serious , although this is never mentioned .
I believe we must also assume our responsibility here and speak out .
For my part , I feel we are still far from doing so .
The Commission has produced an excellent White Paper ; it is very good at laying down requirements , but it has not as yet paid out enough to enable us to make the transition to rail in the very short term .
We therefore need to allocate far , far greater resources to improving rail capacity .
Let me finish by saying that public opinion is now concerning itself with transport policy - which is a good thing - and as a result , it is no longer a matter just for the specialists , for the large State bodies .
It means we will all be judged by whether we can implement rapid solutions , not just the politicians but also the railwaymen and the hauliers .
Let me conclude by saying that I also hope we will not confine ourselves to imposing constraints while rejecting all the solutions . In regard to north-south transport , I think we should also look again at adapting the Rhine-Rhone canal to heavy goods transport .
We cannot say that we have to put a stop to road transport while , at the same time , rejecting transport by river and inland waterway which would relieve much of the pressure on the roads .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking you for your contributions to this debate ; they were all very constructive and sought to find a solution to this very grave problem .
On the quite specific question of signing the Alpine Convention , the Commission will endeavour to get the Council to sign during the course of the Belgian Presidency .
On the other hand , the primary concern is naturally for safety .
I do not think it will work if we now quite simply push all safety matters up to the European level .
Everyone must see to it in the areas for which he or she is responsible .
The national authorities must do that just as much as we have to fulfil our own responsibilities , but we cannot take over the responsibilities of the national authorities .
So the fact is that the question of reopening and the question of safety standards must be settled primarily by the French and Italian authorities .
There is a procedure for that .
That procedure has been completed and we have the result .
If those authorities come to the conclusion that reopening is justified , then that is what must happen .
On the other hand , we must also be clear at European level that we can only act within the framework of our own competencies .
The fact is , too , that the very White Paper that my colleague Mrs de Palacio has presented , is intended first of all to clarify those competencies and secondly also to see that traffic becomes even safer and also that the environmental effects of traffic are kept in check so that there is no further damage to the particularly sensitive areas of the European Union .
Regarding the question of the Euro-toll disc regulation , as I said , we shall be submitting a draft for it in 2002 .
In this connection we shall also be considering whether it is necessary to create some kind of transitional arrangement for the transit agreement with the Republic of Austria .
Essentially , this depends on how quickly our Member States and the European Parliament can agree on the contents of the White Paper .
It will not be possible to actually implement these things until we are in a position to create a new , improved infrastructure costs directive and adopt the other parts of the White Paper .
We therefore have the answer to the question .
The Commission has no way - no legal way in particular - of preventing the opening of the Mont Blanc Tunnel .
But I am very much in favour of an appropriately intensive debate on the new White Paper so that definite decisions can be taken as soon as possible .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have come to the end of the Commission statement on the reopening of the Mont Blanc tunnel earlier than expected .
The following report , by Mr Lannoye , is set for debate at 4.00 p.m. , and this time cannot be changed .
This being the case , we have no choice but to suspend the sitting and resume at the previously fixed time .
( The sitting was suspended at 3.46 p.m. and resumed at 4.00 p.m. )

Fisheries and poverty reduction
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0334 / 2001 ) by Mr Lannoye , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Commission communication on fisheries and poverty reduction [ COM ( 2000 ) 724 - C5-0071 / 2001 - 2001 / 2032 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , this communication from the Commission deals with a key issue for the developing countries : how can the fisheries policy conducted by these countries help reduce poverty ?
I will now present the resolution adopted by the Committee on Development and Cooperation under a special procedure - the Hughes procedure - which means the Committee on Fisheries was closely involved in drawing up the report .
Let me also point out that the resolution fully endorses the opinion delivered by the Committee on Fisheries .
In the report and the resolution , we start from two key premises .
Firstly , in the developing countries , the respective contribution of the coastal communities to food security and employment make this sector a major factor of sustainable development and poverty reduction in these regions .
Secondly , and unfortunately on a less positive note , we find a constant depletion of fish resources in these developing countries ' fishing zones .
In the context of fisheries relations between the European Union and the developing countries , the Committee on Development believes that we need to encourage observance of the principles of the FAO 's Code of Conduct for Responsible Fishing .

Let me remind you of the main points of this code : application of the precautionary principle in resource management , giving priority to the needs of coastal communities in the developing countries and , in particular , those engaged in small-scale fishing , active participation by those directly concerned , namely the local communities , and , finally , cooperation at sub-regional , regional and global level in promoting the conservation and management of resources .
To that end , the Committee on Development proposes a range of strategic measures focused on the need to ensure coherence between the European Union 's sectoral policies and its development policy .
I am thinking , of course , mainly of fisheries policy but also of regional policy .
The first proposal set out in the resolution is that EU development policy must pay greater attention to the developing countries ' fishing industry by drawing up country-specific cooperation strategy documents resulting from the political dialogue between the European Union and the country concerned .
The second is that account must be taken of the need to improve the living conditions of coastal communities in the context of the various priority intervention areas defined within this cooperation strategy .
Thirdly , we must apply specific mechanisms to reinforce the organisations representing the small-scale fishing industry , and in particular in the area of processing fisheries products .
I am thinking here of women 's organisations , which are extremely important in the developing countries and have relatively few operating resources .
Fourthly , in the context of the fisheries agreements , abiding by the precautionary principle means carrying out prior scientific assessments of available resources ; if there are any doubts , this precautionary principle must indeed be applied , meaning we must take the lowest hypothesis as the basis .
Fifthly , it is important for the European Union to support surveillance and monitoring programmes in the developing countries ' exclusive economic zones .
We are all aware that some of these countries do not have the necessary technical means to do so .
That is why it is important for the European Union to make its contribution , so as to avoid over-fishing and the poaching activities of certain vessels .
In that spirit we must also help these countries combat flags of convenience and other vessels which fish illegally in their exclusive economic zones .
Finally , our resolution calls on the Council to amend FIFG , so as to put a stop to grants of subsidies to Community ship-owners for transfers to flags of convenience .
I have not gone into every aspect , but I am sure my colleague , Mr Varela , in the Committee on Fisheries , will be happy to present the particular points his committee has proposed .
. ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Fisheries has unanimously approved the report for which I was rapporteur and that today is included in the Lannoye report .
I requested the Hughes procedure , because the matter has a profound effect on both fisheries and development cooperation .
I sincerely believe that we in the Committee on Fisheries have significantly improved the original draft of the Lannoye report .
We have contributed to focusing and balancing the hitherto exclusive point of view of the Committee on Development and Cooperation and particularly the opinions of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , that were held on this matter .
International fisheries agreements are not harmful to fishing , to the European Union , or to third countries , as is sometimes claimed .
On the contrary , they are beneficial to all .
We should try to ensure that this mutual benefit is enjoyed by all those concerned , and this cannot be achieved only by means of the CFP .
The development cooperation policy should become more involved , with more economic , financial and technical measures , as requested by our report and as shown in the information given in the explanatory statement .
International fisheries agreements are trade agreements as the Council of the European Union acknowledged , even though they are dedicating more and more of their own funds to cooperation , yet they are of fundamental importance to cover the deficit in the supply of fish in the European Union and for jobs in Europe ' s Objective 1 regions that we must also treat as a priority .
Employment and economic and social cohesion in Europe are fundamental political principles of our Union .
Are we keen to preserve the resources of third countries ?
Of course .
Is anyone more conservation-minded than the European Union ?
Would other foreign fishing powers , in Asia , for example , which would take our place if we left them to it , have more respect for these resources ?
Of course not .
I think that the criticisms voiced in the Lannoye report on the agreements with Mauritania and Senegal are completely unfounded .
I also disagree with the regional approach that is proposed , because international fisheries agreements apply to exclusive economic zones that are come under the sovereignty of third countries , and each State is sovereign and has different political and economic interests .
Multilateral cooperation in international waters would be another matter altogether .
I think , Mr President , that our Parliament has taken a positive step forwards .
We would still ask the Commission to coordinate its cooperation and fishing competences .
Parliament has set an example by coordinating our two committees and I think that this is right way to defend European interests , combining principles that we all advocate , such as the conservation of mankind ' s natural resources and the eradication of poverty in the Third World , which requires development cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as we all know , reconciling various Community policies is a task that is necessary , but not always easy .
To put it simply , when we are involved in the fight against world poverty , our work is not only important : it is crucial .
Fish are a universally scarce resource .
For the coastal communities of the poorest countries that live exclusively from fishing , it is a precious resource on which their very survival depends .
We are , therefore , very pleased with the Commission statement on fisheries and poverty reduction and endorse Mr Lannoye ' s report , both of which provide an intelligent definition of principles and suggest options that will enable us to reconcile supply for the Community market with the catching , processing and marketing of fish from the countries with which we have fisheries agreements .
There is a wise Chinese proverb , which teaches that acting responsibly involves ' not giving a man a fish but teaching him how to fish ' . This proverb is also applicable here , but with some changes because the fish we catch in other waters belong , first of all , to other countries .
Promoting scientific research into resources and the equal sharing of this knowledge with developing countries , aid for the organisation of local communities that depend on fishing , improving and promoting mechanisms for regional cooperation and support for fighting against flags of convenience and illegal fishing are , therefore , only some of the measures that show that the course of action now being proposed is the right one for us to take together .
Mr President , on many occasions I , like many other of my fellow members , have lamented the lack of coordination between different Community policies and between the various Directorates-General of the Commission . I could even say the same for the Parliamentary Committees in this House .
There would be no contradictions between the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) and the development cooperation policy if Community instruments - the budget , to be precise - were more transparent .
The European Union funds cooperation in fisheries with these countries in two different ways : international fisheries agreements and projects funded by the European Development Fund .
An increasingly large proportion of financial compensation from the agreements is for this purpose - with regard to Madagascar , for example , it is 62 % - which is not , of course , the ideal situation , given that the CFP is being asked to fund actions or compensations that have nothing to do with its real objectives .
Those who say that the Community does not help the fisheries sector of developing countries are wrong .
In response to a question I asked recently , Commissioner Nielson informed me that the Community had undertaken , with funding of EUR 421 million from the European Development Fund , 334 programmes , projects or actions to support the fisheries sector in these countries .
I would remind you that the largest current fisheries agreement , the agreement with Mauritania , involves around EUR 80 million per year .
I think that nothing could be of more use to the progress of developing countries than mutual trade with the European Union .
Fisheries agreements allow them to obtain financial resources in return for giving the Community fleet fishing rights on various perishable resources whose capture , processing and marketing , require specialist companies and methods that these countries do not have themselves .
In the same way that it would be absurd for us to oppose these countries ' exporting their agricultural products to Europe , it would be appalling if we were to deny them the opportunity of selling their surplus fish supplies at international prices .
This ill-informed approach to development cooperation would lead us to prevent developing countries from exporting their mining products to us , or to ask European energy companies to abandon these countries so that local companies can carry out operations , or to not pay Gabon or Nigeria the international price for a barrel of oil .
Lastly , it is worth pointing out that the fishing grounds where the Community fleet operate are in international waters that do not belong to any one country , but are in Exclusive Economic Zones , according to the International Law of the Sea Treaty , that obliges all countries to leave the surplus resources from these zones that they cannot exploit themselves for other countries to use .
This should take place within the framework of the sustainable management of resources , which is what the CFP is designed to achieve .
The fishing carried out by the Community fleet that operates in these waters is compatible with the local small-scale fleet , which maintains the monopoly within a 12-mile zone .
An interesting project for all those involved would be to help those countries to better manage this zone where spawning takes place and where the highest concentration of young fish is to be found .
I congratulate Mr Lannoye on his excellent report and I ask everyone here to continue working on this cooperative approach .
Mr President , poor , small fishermen are missing out because there are too many big rich fishermen .
The European Union is suffering from severe excess capacity in the fishing industry , and is solving this problem by shifting some of the production to developing countries .
Instead of modernising the fisheries sector , more than EUR 1 billion of government money is being spent on doing so every year .
Naturally , the governments of poor countries are delighted to receive large sums of money for allowing large-scale fishing in their waters .
However , it is better to facilitate the development of the indigenous fishing industry in economically weak countries than it is to let local fishermen bob about in their boats while the enormous proceeds from the catches are credited to the accounts of big European ship-owners .
The precise consequences for fish stocks and the environment are unfortunately still unknown . However , it is certain that small , local operations will not be able to compete without subsidies or state support , and will thus continue to suffer a marginal existence .
The Spanish and Portuguese fleets in particular will have to be curtailed in the foreseeable future .
Furthermore , there must be much stricter supervision of the way in which the developing countries spend their compensation payments .
This spending must fit in with the policy of targeted poverty reduction .
Local fisheries must also be involved in the spending to a much greater extent .
The European fisheries policy must be brought much more closely in line with European development policy .
The European Union must systematically provide technical assistance for transferring knowledge about fisheries resources to developing countries .
Most importantly , the poor countries must gain the know-how , the capacity and the investment they need in order to be able to fish in their own waters in a responsible way .
In the longer term we must move away from these fishing agreements , which maintain redundant European fishermen but which cause developing countries to miss out .
Mr President , a debate on fishing and poverty is not simple .
And , since the rapporteur belongs to the Group of the Greens , Mr Lannoye ' s efforts towards synthesis are all the more creditable .
Poverty is the world ' s main problem today and it unfortunately will continue to be so for many years .
For some of the poorest countries in the world , fishing is one of their main resources ; in fact , for many of them , it is their only economic resource .
Mozambique receives 75 % of its total income from the export of crustaceans , and this is a perfect example of a model of sustainable development .
The rapporteur , Mr Lannoye , should be credited with proposing a realistic text , which retains a laudable dose of utopianism .
I must say that the Commission ' s proposal is coherent with the objective of responding to European interests , while making it compatible with a frame of reference for the development of countries for which fishing is an essential resource in their fight against poverty .
I have mentioned the case of Mozambique , but it would be unfair not to say that there are other very positive aspects to this African country ' s efforts to move forward , and there are other African countries which are acting well in relation to fishing , such as Namibia , to give but one example .
It seems pertinent to insist on the need for the Union to be especially careful in complying with the code of conduct for responsible fishing , to which we are committed as members of the FAO .
We must wait for the authorities of the developing countries to make the same effort .
It is true that certain practices - as Mr Lannoye has mentioned - in certain specific cases of Community operators are unacceptable , but it is also the case that , sometimes , these practices would not be possible without the cooperation of the local operators involved .
This problem is serious and complex and I therefore repeat that the efforts of the Commission and the rapporteur are creditable in that they offer us a balanced approach to it .
Mr President , at a meeting a few days ago of Portuguese and Spanish Socialists in Santiago de Compostela , we said that European Union policies must always be judged in terms of the added value they contribute in the field of social cohesion .
We thereby insisted that our Union must be , amongst other things but , for us , essentially , a great framework for intra-European solidarity .
Naturally , this approach also goes for the actions of the united Europe in its relations with other countries , in particular the developing countries .
So the policies of the European Union relating to these countries must also be judged in terms of the added value they contribute in relation to social cohesion , in other words , in terms of their contribution to progress towards a more balanced world with fewer inequalities .
Therefore , while agreeing with the excellent and - in my opinion - not utopian report by Mr Lannoye , and speaking for the Parliament ' s Committee on Development and Cooperation , we Socialists believe that we must take this criterion into account in assessing our fisheries policies and the agreements with third countries which make up these policies .
I will not say that these agreements must be seen fundamentally as instruments of our development cooperation policy .
We understand that there are other legitimate objectives , including the defence of the interests of the fisheries sectors in the Member States of the Union .
But we would say that this fisheries policy must not contradict what we do in the field of cooperation and , above all , it must not contradict , either in the immediate , medium or long terms , the priority strategic objective we have set in the field of development cooperation , that is , the eradication of poverty in the countries of the South .
In summary , we aspire to a fisheries policy which is coherent with what we are doing in relation to development cooperation .
A fisheries policy which , at least as a collateral effect , contributes to the eradication of poverty in the countries with which we sign agreements so that we may fish in their waters .
As well as respecting our partners and their rights as owners of those waters , we must learn the necessary lessons from our experience , which led us to exhaust the fish stocks off our coasts .
It would be intolerable to repeat the same mistake in the fishing grounds of people for whom fishing may provide resources which are important for their own future .
This respect and coherence with our goal of sustainable development for all must prevent egotistical and conceited actions by us , and by others who , equally irresponsible , through fishing activity in the third world , brought to reality the Spanish saying which says that we ' brought these people bread for today and hunger for tomorrow ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , fishing is an activity that mankind has practised throughout history , but it has never been a great source of wealth , as demonstrated by the fact that the Neolithic revolution was achieved through agriculture and not through fishing .
Although the European Union ' s fishermen currently enjoy a degree of protection and guarantees that offer them an acceptable standard of living , albeit lower than that of many other workers , the same cannot be said , unfortunately , of the fishermen and fishing communities to be found throughout the developing countries .
For these reasons , the Commission communication should be welcomed , praised and supported , since it contains a clearly humanist approach that is enlarged upon in Mr Lannoye ' s report .
This acknowledges that fishing is an essential activity for many developing countries , but is threatened with extinction because resources are scarce and pressure on the various species is increasing .
The fisheries agreements that the European Union concludes with third countries are essential to the survival of activities and cultures that are an integral part of the history and identity of many European countries .
Nevertheless , these agreements cannot ignore and fail to respond to their impact on the vulnerable economies of the world ' s poorer countries and regions .
We therefore need to reconcile the legitimate interests of Community fishermen and consumers with the interests of poor communities in developing countries and with the preservation of fish stocks that are often devastated by an irrational method of fishing , that is also carried out under flags of convenience .
In conclusion , the golden rule in this field must be to integrate the external requirements of the common fisheries policy into the overall policy of support for development already embarked on by the European Union .
Lastly , I should like to express my support for the excellent work by Mr Lannoye , which shares , as I have already said , the Commission ' s inspiration and contains extremely constructive and fair proposals to which we must give our support .
Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the very wide-ranging report and the proposed motion for a resolution , the content of which was formulated by the Committee on Development in close cooperation with the Committee on Fisheries .
I also would like to sincerely thank you , Mr Lannoye , for your valuable work on this in your capacity as rapporteur .
Your motion for a resolution stresses the need to take greater account in future of the development potential of local fisheries , especially small-scale coastal fisheries , and the needs of fisheries-dependent coastal communities .
As is clear from the Commission communication entitled ' Fisheries and Poverty Reduction ' , the Commission wants to take a more sector-based approach in promoting closer partnership and political dialogue with the developing countries .
The developing countries ' responsibility for determining their own development priorities and interests will be recognised and also directly encouraged .
Let me now turn briefly to the various development problems that should in future be taken into account in fisheries agreements and to which you expressly refer in your resolution .
The following in particular are mentioned as necessities . The quantities that the Community fleet is allowed to catch must not result in local fish stocks being decimated , and fisheries agreements must be signed only if they are compatible with sustainable development of the sector in the developing country concerned .
The Commission is of the opinion that these principles , mentioned in the resolution , for taking account of development questions in the external aspects of the common fisheries policy are in harmony with the principles set out in the Commission communication on fisheries and poverty reduction and in the Green Paper on the future of the common fisheries policy .
And we do in fact respect them when concluding fisheries agreements with third countries .
In accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea , we base our fisheries agreements on the available surplus stocks that the third country in question does not fish .
The Commission also expressly shares the view that the principle of sustainable management of natural resources must be more strictly applied .
These same principles will also be taken into consideration in the debate on the reform of the common fisheries policy initiated by the publication of the Green Paper a short while ago .
Let me come to a final point , which concerns improved coordination between development cooperation policy and the external aspects of the common fisheries policy .
I can say that the Commission shares Parliament ' s view on this .
The country and regional strategy papers produced in cooperation with the developing countries must pay greater attention to the link between development cooperation and the external aspects of the common fisheries policy .
We will therefore also be addressing this subject in connection with the reform that is now being prepared .
This really is my final point : Mr Lannoye , you pointed out that it would be important to suspend structural aids from the structural programmes if a ship is transferred to a third country .
On this I can say that in the discussion about the extension of MAGP IV , which is coming next , we shall have to bear in mind that this thought has already been taken up in the proposal for extending MAGP IV and it is already part of the proposal .
I hope that this will also meet with Parliament ' s approval .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place this afternoon at 6.30 p.m.
Community fisheries ( 1997-2001 )
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0316 / 2001 ) by Mrs Attwooll , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a
1 . Council decision amending Council Decision 97 / 413 / EC concerning the objectives and detailed rules for restructuring the Community fisheries sector for the period from 1 January 1997 to 31 December 2001 with a view to achieving a balance on a sustainable basis between resources and their exploitation ( COM ( 2001 ) 322 - C5-0308 / 2001 - 2001 / 0128 ( CNS ) ) ;
2 .
Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 2792 / 1999 laying down the detailed rules and arrangements regarding Community structural assistance in the fisheries sector ( COM ( 2001 ) 322 - C5-0309 / 2001 - 2001 / 0129 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , the Committee on Fisheries accepts that in extending the rules concerning restructuring and structural assistance in the fisheries sector for one year , changes need to be made in the pilot reduction rates in order to maintain current levels .
It welcomes the tightening up of provisions concerning the transfer of fishing vessels to third countries .
Amendment No 6 to Article 1 ( 3 ) asked the Commission to produce a list specifying which transfers are permissible and which are not .
We hope it will be acceptable to them .
The committee also welcomes the possibility of financial assistance being made available where any Community legislation imposes technical restrictions , but feels that Parliament should be kept informed of such cases - that is Amendment No 10 .
From this point , the Committee on Fisheries has difficulties with the Commission proposal in that it goes beyond an extension of the rules to making three substantive changes to them . These are : removing the possibility of an increase in capacity on safety grounds ; allowing financial assistance for fleet modernisation and renewal only where objectives have been met purely by reduction in capacity ; and allowing such financial assistance to any segment of the fleet only where every segment of the fleet has met its objectives .
In voting the report , the Committee on Fisheries rejected each of these three changes .
The motivation was mixed , relating both to the desirability of the changes themselves and the desirability of making them in the course of a one-year extension of the programme .
For example , both the Committee on Fisheries and the Committee on Legal Affairs took the view that requiring every segment of the fleet to have reached its objectives before any segment could benefit from financial assistance ran counter to the principles of natural justice .
Similarly , the proposal that financial assistance could be given only where objectives had been met purely by a reduction in capacity seemed unfair to those fleets where capacity and activity reductions had been combined .
There are also doubts about making such a change in circumstances where there is increasing agreement that a variety of measures are needed to reduce fishing effort .
Amendments Nos 4 , 7 , 8 and 9 are intended to maintain the status quo in relation to both these requests .
The most difficult point has concerned the removal of the possibility of capacity increases on safety grounds .
The Committee on Fisheries is highly committed to fishing safety .
There is serious concern that shipowners simply will not make safety improvements unless they are given additional capacity for this .
It was also argued that abuses of the provision should be prevented by proper controls and that such a change , if to be made at all , would be more properly done in the reform of the CFP as a whole .
It is largely on the capacity issue that I part company with a number of my fellow committee members .
Of course , we must find ways of ensuring that vessels are safe , but we can no longer afford to take risks with conservation either .
The perilous state of cod stocks in the North Sea is but one example .
Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 5 , approved by the Committee on Fisheries , reject the changes on the capacity rules altogether .
Amendments Nos 11 and 12 , submitted by the ELDR Group , however , accept the Commission 's approach in principle , but seek to allow capacity increases on safety grounds by way of exception for existing vessels under 12 metres .
The justification for this exception is that taking away the possibility of financial assistance is likely to bear hardest on the sector and put safety improvements more seriously at risk in circumstances where they are likely to have only minor effects on capacity .
I know that many of my colleagues - for reasons that I respect - will wish to take a different view , but I urge everyone in deciding how to vote on this report to bear in mind just how imperative the need for conservation has become .
Mr President , it is a pleasure to speak on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , substantially in support of what my colleague , Mrs Attwooll , from the Committee on Fisheries , has said .
The Committee on Legal Affairs looks at this issue through legal spectacles , as you would expect .
From our point of view , it is not just important that the objectives of the Common Fisheries Policy be achieved , though that is indeed important .
We have to remember that the means through which the Community does this are means of the law , and therefore the principles of the law have to be respected in what is done .
The Committee on Legal Affairs thought that the Commission 's proposals fell down on two important legal principles , at two important points .
The first was the principle of proportionality , and in effect Mrs Attwooll has already spoken about that this afternoon .
In recital 3 the Commission said : " Measures to improve safety should not lead to an increase in fishing effort and such measures should therefore be applied within the existing capacity objectives for the fleet " .
That is to say that improvements in safety can be ignored just if the capacity objectives are not being sustained , regardless of effort .
But the aim we all have is to prevent over-fishing , and it is effort that catches fish , not capacity .
Therefore proportionality requires deletion of that .
Secondly , in relation to the effective provisions about vicarious penalties .
To require all segments of a national fleet to have achieved the annual objectives , as the Commission suggests , before any public aid for fleet modernisation or renewal can be granted , would be unlawful .
It is contrary to the most rudimentary principles of natural justice .
It would permit one fisheries segment to be penalised for things done , or left undone , in another .
It could result in fishermen being penalised for the acts or omissions of their government and would thus constitute vicarious punishment .
As a Scottish Member , I insist that these issues matter vitally to all parts of the Scottish fleet .
Those who meet their targets for reduction of capacity should not be punished for those who do not and should not carry the can for failures by the UK Government or the Scottish Government .
Mr President , first of all , I commend my colleague , Mrs Attwooll for the work she has done in this report .
Although we are only dealing with an extension of MAGP IV for one year , the Commission proposals seek to reduce over-fishing and achieve the 40 % reduction in effort across the EU fleet which they have been consistently pointing out is absolutely essential , if we are to have any hope of a sustainable industry in the future .
I know that some controversy has arisen - and Mrs Attwooll mentioned this - over the question of aid for measures to improve safety in navigation ; working conditions ; and hygiene on board fishing vessels .
It goes without saying that all of us wish to see our fishermen working in the safest , cleanest and most secure conditions .
But there is no doubt that such aid has been abused in the past to increase fishing effort , leading to further over-exploitation of dwindling fish stocks .
It seems to me pointless that we try to achieve a reduction in over-fishing as a core policy objective on the one hand , while continuing to facilitate cheating at the taxpayer 's expense on the other .
The whole point of the MAGP is to reduce fishing effort and bring it into better balance with the existing fish stocks .
Only this week the need for continued for vigilance in this area was again highlighted with the publication of the ICES report on the prospects for catches in 2002 .
They point out that a number of fish stocks remain in a state of great jeopardy , particularly cod , although they also point out that there have been slight improvements in haddock and whiting stocks in the North Sea .
In that respect I was horrified to read that Danish fisheries inspectors last month boarded a Danish industrial fishing boat and discovered 114 tonnes of juvenile cod in a 543 tonne total catch that was supposed to be composed entirely of sand eels .
Pulverising valuable young haddock into fishmeal to feed to salmon in the fish farming sector is complete madness .
It is a crime against everything we are trying to achieve .
I hope that when we come to vote on this report later today , we bear in mind that the whole point of MAGP philosophy is to reduce over-exploitation and nothing we do in applying public aid to the EU fleet should undermine that principle .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Attwooll for the magnificent work she has done on this report which is going to be so useful to us .
Adjusting the Community fleet to the resources available is a fundamental objective of the CFP .
Furthermore , it is a common sense requirement if we want our fishing to be a viable economic activity and our fishing sector to be a viable economic sector .
We therefore welcome the extension of the current MAGP IV until 31 December 2002 .
As I have said , the Socialist Group supports Mrs Attwooll ' s report , which was approved by consensus in the Committee on Fisheries , and we thank her for the compromise achieved in our committee , together with the Members presenting amendments , a compromise which the Council is still far from reaching .
Parliament is sending a good signal by anticipating an agreement which the Council can accept .
The Commission ' s proposal is not restricted to extending the current MAGP by one year , but it also intends to introduce , as has been said , criteria relating to safety , which should be debated in the context of a new MAGP .
I regret that the Commission has not made any reference to the question of safety in the White Paper on the reform of the CFP .
I would like to point out that , as this House approved ( on debating and approving my report on fishing accidents ) , Council Directive 89 / 391 / EEC of 12 June 1989 on the application of measures to promote the improvement of health and safety of workers in the workplace is also fully applicable to vessels of less than 12 metres .
We ask for preventive measures , with a view to preventing accidents , both in relation to the design of vessels and life-saving equipment and to the introduction of rules of management of resources with consequences for human safety , the size and power of vessels .
Lastly , I would like to point out to Commissioner Fischler that if there is one thing we were unanimous on during the hearing organised by the European Commission to present the Green Paper , it was precisely the fact that Community aid for the modernisation of the fleet should remain in force .
Let me begin by saying that the Greens support the proposal of the Commission for both the FIFG and the MAGP .
We also agree with the rapporteur 's amendments seeking to restrict the derogation for safety to vessels less than 12 metres in length and we would like to thank her for retabling these important amendments .
However , we are entirely opposed to the proposal as it has now emerged from the committee .
The amendments are removing the most progressive elements that the Commission is proposing .
After all , both the MAGP and the FIFG are already so full of loopholes that you actually sail The Atlantic Dawn through .
The proposal would simply close a couple of these more blatant loopholes .
Glancing through a scientific report on the status of fish stocks makes for very depressing reading these days .
It does not matter whether it is ICES , or the STECF or any of the regional bodies such as NAFO .
Everywhere you look fish stocks are over-exploited and far too often severely depleted .
The EU has had to take emergency measures for three cod stocks and northern hake and it is clear that other stocks will soon be added to the list .
There is pretty much universal agreement that this deplorable situation is due to the excess capacity of the world 's fishing fleets .
The Commission is always reminding us of this , but the Member States and certain segments of the fishing industry are clearly in denial .
The Community has agreed to several international instruments which seek to control fishing capacity and / or fishing effort .
For instance , the FAO Code of Conduct provides that states should take measures to prevent or eliminate excess fishing capacity and should ensure that levels of fishing effort are in line with sustainable use of fisheries resources .
But whenever the Commission tries to put these obligations into effect , they are shot down by Parliament and the Council .
Some have argued that it is not reasonable to try and change a programme in the last year or that certain aspects of the proposal are contrary to the idea of natural justice .
The FIFG is due to continue until 2006 and so there are several years in which these reforms could bring some sort of positive effect .
Surely it is far from natural justice to refuse to take action now and to continue as if the future is bright , only to have more and more stocks decrease and to impose even further temporary or permanent closures .
I would ask the Members of this House to consider the case of the northern cod stock off Newfoundland which provided 200 000 tonnes of fish every year for five centuries .
In 1992 , the Canadian Government had to close the fisheries even for subsistence fishing and there is still little if any sign of improvement in the stock .
Is that the kind of future we want for our own coastal communities ?
The time has come for us to take a long-term rather than just a 6-months to 12-months view .
We really have to deal with this issue and I would like to support what the Commission is proposing .
Mr President , Commissioner , the decision to extend the expiry date of the MAGP-IV until the end of next year , so as to include the results of the negotiations on the reform of the common fisheries policy , must not be used to undermine the interests of the countries that have so far met and even exceeded the reductions laid down in the MAGP , such as Portugal , whilst there are other Member States have not only failed to meet any of their targets but have even increased their fishing capacities .
Equally , it is incorrect - as the rapporteur and various other Members have stated - to attempt to table amendments on the expiry date of the MAGP-IV that would have a detrimental effect on maritime safety , on the quality of life and safety of crews , on the value and quality of catches and on health and hygiene conditions .
The Commissioner must , therefore , review the position he expresses in the proposals submitted to the European Parliament and accept most of the positions put forward by Parliament ' s Committee on Fisheries .
Mr President , Commissioner , if policy instruments are not working well , you adapt them , and if the adaptations do not produce a result , you abolish them .
With this principle in mind , I was unpleasantly surprised by the Commission proposal before us .
I well understand that the Commission does not want to introduce a new structure policy which may be obsolete within a year as a result of the fisheries policy reforms .
However , I cannot shake off the impression that the Commission still does not realise that they are missing the boat with the current multiannual guidance programmes .
To try to control fisheries with two very different instruments - the TACs and the quota on the one hand and the fleet structure policy on the other - will result in serious problems , particularly if the policy instruments serve different objectives , which is the case .
TACs and quotas are the determining factor in managing fish stocks .
Sustainable fishing can , nonetheless , only be achieved if there is room for an efficient fleet within the parameters set by the allowable catches .
The fleet structure policy must support this .
Unfortunately this is not happening .
Under the MAGP , all kinds of subsidies are offered which are maintaining excess fleet capacity and therefore distorting competition .
What is more , a number of Member States have introduced incentives which are further distorting competition .
The common fisheries policy needs a clear objective , and the system of TACs and quotas must be the determining factor for this .
This must also include a properly functioning control system with strict punitive measures .
At the moment , the Commission is , nonetheless , holding onto its MAGP , with some changes which I can only describe as unfortunate .
Under the guise of reinforcing the suitability of the MAGP , the Commission is ignoring the most elementary sense of justice in one of these amendments .
By withholding government support , it is punishing one fishing segment for the excess capacity in another .
Justice is further undermined by the Commission making a distinction based on the capacity reductions in the fleets .
The fleet in my country regulates capacity by reducing activity ( the " days at sea restrictions " ) .
Unlike other countries , the Netherlands is now excluded from European support for modernisation and renewal .
In order to reverse these unfortunate changes , we will give our wholehearted support to the rapporteur 's amendments .
Mr President , under the pretext of extending MAGP IV for a further year so that it will coincide with the expected reform of the CFP , the Commission 's intention was further to tighten up this instrument , which has become as disastrous for our small-scale fishing industry as it is ineffective in terms of regulating fishing .
Thanks to the efforts of Mrs Attwooll and the Committee on Fisheries , I hope we have avoided the most unfair and dangerous aspects of this tougher line ; more generally , however , the very principle of MAGPs needs to be questioned now .
The professionals have never accepted this bureaucratic , brutal system , which is totally alien to the traditions and culture of the maritime world .
Experience also shows that this instrument is crude , unfair , redundant and costly .
Its negative effects are well-known and , coupled with the blocking of aid for new construction , it bolsters the second-hand market and dissuades young people from going into jobs connected with fishing .
Within the framework of the debate in progress on reforming the CFP , we must therefore give absolute priority to the system of TACs and quotas .
That has to be the instrument used to keep catches in line with resources .
The new CFP must be based on the quota mechanism , which we need to fine-tune by putting it on a multiannual basis , making it more transparent and more scientific , relating it more closely to the fishing zones , closely involving the professionals and monitoring it effectively and fairly .
Mr President , Commissioner , let us forget MAGPs and perfect the quota system ; then we will be doing a good job .
Mr President , Commissioner , we did not need the Green Paper on the future of the common fisheries policy to tell us about the serious problems facing fisheries in Europe .
The Green Paper has merely made clear once again how serious they are .
Our Committee is earnestly discussing the various approaches to solving the problems .
We know we shall not be able to make all the difficulties simply disappear by waving a magic wand .
If somebody really wants to pull the wool over our eyes about it , we must call it what it is , namely eyewash .
The common fisheries policy as it has existed up until now has not succeeded in preventing the crises affecting a number of fish stocks or in reducing overcapacities in fleets .
Whether we will all survive economically depends on the Union ' s future ability to shape a fisheries policy in the new century .
The Commission is now proposing extending the current multi-annual guidance programme for one year .
In the light of the ongoing debate on reform , I think we also need such measures for the sake of continuity .
We cannot of course solve the problems in this short space of time , but perhaps we can alleviate them a little .
The crucial thing is that the programme should be properly carried out .
We need data , but some Member States fail to provide that data or their data is incomplete .
We therefore need a system of penalties to ensure the data is supplied at all , and we need comparable criteria and categories .
Every shipowner wants to increase efficiency .
But we must not shift the premises .
We want better safety at sea .
That is a central part of the European Parliament ' s demands .
But at the same time we should be careful to avoid negative effects on safety , even dressed up as increased efficiency .
The proposed change to structural measures also misses the target at the present time .
Making the achievement of objectives in all segments of the fleet a precondition for public subsidies is counterproductive because it penalises everyone for the failings of a few .
Our policy will only find acceptance among fishermen if the conditions are fair .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , extending the multi-annual guidance programmes by one year to keep them in force pending the decision on future fleet policy after 2002 is sensible and I think it has everyone ' s support in principle .
The MAGP ' s objectives are correct , but their implementation by the Member States still leaves much to be desired .
The Commission ' s reports in the past have shown us that over and over again .
We have repeatedly criticised the failings in implementation and it is clear that the future fleet policy will have to remedy the situation .
That is why the Commission wants to make changes to the MAGP and FIFG provisions as well as extending them by a year .
I am opposed to some of those changes because I think these matters would be better resolved in the landmark decision about fleet policy .
In my opinion there is no point in making extensive changes in the last year of MAGP IV ' s validity , especially when they could have negative repercussions for safety on board fishing vessels .
But if Member States are to continue to be able to apply for increases in capacity for measures designed to improve on-board safety and fishery product hygiene and these are to be paid for out of FIFG resources , something really must be done to ensure that those measures do not result in increased fishing .
This condition is absolutely essential .
We cannot have a situation where investments in on-board safety are prevented because the conditions for the application of the measures are not complied with or because many Member States are sometimes unable to ensure that they are or fail to do so .
We ought to be using the debate about common fisheries policy reform to find solutions to the dilemma between on-board safety and careful management of stocks that has again been made clear by this report .
No way must the one be at the expense of the other .
Mr President , I should like to add my thanks to the rapporteur , a fellow Scot , for her work on this document , and likewise to my SNP colleague , Mr MacCormick , for leading the Committee on Legal Affairs ' consideration of this report which I support .
The size of our fishing fleet in the European Union is one of the greatest problems that we are faced with when considering CFP reform , but the real measure of activity should be effort as opposed to fleet size .
In order to secure what we all want , sustainable fisheries , then surely fishing effort must be made to correspond to available resources .
I agree with the need to extend MAGP4 , but I have some concerns , in three areas in particular .
Firstly , it is intolerable that safety has been taken out of the equation .
The provisions that currently exist to increase objectives on grounds of safety should be maintained .
We should be looking for tighter control and management to ensure that these provisions are not used to circumvent the rules .
Safety must remain a priority and I hope the Commission will recognise this and also make up for its failure to include adequate provisions on safety in the Green Paper .
Secondly , while there must be penalties for non-implementation of MAGP targets , surely they must be targeted at the guilty parties .
It must be wrong to penalise one segment directly for the acts or omissions of another .
It is also necessary to make sure that those Member States which claim to have met their MAGP targets are not simply transferring their vessels to other flags .
Thirdly , the proposals which limit financial assistance from FIFG to segments where reduction of fishing effort is obtained through capacity reductions only seems to me unjust and would discriminate against fishermen whose Member States choose to reduce effort through schemes such as days at sea .
One reason why these targets are not met is that some Member State governments have not been prepared to match funding for restructuring .
The Commission must look at ways of ensuring that restructuring funds can be distributed in an equitable fashion throughout the EU fishing industry .
There is a need for more standardised and more rigorous assessment procedures right across the EU .
Only if we have fixed , clear and comparable criteria for the measurement of vessels , including engine power and tonnage , can there be confidence in the targets that are set by MAGPs .
Mr President , I would also like to thank Mrs Attwooll for her cooperation leading to a compromise which , in my opinion , very much improves the Commission ' s two proposals , which were originally untimely and doomed not to be complied with .
It is hard to accept that , six months before the end of a programme to restructure the fleet , the sector can be told , without scientific or technical justifications , that fishing capacity cannot be reduced by means of restructuring efforts and that the only solution is pure scrapping , all because the Commission made a small calculation error four years ago .
And that , furthermore , while they are at it , they take the opportunity to turn the bases of MAGP IV and key elements of the FIFG Regulation on their heads , which is completely unacceptable , and I believe there is general agreement on this here .
If we add to this the fact that the greatest burden of the new requirements , as has been said , rests on the elimination of the facilities intended to improve the safety of ships , it begs the question of whether the Commission ever thinks about the fisheries sector when it starts coming up with brilliant ideas at the last minute .

I therefore ask that you vote in favour of the amendments of the Committee on Fisheries because I still cannot understand , and the sector understands even less , what is the point in reserving safety measures just for vessels of less than 12 metres , when it is precisely the largest ships which have more crew and work furthest from the coast and therefore face considerably more risk and , in the event of emergency , have most difficulties getting back to port . And all of this with winter just around the corner and in waters which , like European Atlantic waters , are not exactly a mill pond .
It is fair to recognise that the Commission tried , from the outset , to coincide the end of the MAGP IV with the reform of the CFP in 2002 .
But , since 1997 , it knew that it was not going to manage it and on that basis the Commission should have started work on an MAGP V which would have eliminated the errors committed so far and , meanwhile , simply extend the MAGP IV .
And extension , Commissioner , cannot in any way be used to change the rules of the game which we have had up to now .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Attwooll , for the spirit of consensus she has created in our committee in order to arrive at compromise amendments , particularly with Mrs Fraga Estevez and to substantially improve , as has been said , the Commission ' s proposal on a key issue , which we all recognise , in the current common fisheries policy and in the policy that we are creating for the coming years .
European fleet policy is a sensitive and complicated issue - this is something we all agree upon .
However , if each State defends its own interests and only complies when it is in its own interest , we clearly get nowhere .
Therefore , the Commission must rise to the challenge , through an effective policy accepted by everyone , of designing a fleet that is really suited to our fishing needs .
A safe , effective and competitive fleet .
Mrs Attwooll ' s report , like the report by Mr Busk , is currently of fundamental importance .
We want it to draw attention , on the one hand , to the fact that the increase in onboard safety measures has nothing to do with increasing fishing capacity or power , and on the other , to the need not to introduce substantial last-minute changes to programmes which have been in operation for five years , because an annual extension is one thing , but to change fundamental conditions in the general philosophy of the MAGPs now , at the last minute , is quite another .
I therefore hope that the House supports this message which the Committee on Fisheries wants to send this afternoon , and that the Commission will , of course , take it into account .
Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking you , Mrs Attwooll , for preparing this report .
I have been listening to the debate very attentively and now feel somewhat obliged to clarify a few things because there seem to be some quite serious misunderstandings about this Commission proposal .
First there is the question , do we need a fleet policy or not ?
In my opinion we do need a fleet policy and we need an effective - and more effective - fleet policy because the present rules are far from adequate .
We have tremendous overcapacity in our European fleet as a whole , and if we do not adjust that fleet to possible future fishing opportunities , we will never be rid of these difficulties .
I would also like to say to you clearly and in all honesty that we will not meet that objective at all with MAGP IV .
With MAGP IV we are a long way from achieving a reduction of 30 % , let alone 40 % .
There is a report with which you are probably familiar , I hope you are , which says that we will at best achieve 5 % over the full MAGP period and even that is very unlikely .
What is more likely is that the entire MAGP IV exercise will have had no effect .
That is the reality , that is the truth and that is what we have to deal with .
But there is a second principle we must see as well .
In my opinion it makes little sense to isolate fleet policy from the rest of the common fisheries policy .
We must see it in the context of the other essential political elements of our common fisheries policy .
We therefore believe that it is entirely correct to include consideration of the future of fleet policy when devising our new common fisheries policy , which we intend to do next year .
The proposal we have submitted can be understood only in this light .
MAGP IV expires next year and that would mean that we would have to isolate all other areas of the new fisheries policy from that of fleet policy .
That is why we had the idea of seeking this one-year extension so that they could be synchronised .
But we do not really want at the same time to lay ourselves open to the charge of prolonging an ineffective arrangement for a year .
That was why we also proposed a few measures to improve this MAGP .
There is also the fact that a few Member States are not even keeping to the modest targets of MAGP IV .
Unfortunately , the Commission has no other way of enforcing compliance with the MAGP objectives than to introduce proceedings before the European Court of Justice .
That is why we have also submitted proposals to that effect .
This brings me to the amendments that have been tabled .
Amendments Nos 1 to 3 and 5 are concerned with the question of safety at sea .
Here , too , I want to clearly say that no one should accuse the Commission of being against more safety at sea .
We too are aware of the problems and accidents that have recently occurred at sea .
So we are also aware of how necessary it is to improve safety , and we are also promoting that .
Community resources are being deployed to improve safety .
I do not dispute that in some cases enhancing safety increases the weight of the ships .
But that has nothing to do with the fact that we cannot therefore demand that the increase in weight of just one ship should be compensated for by taking more ships out of use .
That is what this is about .
After all , there is no prohibition on installing more additional safety devices on a particular vessel .
That is why we are not prepared to accept these four amendments .
We are able to accept Amendments Nos 11 and 12 because the application of the safety clause remains confined to vessels under 12 metres in length that no longer fish with drag nets .
This is of particular benefit to older vessels that are engaged chiefly in coastal fishing and for which an increase in capacity and engine power are justified , subject to clear conditions , if that enhances safety .
I am quite concerned about Amendments Nos 4 , 7 , 8 and 9 .
They reject any form of restriction on access to FIFG aid .
But this is after all the only mechanism we have for reducing fleet capacity at all .
It must be obvious that the Community ' s lavish modernisation aid is thwarting all our efforts to reduce the size of the fleet .
How will it ever work if we first offer Community public funds for ships to be broken up and then also use Community funds to encourage the purchase of new ones ?
At some point we are going to have to decide which of these two things is to have priority .
Parliament has also said in this connection that it is not appropriate to amend the provisions of a regulation that was adopted less than two years ago for a period of six years .
In view of the present difficult situation regarding stocks , I think the time has now come to talk about this question , too .
Finally , Amendment No 6 amplifies a provision that was included in the regulation at your instigation , and that provision bans FIFG aid for exports or for the formation of joint ventures .
We have already discussed this point in connection with the previous agenda item .
The Commission is in total agreement on this point and suggests that the lists of countries that break these rules should also be published .
Finally , the Commission is unable to agree to Amendment No 10 because it involves a procedure internal to the Commission , for which the Commission alone is competent .
It ought therefore to be handled under the Commission 's aegis .
Thank you , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
EEC / Senegal fisheries agreement
The next item is the report ( A5-0314 / 2001 ) by Mr Gallagher , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation [ COM ( 2001 ) 422 - C5-0405 / 2001 - 2001 / 0168 ( CNS ) ] on the conclusion of two Agreements in the form of exchanges of letters concerning the extension of the Protocol establishing the fishing opportunities and financial compensation provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Republic of Senegal on fishing off the coast of Senegal for the periods 1 May 2001 to 31 July 2001 and 1 August 2001 to 31 December 2001 .
Mr President , Commissioner , this proposal for a Council regulation concerns the prolongation of the fisheries protocol which has been in force between the EU and Senegal for the period of 1 May 1997 to 30 April 2001 .
The prolongation concerns two periods .
The first period is from 1 May 2001 until 31 July and the second from 1 August 2001 to 31 December .
After several rounds of negotiations starting in Brussels in January 2001 no agreement was reached between the EU and Senegal on the renewal of the current protocol .
Last June , Senegal suspended negotiations until October in order to gain time to analyse the fisheries issues and their effects .
Breaking off the negotiations did not have the same negative impact as it had at the end of 1996 when all fisheries were suspended .
This time there has been no suspension and good sense has prevailed on both sides .
According to estimates by Senegal 's research institute , which was carried out in 1996 , the available resources at that time would permit catches of some 465 000 tonnes .
However , recent scientific analysis has shown that , in spite of the satisfactory utilisation rates in this segment , coastal demersal resources have plummeted and have forced the small-scale and industrial fleet to fish in neighbouring countries .
Of course , sustainable fishing is one of the leading principles of the common fisheries policy .
Signals about the critical state of some fish stocks must be taken into account by both parties when negotiations are resumed .
Until the date of resumption of negotiations , the Senegalese Government is carrying out a new study to determine the country 's present fisheries potential .
Since the question of durable management was one of the breaking points at the negotiations , the Senegalese Government will make use of the results of this study later this year in negotiating with the EU .
The fisheries possibilities and the financial contribution from the Community have remained unchanged .
The compensation to be paid by the Community for the eight months of this year will be calculated on a pro rata basis , meaning that the compensation for the period 1 May until the end of the year will be two-thirds of the yearly sum of EUR 12 million .
That payment has to be made by the end of the year .
I believe , as does the Committee on Fisheries , that it is important for Community fishermen that this agreement be renewed after 31 December of this year when the current prolongation expires .
The renewal of the protocol is now more important than ever in terms of fishing opportunities , after the failure to reach agreement with Morocco .
I am not trying to compare the opportunities in Senegal with Morocco , but the fact is that there are other opportunities there .
We cannot compare them because the protocol with Morocco would have involved EUR 500 million over a four-year period .
When , therefore , we consider the recently signed agreement with Mauritania , costing EUR 430 million over five years , the Senegal agreement is very modest in financial terms .
In the light of all these considerations , I can recommend this report to the House .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Gallagher for the speed with which he has worked on his report in order to allow the approval of these two extensions which , as he has pointed out , allow the continuation of fishing activity until the signing of a new protocol with Senegal .
We must also recognise the sensitivity shown by the rapporteur in not presenting amendments so as not to interfere with the result of the negotiations currently under way , although he indicates that the results of those negotiations will have to be analysed in line with the considerations expressed in his report .
I almost entirely agree with the considerations , but I would like to expand on the rapporteur ' s reference to the lack of utilisation of the agreement by pelagic trawlers .
The rapporteur refers to the fact that , in the Northern agreements , criticism has been made of the existence of ' paper fish ' or ' paper quotas ' and that also , in this case , payments should only be made in exchange for real fish .
I would like to point out that these situations are in no way comparable .
In this case , fishing opportunities really exist and , being a Southern agreement , any interested Member State could chose to make use of them , just as in other categories of this same agreement entry has been granted to fleets that are not traditionally present in the area , such as those from Italy or Greece .
If these opportunities are not taken advantage of , it will be because certain States have not been interested , but I doubt that with the non-existence or non-continuation of the agreement with Morocco , these opportunities will not be utilised in the future .
In the Northern agreements , however , no Member State can fish .
It is prohibited , even if a State is interested ; and you all know that certain fleets are interested in being able to fish within these quotas which are already paid for .
And we must also remember that , in this particular case , we are not talking about ' paper fish ' because , as I have already stated , the fish really exist , unlike the cases of certain Northern agreements , where the state of resources is so poor that real fishing opportunities are not available , and which , by the way , are much more expensive than the agreement with Senegal .
Mr President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists is pleased that the Commission and the Senegalese Government have reached an agreement to extend the previous fisheries agreement with Senegal for eight months .
We are grateful to the Government of Senegal for their willingness to allow our fleet to continue fishing until the parties have reached a new agreement .
Fortunately , this time , the fleet has not been docked as it was five years ago .
In the interim , the Commission and the Senegalese Government have reached a new fisheries agreement , which will be the subject of another debate .
The catches the Community fleet can benefit from are the surplus resources which the local fleet cannot fish .
Fishing relations between Senegal and the European Union are wholly satisfactory to both parties .
We must not forget that fish products account for 30 % of Senegal ' s exports and these exports are mainly sent to Europe .
Furthermore , many of the landings of the Community fleet take place in Senegalese ports .
It would be wonderful if , in terms of what we are discussing here today ( the coherence between the common fisheries policy and development cooperation policy we all want to see ) , the Commission could help the Senegalese authorities , and other developing countries , to manage their fisheries resources better , especially - as we have already said - in areas where there are young and spawning fish , which are in such need of it .
I therefore congratulate Mr Gallagher on his wonderful and , above all , rapid report , as well as his excellent work .
Mr President , thank you , first of all , to Mr Gallagher for a very fine piece of work on the report .
On behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , I should like to begin by adding a few remarks on the financing of the fisheries agreements concluded by the EU with third countries .
We have proposed that fishermen should make a greater contribution to the financing of these agreements .
It would be of benefit to themselves , but it would also , at the same time , be in line with current developments in the direction of a structure more in keeping with a market economy .
It is gratifying that the Commission has begun to prepare evaluation reports on the previous protocol .
The evaluation of existing agreements is an extremely valuable tool for improving the fisheries agreements . These must , of course , be to the advantage of European fishermen , who do in fact benefit from them , but also be to the advantage of local fishermen in the countries concerned with which the agreements have been made .
The agreement should relate to the surplus resources that cannot be caught by local fishermen .
Sustainability must be ensured .
That is the EU ' s responsibility .
The fisheries agreements are exceedingly important to certain regions of Europe in which , in addition to jobs in the sector itself , there is a range of additional businesses dependent upon fisheries .
We should focus more upon the degree to which third countries make use of subsidies for the development of local fisheries and ensure that the development aid we provide is used in the best way possible and , especially , to benefit local fishermen .
These agreements are important to the Community , especially in the light of the fact that the fisheries agreement with Morocco was not renewed .
Mr President , I would like to join in congratulating our rapporteur , Mr Gallagher , on the sensitivity and speed with which he has produced his report .
I would also like to take advantage of the presence of the Commissioner to congratulate the Commission on the fact that , in the interim , we have been able to extend this agreement until the end of the year , which has allowed European fleets to continue fishing .
I would like to take this opportunity to say to Mr Fischler that I am naturally concerned about the repercussions of this agreement for the fleets which , after the failure of the negotiations with Morocco , are in a truly delicate situation .
All of this has its place within the framework of the debate we have held today on development cooperation and respect for the resources of third countries , certainly , but also in the knowledge that there are fishing opportunities which have not yet been utilised .
The agreement that has been reached with Mauritania - on which we must also congratulate the Commission , and on which our rapporteur , Mr Gallagher is also working hard - has broken the curse that was stopping us from signing agreements and , therefore , the agreement with Senegal must come to fruition .
I know that the Commission is working seriously and has meetings arranged for 20 and 23 November .
I urge it to work as quickly as possible and I also urge this Parliament to deal with it with the urgency it deserves , because it is of great importance in terms of the situation of the European fishing fleet .
First of all , I would like to thank you , Mr Gallagher , for your report on the extension of the fisheries agreement under discussion until the end of the year .
I am glad that you agree with the Commission ' s proposal .
This will enable the Community ' s fishermen to continue their activity in this region while - as the Senegalese side wanted - a further study of the fisheries sector is prepared .
The extension of the existing protocol also enables us to pursue negotiations for the multi-annual protocol without undue pressure of time and to bring them to a conclusion .
As you know , this agreement is a very important agreement for us .
At EUR 12 million a year , the amount of money involved is considerable , and in purely mathematical terms it means EUR 8 million for the eight months extension .
Apart from the considerable amount of money , the advantages for Senegal are not least that the agreement secures a major part of the raw materials required by the Senegalese fishing industry because EC vessels have to land part of their catches in Senegalese ports .
The Commission is unable to accept the present amendment because it is , as you know , a fundamental component of the Community ' s external fisheries policy that the costs of fishing rights should be met partly out of the Community budget and partly by the ship owners .
That is included in all the negotiating guidelines for fisheries agreements .
The financial compensation payable is specified in the agreements themselves .
This is paid by the EU , while the ship owners have to pay the licence fees .
May I conclude by saying that the next round of negotiations for a new agreement or a new protocol is due to take place on 20 to 23 November .
Thank you , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
EEC / Madagascar fisheries agreement
The next item on the agenda is the Report ( A5-0315 / 2001 ) by Mrs Fraga Estevez on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries on the proposal for a Council regulation [ COM ( 2001 ) 409 - C5-0406 / 2001 - 2001 / 0161 ( CNS ) ] on the conclusion of a Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Democratic Republic of Madagascar on fishing off Madagascar for the period from 21 May 2001 to 20 May 2004
Mr President , I am speaking in order to present , and ask your support for , a new Fisheries protocol , this time with Madagascar - as you have said - with whom we have had relations since 1986 .
From the point of view of what has come to be called cost / benefit , it is an excellent protocol which clearly demonstrates the viability of this type of agreement for the European Union .
In this case , the Community fleet , industry and market are ensured a stable supply of a raw material , tuna , of which we have a considerable deficit , by means of our own fleet , which means that many Community jobs will be retained , not only in the extractive sector , but also in the activities dependent on it .
Furthermore , the protocol once again demonstrates that , in the Southern agreements , a high proportion of the fishing opportunities are utilised , in this case reaching 91 % for tuna seiners .
It is just as viable for Madagascar , which in addition to the EUR 308 000 in annual financial compensation , will receive a further EUR 517 000 for development aid actions , mainly aimed at improving the fishing control of the area and the training of its fishermen .
Furthermore , the number of Malagasy seamen which must be employed rises from 6 in the protocol currently in force to 40 in the protocol under discussion .
This is therefore a genuinely significant quantitative leap .
Community fishing activity in itself does not interfere with small-scale fleets , since our fleet does not have access to the twelve mile zone .
Meanwhile , the presence of the European Union in itself makes a significant contribution to the control and guarantee of greater sustainability of the resource .
We must not forget that the fleet carries with it all the control regulations of Community policy , which is a very important element in terms of ascertaining the details of catches and the state of the resource in the region , to a degree which cannot be matched by all the other diverse foreign fleets that fish in those same Malagasy waters .
Following this brief summary of the content of the protocol , and reminding you that , as a Southern agreement , the shipowners contribute to its funding , I would like to focus on two issues .
I would like to draw your attention firstly to the fact that with this agreement , as in Southern agreements in general , there remains the possibility of granting licences to those interested Member States that would not have access to the fishing opportunities on the basis of relative stability , as demonstrated by the presence of Italy and Portugal .
It is therefore time to ask the Commission once and for all to implement the views of the 1997 Council of Fisheries Ministers , which clearly request that fishing opportunities which remain unused may be used by interested Member State fleets in all agreements of the European Union .
Secondly , I do not believe it necessary to point out that we are all committed to the development of third countries , as clearly demonstrated by the Lannoye report , which preceded the debate on fisheries .
The fisheries sector has been one of the first to cooperate in this development , since its presence in the waters of third countries has been the catalyst for many of the first industrial centres in their coastal regions , if not the definitive element in terms of many nations now having taken on the genuine vocation of a fishing State .
But , having said that , I believe things are reaching the point where clarification is necessary from several points of view .
To begin with , we must not forget , as the aforementioned Council of Fisheries Ministers also made clear , that fisheries agreements are essentially of a commercial nature .
However , they are increasingly becoming a complement to Community development aid policy .
In the case of this agreement , the proportion intended for development cooperation actions is now rising to 62.6 % of the total cost of the agreement to the Community budget .
This situation raises many questions .
Firstly , there is no reason why fisheries budgets should be financing the development policy budgets and , from the point of view of budgetary transparency , this state of affairs should be clarified as soon as possible .
Secondly , this situation should also be clarified in order to silence those voices which complain about the high budgetary cost of the fisheries agreements , when in reality , as we have seen , considerably more than half of that budget is pure development policy .
Mr President , the fisheries agreements the EU has signed with third countries have always formed a decisive part of its common fisheries policy .
I want to pay tribute to the excellent work carried out by Mrs Fraga Estéves , the rapporteur . As a Member from Réunion , I am naturally interested in the conclusion of this seventh fisheries agreement between the EU and Madagascar , given its implications for fishing in the Indian Ocean and , obviously , off Réunion too .
Let me start by pointing out that there is an enormous paradox between the restrictions imposed by the establishment of a European common fisheries policy and the precautionary principle the European Union advocates .
In fact , at the same time that the Commission was refusing to countenance any increase in the rate of public aid for longliners in Réunion on the grounds that this resource could be at risk in this part of the Indian Ocean , it was also saying that this same resource was abundant enough to allow for an increase in catches under its fisheries agreements with third countries .
For those of us who come from Réunion , this is rather difficult to understand , as , moreover , I explained , in Réunion , to some of our MEPs in the Committee on Fisheries , pointing out that the fishing resources of this sector are young , specific and over-abundant , with the result that the catch quota criteria imposed by the common fisheries policy are inappropriate .
The rapporteur refers to the increased fishing opportunities given under the agreement between the EU and Madagascar , which will make it easier for fishermen from Réunion to acquire additional fishing rights in Malagasy territorial waters .
We would be allowing them to increase their catch quota , which , at present , accounts for only 0.12 % of the total EU catch in this zone .
The fisheries agreements are the EU 's main instrument for contributing to the development of the fishing industry in third countries .
A large part of the total financial contribution is allocated to this under the agreement with Madagascar .
Since it is quite familiar with the real situation in Madagascar , Réunion is prepared to offer its experience and to take part in co-development projects , based , in particular , on the creation of joint enterprises with Madagascar and the development of aquaculture .
In fact , some projects of this kind have already been conducted and simply need reinforcing .
Finally , I do hope the European Union will adopt a strict policy with regard to poaching in the Indian Ocean .
Madagascar has recently signed bilateral agreements with Japan , Taiwan and Korea , the terms of which are not always entirely clear .
I therefore feel it is crucial for the European Union to keep a very close watch specifically over the implementation of the special surveillance and monitoring measures aimed at restricting poaching activities in this zone and thus to ensure that the signing of the fisheries agreement with Madagascar is genuinely and indisputably valid .
Mr President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists supports this proposed regulation on the renewal of the fisheries agreement with Madagascar .
We also support the excellent report by Mrs Fraga Estevez , and we ask the Council to incorporate the amendments approved by the Committee on Fisheries .
On many occasions we have complained , always justifiably , about the lack of coherence of the Commission and the Council , which sometimes verges on the arbitrary , in relation to the negotiation and signing of fisheries agreements .
It is the sector itself which suffers from this lack of direction , and it does not feel that it is supported by the Commission .
The Commission sometimes gives the impression that it wants to forget the conclusions of the Luxembourg Council of October 1997 on the policy of fisheries agreements with third countries , which explicitly recognised the socio-economic advantages of those agreements for the Community , both in terms of the supply of raw materials and employment , and which are - and will continue to be - an essential element of the common fisheries policy .
I share the concern mentioned by the rapporteur in her report relating to the fact that more than 62 % of the cost of the agreement corresponds to development cooperation actions and has nothing to do with financial compensation for the agreed catches .
We are in favour of development cooperation and budgetary transparency .
These actions must therefore be financed by the European Development Fund which , to date , has financed the development of the fishing sectors of the developing countries to the not inconsiderable tune of EUR 421 million .
This agreement , like all fisheries agreements with third countries , is aimed at a specific form of fishing - in this case , tuna - clearly outside the 6-12 mile zone , and includes absolutely limited and measured annual fishing opportunities for an also limited and measured number of ships - 80 .
The shipowners pay an amount per tonne - EUR 25 - which , as the rapporteur has pointed out , is something that only happens in the Southern agreements .
The shipowners are obliged , furthermore , to employ a significant number of Malagasy seamen , which is rising from 6 to 40 , as has also been pointed out .
I congratulate Mrs Fraga Estevez once again on her excellent report which clearly demonstrates that , of the fisheries agreements signed by the developing countries with third countries , it is those which they sign with the European Union which achieve and guarantee a greater degree of transparency and control of fishing activities in those areas .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank Mrs Fraga Estevez for a splendid piece of work in connection with the report .
Just as I said earlier in connection with Mr Gallagher ' s report , those of us in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party are concerned that , in line with developments , we allow the self-funding sector , that is to say the ship owners and fishermen , to pay a larger contribution towards those agreements from which they of course benefit most .
The fisheries agreement with Madagascar is valuable not only for the Community but also for Madagascar .
The high degree to which the Community ' s fishing opportunities are exploited is impressive and worth emphasising .
I should like to support Mrs Fraga Estevez in saying that , in the funding of the fisheries agreements , a sharp and clear distinction should be made between the portion used to fund fishing opportunities and the portion used to fund development measures which , in the EU ' s budget , should appear as development aid .
The agreements are exceedingly important to those regions of Europe in which fishing is the most important activity , and we are concerned here not merely with the work of the fishermen but also with associated businesses on land .
It is the EU ' s responsibility to ensure that , when we conclude agreements , it is surplus resources with which we are concerned .
Matters must be arranged in such a way that local fishermen are provided with development opportunities , and that means that the EU must secure the concept of sustainability .
This agreement , like the one with Senegal , is important to the Community , partly of course in the light of the fact that the fisheries agreement with Morocco was not renewed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Fraga Estevez , I thank you for your report on the new protocol under the fisheries agreement with Madagascar , by which we can safeguard the operation of our tuna fleet in these waters up to and including May 2004 .
I am also pleased that you are able to adopt the draft .
The new Protocol refers exclusively to tuna and offers fishing opportunities for 80 vessels .
The financial contribution totals EUR 825 000 .
I would like to emphasise that over 60 % of this amount is allocated to specific measures and thus benefits the local fisheries sector .
These resources benefit , above all , monitoring and supervision , but also research and non-industrial fishing .
Also , this is the first time this Parliament has dealt with an agreement with an ACP state , providing for the satellite-based surveillance of all Community ships operating within the scope of this Agreement .
As regards Amendments Nos 1 and 3 , I draw your attention to the interinstitutional agreements in force and most especially to the 5 July 2000 Framework Agreement between Parliament and the Commission .
In the context of this Agreement , we are complying with the demands of these amendments , which are therefore not necessary .
I cannot support Amendment No 2 , as negotiations on a protocol to a fisheries agreement do not require their own new mandate .
What I have already said about Senegal applies correspondingly to Amendment No 4 .
Thank you , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
The self-discipline of the speakers who , in contrast to their usual practice , have not wholly exhausted their speaking time , means that we have now closed the debate earlier than originally planned .
Commissioners , too , Mr Fischler , usually require more time than you , with your characteristically Austrian succinctness , have done today .
I ask for your understanding that we must now suspend the sitting .
We cannot bring the vote forward , as it is fixed in the agenda for 6.30 p.m ..
I shall suspend the sitting until 6.30 p.m. and request you to reassemble punctually .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.51 p.m. and resumed at 6.30 p.m. )

VOTE
Mr President , I did not want to draw your attention to this point before the vote , so I waited until after the vote .
I note that more than 80 % of our fellow MEPs evidently had a good reason for not participating in the vote this afternoon .
So I ask myself whether I actually have a good reason for being here to vote at 6.30 pm this Thursday evening with so few Members present - about one hundred .
I am starting to wonder whether this is indeed wise .
Should we not join the vast majority of our colleagues who evidently had a good reason for not being here during the vote ?
In other words , Mr President , I would like to ask you whether you will discuss with the presidency of the Parliament whether there would be any possibility of either considerably increasing the number of Members present at 6.30 pm on a Thursday evening or finding another solution for this Thursday evening that does not entail a vote .
Mr President , I would just like to tell Mr Blokland that it is not those who are absent who are in the right , but those who are present , and those who are not here should be ashamed of themselves .
I take the view that we should be proud of doing our duty .
We must , though , also be quite clear in our own minds that it is important to reintroduce Friday so that Thursday is made a correspondingly more attractive proposition .
Explanations of vote
Adam Report ( A5-0340 / 2001 )
. The British Labour MEPs have voted in favour of a sheep premium of EUR 25 , an increase of 20 % on the figure proposed by the Commission .
Our objective was to pass on to sheep ( and goat ) farmers an increase in the annual premium but to keep within the expenditure limits set out in Agenda 2000 and keep us on track for CAP reform .
The incomes of sheep farmers have not kept pace with other types of farming .
This decision will help to correct the imbalance .
Because the payment will be annual and known in advance , it will help farmers in their business planning .
We particularly emphasise the importance we place on increased marketing support to encourage consumption and we look to the Commission to act with urgency .
- ( FR ) It seems to us that the Adams report on the proposed reform in the sheepmeat and goatmeat production sector does not take account of the basic problems facing small-scale farmers , who have the lowest incomes in Europe .

We would be happy to present the point of view of the Confédération paysanne , the French farm workers ' confederation , which is protesting at the fact that the income of French sheep farmers is 45 % lower than the average farm income and believes that ' at European level , the COM ( common organisation of the market ) in sheepmeat has not fulfilled its role , which was to guarantee the producers an income , ' and that the proposed reform ' shows no signs of any political ambition to give new impetus to the sheepmeat sector . '
Allocating flat-rate aid per head of sheep and goats instead of the present system of compensatory payments is harmful to small-scale stockbreeders and in no way improves their incomes .
That is why we abstained in the vote on 