Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 14 June 2001 .
Membership of political groups

I would like to inform you that , with effect from today , 2 July 2001 , Mr Holmes will no longer be a member of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities . He will now sit with the Non-attached Members .
I would also like to announce that , pursuant to Rule 7 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has carried out a verification of credentials regarding Mrs Olga Zrihen Zaari and Mr Miguel Mayol i Raynal .
I therefore propose to confirm these mandates .
I note that Mr Holmes is leader of the UK Independence Party .
I wonder whether that means that the UK Independence Party is now transferring in its entirety , or at least the two Members who are present here , to the other group .
I only have information about Mr Holmes .
Agenda
Madam President , I am sorry that I keep on having to repeat myself on the subject of Wednesdays , but the same deplorable state of affairs still exists .
As I see it , question time has again been deferred and shortened .
Every time I protest , I am told that this is exceptional .
The exception is now slowly becoming the norm because , by foolishly abolishing the Friday sittings , we have overloaded the Wednesday ones .
I would therefore ask you to ensure that , independently of the Friday issue - which we cannot now resolve -Wednesdays come fully into their own again .
In other words , a full one and a half hours should be set aside for question time , for the right to ask questions is a fundamental right of every parliamentarian .
Mr Posselt , I promise you that this will be the last time .
Unless the chairs of the groups decide otherwise .
( The order of business was adopted )
Speeches relating to procedure
Madam President , I would like to inform you once again of the difficulties of travelling to Strasbourg from the countries where we live .
This morning , there were only 18 seats in total on the flight from Milan Malpensa to Strasbourg , as a result of which Mrs Morgantini and other Members found that their seats had been double-booked , and she was unable to get a plane in time to be here before the beginning of the part-session , despite the fact that she had left Rome at 7.30 this morning .
I would like to make this extreme inconvenience known .
I realise that airlines have limits , but surely Air France could provide an aeroplane with more than 18 seats on the first day of the part-session , Madam President .
This is an obstacle to the work of this House .
Thank you for pointing this out to me , Mrs Napoletano .
As you know , we are doing all we can to improve the situation .
In any case , I think that there have been some improvements .
I hope that some of you have noticed this , but I am well aware that there is still much to be done and have , therefore , taken a careful note of what you have said .
Madam President , there were no flights at all from Amsterdam to Strasbourg this morning .
The flight was once again cancelled .
I have drawn your attention to this on several occasions in this House .
The number of flights , which was originally three per day , has been cut down to two .
We then assumed that those flights would probably continue to operate , but Air France has once again decided to cancel the flights altogether .
I should like to draw your attention to this .
We all had to fly via Paris , Brussels or Frankfurt again , which meant that we were late arriving here , although we were at the airport before 8 a.m.
Thank you , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , I can only say that I am sorry to hear this .
You have indeed pointed this out on a number of occasions , so please rest assured that I will try to do all I can to follow up this matter .
Madam President , whatever one ' s personal opinion may be of events in Yugoslavia over the past 10 years , bombings , holding governments to ransom , endeavouring to stigmatise and humiliate an entire nation and its leaders for resisting NATO policy ; whatever one ' s personal opinion of how this country was governed by a president and his advisers repeatedly elected in democratic elections , one must , I think , agree that the unprincipled manner in which he was abducted from his own country , despite categorical opposition from the upper and lower houses of parliament and the supreme constitutional court , and handed over to a court which , as we now know , was set up on the orders of the USA in order to serve political interests and help terrorise anyone who opposes the new order , are unacceptable methods , to put it mildly ; some of us think this is the work of hoodlums and deserves to be roundly condemned .
I therefore call on you to intervene . I am asking for a stop to be put to this deplorable situation and for Mr Milosevic and his advisers to be returned to their country , because only the people and the courts in their own country have the power to judge them .
To remain silent in the face of this sort of international terrorism is basically tantamount to complicity ; it shows disdain for any notion of international law or national sovereignty and paves the way for international political activity to be criminalised .
I would like to thank my fellow members for their support , but it is high time everyone accepted their responsibility ; otherwise how can we talk of international legitimacy and respect for institutions ?
Madam President , I will be very brief .
I would just like to remind Mr Wurtz that Mr Milosevic was the force behind his political family .
My whole group and I fought , therefore , against him , in particular during the Yugoslavian conflict .
I cannot help feeling some disgust , however , at the vultures circling around this carcass and at this farcical judicial system which is still designed for the victors and never questions their actions .
Whether we are talking of Nuremberg , Tokyo or The Hague , today , everyone believes that victors should at least have to answer to history if they are not subjected to the all-too-weak legal systems of their fellow men .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , without wishing to defend a Member from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I feel that the essence of the speech we have just heard on Mr Milosevic concerns not so much whether or not he has committed crimes as the following question , which is a serious one : how far can limits be imposed on a people 's autonomy in matters of putting its citizens on trial ?
Who gave the United States the right , which they exercise today , to put on trial all those who are suspected of having committed war crimes , when they themselves are often suspected of committing crimes in wartime ?
Well then , the task of a self-respecting European Parliament is to analyse this fact : whether Mr Milosevic is a criminal or not will be decided by an appropriate court .
Our task is to decide whether or not the autonomy of peoples is sacred and sacrosanct .
Madam President , as the chairman of the group and a number of honourable members have commented on my speech , I should like to clarify that I was speaking solely for my own part and on behalf of the members of my party and , secondly , that I merely pointed out that , whatever ones personal opinion of how Mr Milosevic and his advisers governed their country , we cannot condone this sort of action , especially when the upper and lower houses of parliament in his country refused to pass this sort of law and his country has not ratified the statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia .
I think that we need to respect the institutions and sovereignty of every country , otherwise I am not sure exactly what sort of European Parliament this is .
Madam President , in my view , we must welcome Mr Wurtz ' s speech on conversion .
I also feel that we must remind our fellow Members from Greece that the Macedonian people are being humiliated , mainly because of the attitude of Greece , which still forces all the countries of the European Union as well as Greece , to use the acronym ' FYROM ' to refer to Macedonia .
This constitutes genuine humiliation , and perhaps this would be enough to inspire our Greek friends to set about fighting to change this situation in their own country .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I simply wish to say to Mr Dupuis that the matter of the name he has referred to is under negotiation , progress has been made and I hope it will be resolved soon .
For the rest , I repeat what I have said once before in this Chamber : our neighbouring State has existed so far only because of the continued moral and material support of Greece .
Otherwise Milosevic and company would have broken it up long ago .
We should concentrate now on supporting and helping it to survive in this present very difficult situation rather than confuse the issue with matters which are secondary .
Madam President , I should like to endorse Mr Dupuis ' remarks about not calling Macedonia " FYROM " and to recommend that the whole of Parliament align its practice with the Dutch text of this week 's agenda which lists the Council and the Commission statements on Wednesday morning as being about " Macedonia " , whereas the English text says " FYROM " .
Mr Dupuis is quite right .
How can we expect a country to have an identity when it is called by an acronym ?
Let us please put an end to this nonsense .
Madam President , with all due respect , I should like to remind the House that , as far as the recurring issue of the name of FYROM is concerned , this name has been endorsed by FYROM itself .
Ladies and gentlemen , please do not subrogate to this nation by speaking on its behalf .
They personally agreed to this name at the United Nations .
Do not worry , a solution will be found and , anyway , that is not the problem .
Helping FYROM or Macedonia in its present state .
That is what Parliament should be doing .
Madam President , I wish to speak about pensioners and elderly people who are not self-sufficient , who have disabilities .
On Thursday 28 June , the German Provincial High Court and Court of Appeal upheld the appeal brought by a private German rest home for elderly people who are not self-sufficient , which is a member of an association of private European rest homes known as ECHO , ruling that the German law which grants funding and aid to public rest homes but not to private rest homes for elderly people with disabilities is illegal .
I want all the elderly people who need to , to be able to find a public or private home where they can receive assistance , in a situation of free competition .
I call upon you to make every effort to bring this about .
Resale rights
The next item is the report ( A5-0235 / 2001 ) by Mr Zimmerling , on behalf of the Parliamentary delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on the resale right for the benefit of the author of an original work of art ( C5-0220 / 2001 - 1996 / 0085 ( COD ) )
Madam President , I think this directive will be a success .
What we have here is a classic example of European work .
First of all , Parliament came up with a pioneering proposal as regards which the Council then needed four years to establish a common position adopted by the 15 Member States which was characterised by exclusively national interests .
Parliament then required the Council to think in European terms at second reading , while the optimum demands were made on behalf of artists and auction houses .
Finally , a solution that everyone involved considered to be acceptable and satisfactory was found following tough negotiations with the Council and the Commission .
We have put European competition in the art market back on track , while auction houses and galleries in the EU are being given equality of opportunity .
In this context , I think it is particularly important for the Commission to also look regularly into the issue of whether - and , if so , when - the European art market , and not only national art markets , are affected , and that corresponding adjustments are made .
We have improved social security for artists and their heirs , who have now also been uniformly guaranteed a financial stake in the increases in value of their works .
I therefore believe that we have , in this way , taken a first important step in the direction of more competition and more security in European art circles .
I must ask the House to approve the result of the negotiations .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , having started in April 1997 , we have now reached the third reading of the Resale Rights Directive .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank the members of the conciliation committee and Mr Zimmerling for their efforts .
But unfortunately , I shall have to adhere to my old point of view .
The vast majority of my group are still not happy with the proposal .
We are concerned here with the difference between the English term ' copyright ' and the Dutch word ' auteursrecht ' , for what is at issue here is the sale of a work of art .
Should an artist ' s heir be able to exercise his or her rights seventy years after the event ?
I do not think so .
A sale implies that all rights and duties are waived , and that is what the financial compensation is for .
The suggestion to increase the minimum price to EUR 3 000 is an improvement .
Anything lower would seriously hamper budding artists .
This brings me to my next point of criticism .
Our main objection to this proposal is that it is diametrically opposed to the principle of subsidiarity .
The Commission has been unable to demonstrate that discrepancies in legislation in the Member States will , in the long run , have a direct , negative impact on the internal market .
Furthermore , it is quite likely that the European modern and contemporary art market , which is of particular significance for London , will be moved to Switzerland . This was , in fact , already evident a few weeks ago at the Basel Art Fair .
The art market could , in fact , move outside Europe altogether , where this right does not exist .
Surely that cannot be the aim of the exercise . It appears from the proposal that that is a problem .
Provision is made for all kinds of unnecessary exceptions .
Harmonisation has therefore gone out of the window .
Is it not a contradiction in terms that , whilst attempts are being made to harmonise resale rights worldwide , the opportunity is being created for the Member States to abandon the minimum price at will via all kinds of loopholes ?
Then there is implementation .
In addition to the red tape which is involved in keeping track of the different sales and purchases of a work of art , exceptions complicate the matter even further .
Artists do not welcome this either .
If the sale takes place between private persons , resale rights do not apply .
Would you not agree with me that the trade in art between private persons will experience a dramatic upsurge ?
That is not the only example I could quote .
Finally , the directive does not offer all artists the same treatment , except in the case of sales via galleries and auction houses .
The directive is unclear and is not fraud-proof .
It is also superfluous , for there is no distortion within the internal market .
My group does not welcome legislation of this kind .
The citizen experiences this , in fact , as unnecessary interference from Brussels .
My group has voted against it twice .
It deems the changes and improvements in respect of the proposal to be insufficient and will therefore be voting against it for the third time .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , further to what Mrs Sanders-ten Holte has said , it can be seen that there are two sides to every question .
A majority of members of visual artists ' associations and representative bodies , with whom I have spoken during the last few years , now want to see European resale rights .
Even the majority of those in the art trade want to see common resale rights .
Politicians have been trying for years to negotiate a compromise acceptable to everyone .
Admittedly , the Council has not really striven for harmonisation but , rather , put together a framework with a number of ingenious loopholes .
Admittedly , the Council was not particularly flexible and did not pay very much attention to the European Parliament ' s proposals , but it is , at the end of the day , an acceptable compromise .
I cannot speak for the Commission , but there are one or two things to indicate that the Commission , too , was not happy , or in agreement , with all the Council proposals , especially those regarding the transitional periods .
In what was not so much a debate as a veto policy , the Commission , too , played its role , however , in making resale rights possible .
Now we have this document , on the subject of which I would say that , although we might well protest , we ought to be saying ' yes ' to what is , at long last , a victory .
We have this paper , which can be improved upon , but it is precisely because we now have the paper that such improvements can be made .
Opponents should be somewhat more careful in their criticism rather than appear , as critics , to be all of the same mind .
That is because there are some people who reject resale rights on principle and others who would like to level specific and very serious criticisms which may be of vital importance to themselves or to particular players , for example to the smallest art galleries which , in fact , are instrumental in creating a pool of talent .
It is they who assume the major risk .
They have a great many problems with the tax differentials , administration and insurance contracts .
They are scarcely allowed to take visual artists ' work on commission . For the most part , they have to buy such works .
If these smallest galleries have to buy works of art and are then - as anticipated in this proposal - unable to resell them three years later , and if perhaps , only after that period , have to sell them for less than their purchase price , they are bearing a risk and are losing out on two counts , namely in terms of both the price and of the resale rights .
My group will nonetheless vote in favour of this proposal , although there are still one or two improvements to be made in terms of both resale rights and of related aspects .
Finally , I should not like to brush aside one further argument , for that is not something I can do , but , rather , to qualify it somewhat .
It is only one specific lobby that is arguing the point about market migration . We have supply and demand , and there are certain things that are sought in Europe , and which have always been sought in Europe , and not in the United States , and vice versa .
It is important that this European decision , which will hopefully be taken by a majority of us tomorrow , should exert enormous pressure in favour of representatives campaigning for resale rights in Switzerland and also in the United States .
They are waiting for us to say yes , and I hope that this is what they will hear tomorrow .
Madam President , this report relates to the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee , and it is therefore far too late to affect the course of this directive - not that a single or group of MEPs could do that anyway .
Nevertheless I will take this opportunity to put on record my party 's opposition to this measure .
In so doing I must point out a few home truths to this House , even though I know these will be unpopular with the institution , which prefers to live in its own world , totally detached from reality .
First , although this measure aims to remove distortions in the internal market , it is fair to say that there is no such thing as a Community market in the resale of artists ' work .
There is in fact a major market in the UK - mainly in London - and very little else in Europe .
Therefore , the major effect would be not so much to distort as to disrupt the UK market .
The net result of this will be to drive the trade elsewhere : to Japan , Switzerland and the United States , none of which countries will have the same concern for EU-based artists as the London market .
Secondly , such money as is collected will invariably go to the wrong people .
Seventy per cent of the ' droit de suite ' funds collected in France in 1996 went not to the artists but to the descendants of seven artists , including the relatives of Matisse and Picasso .
This does not exactly conform with the images of helping the struggling artist .
Thirdly , the law itself is cumbersome and will add considerably to the costs of art markets by adding a tier of bureaucracy and expense .
Many small firms will be excluded from low-value sales altogether , limiting the opportunities for new and aspiring artists to market their works .
Instead of helping artists , this will hinder them , and there will be fewer small firms left in business .
Who will then buy the works of unknown artists ?
Altogether this is an ill-conceived , irrational and ultimately unnecessary piece of legislation .
The legislation itself will be the instrument which creates distortions in an otherwise satisfactory market . As is so often the case , Parliament and the European Union should leave things alone .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the agreement reached by the rapporteur , Mr Zimmerling , is a compromise agreement on an extremely interesting issue .
The agreement was criticised by some artists ' groups who told us they believed that the new directive would , paradoxically , cause unacceptable discrimination between famous artists and those who are in difficulty , that it would give no support at all to artists who need it most .
They pointed out to us that , in fact , this would create a distortion between a minority of privileged artists , whose works are sold in art galleries and auction houses , and the majority of artists , who would be officially refused the resale right since their works of art are sold privately or sold to museums by private collectors .
In fact , as you might imagine , we had lengthy debates on setting a threshold of between EUR 1 000 and EUR 4 000 , above which the resale right would apply , arriving at a compromise of EUR 3 000 , which is a reasonable amount .
What is more worrying , on the other hand , is the exception to the rule of equal opportunities in law , which could well lead to appeals before the Court of Human Rights in Luxembourg due , in particular , to the fact that the date on which the directive will enter into force in Member States which currently do not have a resale right is so far away 2010 .
In any case , I am afraid that , as the previous speaker said , the resale right itself although it clearly responds to legitimate concerns will create bureaucracy that is more likely to cripple the art market than to bring genuine satisfaction to the creators themselves .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , a majority of my parliamentary group - I am also saying this because Mr Graça Moura is unable to be here at the moment - will doubtless approve the conclusion reached by the conciliation committee .
In spite of this , a good many more members of my parliamentary group also have reservations , shared by political colleagues in my own country of Austria which , at present , does not have resale rights at all and has not seen any need to introduce them either .
I also promised my French colleague , Mrs Fourtou , that I would again voice some of these reservations today , although I am a committed supporter of fair competition in the internal market and always speak up for European regulations whenever they make sense in terms of the internal market and our common integration policy .
On 13 December of last year , I therefore informed plenary of the concerns expressed about resale rights by artists , the art world , gallery owners and , above all , young artists , as well as by the auction houses in my own country and by our parliamentary group .
On that occasion , I concluded by saying that the present basis for the decision was unsatisfactory .
I certainly think that the conciliation committee made a lot of changes to try to accommodate these reservations .
Moreover , the rapporteur is also to be congratulated .
For many , these misgivings could not , however , be completely resolved , something which finds very clear - albeit only symbolic - expression in the wordings concerning the transitional regulations , such as the following : ' The deadline for implementation of the directive will be 4 years .
Those Member States which do not apply the resale right at the time of the entry into force of the directive shall not be required , for a period expiring not later than 1 January 2010 , to apply the resale right for the benefit of those entitled under the artist after his death . '
A further deadline is cited by way of supplement .
This wording shows how sensitive the subject is and how various compromises had to be made .
I should also like to say , however , that the purpose of introducing resale rights is to enable practitioners of the visual arts to benefit from the subsequent financial success of their works .
We must ask ourselves if this goal has been achieved .
Partly in the wake of scientific investigations and , in addition , the conclusion reached by the conciliation committee , many believe that resale rights constitute a redistribution of resources from young , and often less well off , artists to older , successful artists and , above all , to their heirs .
One of the investigations I have to hand provides a very good five-point summary of the reservations , which I should very probably point out , since they show that not everyone is now in a state of euphoria .
Firstly : since the art and auction trade can only bear a very small part of the resale rights tax and since - thankfully , in my view - this tax cannot be fully passed on to the purchasers of works of art , resale rights might lead to a reduction in the purchase prices of works by young artists .
The second problem is that artists successful later on in life - perhaps just a few out of the total number - might regard resale rights as an enforced redistribution of resources in those later phases of their lives .
Thirdly , this is an undesirable development , however , since it would confine young artists within a world of consumer opportunities .
Fourthly , the tax could change the nature of competition in the art trade .
If this were to happen , there could be a real risk of migration .
Fifthly , the initial sale price might be influenced by account having to be taken of the fact that , in the event of a subsequent sale , the resale rights tax would be payable to the artist .
These reservations are also shared by many in my country and in my parliamentary group .
That does not detract from the result of the conciliation , but I would ask you to understand that not everyone today is laughing .
Madam President , for reasons of equality , if nothing else , a right similar to copyright or other intellectual property rights is needed for intellectual works which can be reproduced ad infinitum .
And what we have created are resale rights for the figurative arts .
These rights are property rights because they vest economic rights and benefits in the artist .
However , they are property rights sui generis because they indirectly recognise the importance of aesthetic values while , at the same time , awarding artists a sort of honorary tax .
It is a fact of life that works of art cannot be bought and sold without the intervention of art dealers .
However , unlike the trade in consumer or other capital goods , the trade in works of art is not an end in itself .
The point about the art trade is that it disseminates aesthetic values and aesthetic messages .
But these messages cannot be disseminated without artists .
And while their contribution is unique , the works which they produce only gradually acquire a market value .
It is therefore wholly unfair for the dealer - who is no more than a middleman - to reap the full benefit of this value .
Besides , it is up to them to encourage artistic creativity .
That is why it is wrong that artists in certain countries do not recognise this right .
We therefore need to correct the mistake in the Berne Convention making resale rights potential rights .
The fact that certain countries insist on long transitional periods or on postponing the date of application does not flatter its supporters .
Europe , as the area of artistic creation and culture par excellence , must show third countries the right way forward .
Everyone stands to gain from this solution .
Mr President , we , the British Conservative MEPs , are not happy with this proposal .
We believe it is not necessary for the completion of the single market .
In practice we do not believe it will help financially those who need it most .
Indeed , there is some evidence it may actually make them worse off , as my colleague Mr Karas pointed out .
It is going to drive a significant part of the contemporary art market out of the EU to Geneva and New York , and that will cost jobs in the trade itself and in supporting industries .
Those jobs are our jobs - Europe 's jobs - and our businesses .
On balance , we believe it will damage rather than enhance Europe 's economy and the position of its working artists .
Moreover , it will make a global agreement on ' droit de suite ' less rather than more likely because there is no incentive for the beneficiaries of this agreement - New York and Geneva - to strike a deal with the European Union .
In short , we believe it is an ill-conceived project which is against the best interests of Europe in general and the single market in particular .
I begin by expressing the thanks of the Commission to the rapporteur , Mr Zimmerling , for his report .
In particular , the Commission notes with pleasure that an agreement has finally been reached .
I shall be brief in my remarks ; much has been said about this subject , not only today , but in the past , so I shall restrict myself to what is absolutely necessary .
The resale right is going to be part of Community law .
It will allow artists to benefit from that right wherever their works are sold in the European Union .
That means that an end will gradually be put to the distortion of competition affecting the internal market in this area .
The directive will give the Commission a basis on which to act in order to promote recognition of the resale rights at international level .
The Commission has already committed itself to taking appropriate action in that direction .
But the Commission is still concerned by the long delays in application which may lead to 10 years elapsing before the directive is able to produce its full harmonising effects .
The Commission has therefore made a statement , which is to be published in the Official Journal together with the directive , in which it points out that such delays should be considered exceptional and should remain so in order to maintain the effectiveness of Community action within the internal market .
Thank you very much , Mr Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Better legal protection for accident victims
The next item is the report ( A5-0174 / 2001 ) by Mr Rothley , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , with recommendations to the Commission on a fifth European Parliament and Council directive on motor vehicle liability insurance to improve the legal protection of accident victims .
Mr President , Commissioner , the rapporteur , Mr Rothley , has unfortunately been detained today at an important meeting in Luxembourg and has asked me to stand in for him today and , in fact , to speak on his behalf , which is something I am happy to do .
With the fifth draft directive on motor vehicles , we want further to improve the protection of accident victims and , at the same time , take account of the requirements of the internal market .
What are we proposing ?
Firstly , any loss arising out of a traffic accident in the European Union - whether those involved are from the same or from different countries - ought , in future , to be settled within a reasonable period . Otherwise , there should be the threat of financial sanctions .
Secondly , the sum insured ought , in future , to amount to at least EUR 2 million , irrespective of the number of victims and the nature of the losses .
I have doubts , however , as to whether this amount will be sufficient .
In December 1998 , a British judge decided the case of a Dutch student who had broken his neck in an accident and since been paralysed from neck to toe .
The court awarded the accident victim compensation of approximately GBP 9 million , some GBP 8 million of which related to purely financial loss .
Thirdly , there are still doubts as to who is obliged to assume liability for an accident caused by a vehicle without a number plate or with a false or stolen number plate .
In such cases , we need clear regulations in favour of the accident victim .
In future , compensation should be paid from the guarantee fund of the country in which the accident occurred .
Take , for example , the case of a Dutch hit-and-run driver who causes an accident in Italy with a vehicle stolen in Poland that has false German number plates .
Who is liable ?
In future , it should be the Italian guarantee fund alone , which would obviously try to obtain redress .
Fourthly , the period for which a policyholder working temporarily in another Member State is protected ought , in future , to be increased to twelve months .
During this period , he ought neither to have to register a new address for his vehicle nor to have to effect a new insurance policy .
Those are only some of the proposals .
They are really there for the purpose of tying up loose ends .
At a later stage , we shall deal with the real problems of the future , i.e. reform of the compensation provided for non-material losses in the European Union .
We discussed this last year in Trier at the Academy of European Law : in other words , the protection of pedestrians and cyclists as vulnerable road users .
That was the theme in Trier this year at the Second European Road Traffic Law Conference : in other words , the accident victim ' s right to claim directly against his own insurer .
I consider that to be a modern concept .
The Commission should therefore set to work .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Rothley , very much for the painstaking work that he continues to do on behalf of citizens and motorists throughout Europe in filling gaps in their insurance cover .
Insurance has to be as foolproof as we can possibly make it , because that is what consumers expect .
Many of us have dealt with constituency cases , because of problems or loopholes in insurance cover .
I welcome this proposal from Mr Rothley on behalf of our group , and particularly thank him because he has accepted a number of suggestions that I have made to him in this area and added them to his report .
I just want to mention two areas specifically this evening .
The first is an important provision that not only benefits citizens , but also encourages in a practical way the development of the single market .
Currently , if European citizens wish to go and buy a new car in another country , they have to get special insurance cover for the period when they pick up the car from the dealership or the factory and bring it back to their own home country .
Their current home insurer is not allowed to provide that cover .
In Mr Rothley 's proposals , they will be able to do that simply and easily .
Cover can be extended for 30 days to encourage citizens to go and exercise their rights in a single market and shop across borders .
That is something which the Commission , particularly the internal market Commissioner , Mr Bolkestein , will be pleased to support .
The second issue , mentioned briefly by Mrs Gebhardt , concerns cover provided for citizens who take up temporary positions in other EU-Member States , such as students moving to a university wishing to take a car with them ; workers on secondment or members of families moving to another country for a temporary period .
They will be able to take their car and its existing insurance cover for a period of up to 12 months , without any problems .
That is important .
We know from complaints received , certainly in my case , from UK citizens that it has not been easy for insurance companies to provide such cover .
Again , this is of practical benefit enabling citizens to exercise their rights in the internal market .
In conclusion , I would like to say to Commissioner Bolkestein that I hope he will accept this proposal from Mr Rothley on behalf of Parliament and move as quickly as possible to bring these changes into effect in the form of further revisions to the Motor Insurance Directive .
Mr President , firstly I want to make it absolutely clear that I have every sympathy with what our rapporteur wishes to achieve in taking forward this proposal .
As we have often noted before , motor vehicle accidents unfortunately touch the lives of far too many of our citizens as mobility across Europe grows .
The Fourth Directive made great strides in dealing with these problems .
However , I want to concentrate on the fact that the proposal " requires " Member States to implement in their national law the provisions relating to an improved compensation procedure .
In essence , we have created a preferential system for European motor accident claims and therefore , logically , it makes sense to give those who experience an accident in a purely national context the same advantages .
Logically , yes , but does this way forward respect subsidiarity ?
I am afraid not and this is an important point .
I have therefore retabled an amendment to make this merely a recommendation to Member States .
The point is that the issues raised here are a matter for national private civil law .
It would involve substantial changes in tort law in England and Wales , for example .
We would be putting motor vehicle accident victims in a class apart .
What about the victims of medical negligence , industrial injury or any other type of claim against insurers ?
At present our committee is looking carefully at the harmonisation of civil law .
In that respect we have been rightly critical of a piecemeal approach , improperly researched .
I merely wish to make the point today that this proposal does , and must , involve a much bigger debate with tremendous implications for our respective systems of civil law .
It deserves proper and transparent treatment .
Mr President , Mr Rothley 's own-initiative report is indeed most welcome at this stage in the evolution of the single market .
There is no doubt that the Fourth Motor Insurance Directive needs updating after 15 years in force .
This period has afforded us sufficient opportunity to assess the effectiveness of the directive in contributing to a genuine single market for motor insurance .
It is clear that there are a number of gaps remaining and that the insuree and the claimant still face certain difficulties which need to be addressed .
I thank Mr Rothley for his research in this area and for clearly identifying the areas in which the legal protection of accident victims can be improved .
As long as there is room for improvement in this area , it is incumbent on us , as European legislators , to push forward and bring about a better set of conditions .
While a certain amount of progress has been made , it is clear that a single insurance market does not yet exist .
This deprives consumers of the best that companies across Europe can offer in terms of choice , in terms of flexibility and , of course , price .
Motor insurance is a multi-billion euro business and further competition must be encouraged so that consumers can reap the benefits .
One glaring inconsistency in the motor insurance field is in the area of temporary residency .
Current rules often place consumers at the mercy of insurance companies .
This must stop .
I strongly support the notion that citizens who wish to take up temporary residency outside their home country should be allowed to bring their personal motor vehicle without running into financial and administrative obstacles .
The freedom to live , work or study abroad must mean just that - freedom - and not hidden barriers . Having to re-insure and re-register can be such hindrances .
In my own country we currently have the shortest re-registration period , with only one day allowed .
It is frequently difficult for temporary residents to obtain local insurance cover at a reasonable price .
A one-year grace period during which the home country insurer would be obliged to continue cover is perfectly reasonable .
This would mean one less headache for citizens considering temporary residency in another Member State .
We often hear in this House that European citizens somehow feel far removed from decisions taken at European level , that the issues dealt with are not ones that impinge on their daily lives .
It is all the more welcome , therefore , that we in Parliament should take the initiative in matters such as this where we can make a real and tangible contribution to the rights and legal protection of our citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , the number of road accidents within the EU is unacceptably high .
That certainly applies to the tens of thousands who lose their lives on the roads and the hundreds of thousand who are injured in road accidents every year .
Certainly in those cases , but even if there is only material damage , the suffering should not be exacerbated by endless tugs-of-war with the insurance companies .
As cross-border transport , both in the freight and in the private sector , increases , so do the problems in obtaining motor vehicle insurance cover .
Mr Rothley has specified these in his report and , in doing so , has underlined the need for something to be done .
While number plates now bear the European emblem , indicating the Member State inside the circle of stars , in many cases the number plate provides no information .
Cars brought back from another Member State retain their old number plate for far too long while , on the other hand , it is made unnecessarily difficult to retain the number plate temporarily in another Member State .
As far as the minimum cover for legal liability is concerned , I share the rapporteur ' s view that it is high time it went up .
Unfortunately , it seems that EUR 2 million will be needed in practice to cover the damages in virtually all cases .
I therefore support the appeal to the Commission in the draft resolution to send a proposal to Parliament this autumn .
This period may be brief , but the rapporteur has already provided the blueprint for the proposal in this report .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that the Commission regrets the absence of Mr Rothley this afternoon .

This is not the first time that I have had an exchange of opinion with Mr Rothley and his colleagues on motor vehicle insurance matters : I remember vividly the discussions we had on the Fourth Motor Insurance Directive : that directive has now been adopted .

Therefore I know that Parliament has a special concern for the effectiveness of the insurance cover which protects millions of European citizens who may become involved in motor vehicle accidents .
Indeed , the most recent developments for the EU motor vehicle insurance framework - the Fourth Motor Insurance Directive to which I have just referred - resulted from a specific request from Parliament .
The legislation was adopted last year .
From the end of 2002 it will help improve the situation of visiting motorists , namely those unfortunate European citizens who are victims of a road accident while they are outside their home country .
That directive was also a remarkable development because it was the first occasion on which Parliament made use of its new powers under Article 192 of the Treaty .
The European Parliament now calls upon the Commission , in my person , to take further action in this field .
This time the object of Parliament 's requests is not to fill a gap in existing rules but to modernise and reinforce the single insurance market in this area .
Let me say on this point that the Commission is fully aware of the need to modernise the motor vehicle insurance directives - after all , the first of these directives was adopted 30 years ago .
For that reason , and in consultation with Member States , industry and victim support groups , in 1998 the Commission started a comprehensive exercise to review our insurance directives .
That exercise is now at a very advanced stage , but has not yet been completed .
I should therefore like to express my sincere thanks to Parliament in general , and to Mr Rothley in particular for his initiative , which is in line with , and provides a new impetus to , the Commission 's work in this area .
Let me also say that some aspects of the actions proposed in the resolution , such as a harmonised deadline for registration of vehicles imported from another Member State , may go beyond the scope of the insurance directives .
That has already been pointed out during the discussion in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , when it was also stated that if we are to go in that direction we will require a different legal basis from that used for insurance matters .
In addition , other actions , such as the insurer 's obligation to provide a claims declaration , ought to be implemented in such a way that these actions do not run counter to the principle of the freedom of tariffs which inspires the Community 's insurance legislation .
In conclusion , I should like to reassure Parliament , that even if we are not in a position to submit a proposal within the time limits requested in the resolution , the Commission will do its best to secure the rapid adoption of a comprehensive proposal aimed at modernising the legal framework of motor insurance .
Thank you very much , Mr Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Out-of-court settlement of consumer disputes
The next item is the report ( A5-0134 / 2001 ) by Mrs Wallis , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on action taken on the Community policy on out-of-court settlement of consumer disputes .
Mr President , I was struck today by an article in The Wall Street Journal ; the subtitle read : " Why do America and Europe differ on the importance of consumer interests ? "
It went on to say , from a US point of view : " when it comes to putting the consumer at the center of its economic model , Europe remains stubbornly old-fashioned . "
E-commerce , of all types , still lags behind in Europe .
By 2005 , 11 % of US retail sales will be online , only 6 + % in western Europe .
Our hope must be that this Commission initiative for a European Extra-Judicial Network will help build consumer e-confidence and force those European figures up .
These were the problems that we wrestled with during the passage of the Brussels regulation : how to allow Europe 's consumers access to cross-border justice without over-burdening business and yet , at the same time , exposing business to necessary competitive forces .
We must be clear that this is an attempt to deal with a large number of low-value cross-border consumer disputes , outside the normal legal system .
Alternative means that almost replace the lower end of our traditional court systems will be introduced .
This is a very ambitious project , and such an exercise needs to be seriously undertaken and properly funded .
One of my greatest concerns about this initiative is its funding , both substantively and in terms of its publicity .
Our citizens know where their local courts are , but will they know how or where to access the EEJ Net ?
From what I have seen , I am not over-optimistic .
Secondly , is the system coherent and efficient ?
At the moment , progress is very variable in the different Member States .
The Commission must get tough in this respect , hence our suggestion of a service-level agreement with each clearing-house .
Only such an arrangement will ensure that our citizens get the service that they really deserve .
This brings me to the amendments .
We can happily accept Amendments Nos 2 and 3 , but we have grave concerns about Amendment No 1 .
Not to allow the clearing-houses to give legal advice flies in the face of reality .
Some of the centres already operating as Euroguichets , have trained lawyers on their staff .
They could not function without that .
We cannot offer our citizens a second-rate service .
Good legal advice , or knowledge , at the outset of a claim is essential if it is not to veer off in the wrong direction , causing aggravation , disappointment and denial of justice .
Lastly , let us turn to the legislative method , ADR and the EEJ Net , are examples of soft law or co-regulation .
If this is the way of the future , it is important that Parliament be fully involved from start to finish .
For example , most of us would applaud the other sectoral initiative in this field , the FIN Net dealing with financial services for instance , but when was this initiative referred to Parliament ?
If we are replacing or enhancing our legal system and access to justice , these issues are key to civil society and they cannot and must not be tackled without the input of democratically elected Members .
Mr President , we welcome this report so deftly piloted through Parliament by Mrs Wallis because , in the brave new world of e-commerce , there is going to be the same share of crooks and mountebanks as in the non-digital environment .
For this reason consumer protection matters at least as much .
It comes in two forms .
First , it provides legal protection , and , secondly , it provides a means of enforcing that protection .
Clearly , especially as regards small claims across international borders - in other words , between different legal systems - conventional court systems will be of limited real help , as Mrs Wallis has just pointed out .
Hence we welcome this initiative to create a user-friendly , extra-judicial network across Europe .
Indeed we believe it should go beyond the physical limits of the Union since the Net is no respecter of national boundaries .
As is so often the case , the devil lies in the detail .
We look forward to seeing that detail and wish its progress well .
Mr President , Mrs Wallis ' report is an important contribution to the debate on Community policy on out-of-court settlement of consumer disputes .
I also commend her recommendations to this House , and indeed share her concerns .
We all know from our own experience that lengthy and costly litigation through the courts is losing its appeal as a means to resolve disputes .
The notion that most people want judges , well-dressed lawyers and fine courtrooms as a setting to resolve their disputes is no longer correct .
People with problems , like people with pains , want relief and they want it as quickly and as inexpensively as possible .
The success of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms is beginning to create a cultural shift away from traditional litigation .
In a recent case in the UK , an eleven-month trial running into millions of pounds was replaced and resolved by mediation in a matter of days .
We see examples of this across Europe .
But if the single market is to grow , then we need to make it easier for consumers to shop across borders with greater confidence .
This will only happen if consumers can buy goods and services and be confident and secure that if problems arise they can be resolved easily .
Not in the first instance in court where the average cost for a cross-border case is EUR 2 500 and it takes between 23 and 29 months to resolve .
In reality , we know that consumers are not encouraged to shop on the Internet outside their own Member State and that national consumer organisations - including in my own Member State - are not advising consumers to go down this route because it is fraught with difficulties .
My own personal experience with Internet shopping has not inspired me with e-confidence .
After purchasing CDs from a renowned high street store , namely HMV , I received an incomplete order with a promise of further delivery .
Most reputable shopping sites ensure that money is not taken from an account .
Two months on I have still to receive outstanding items and my visa card has been debited the full amount .
Yet the value of these items is small and court redress would be costly and nonsensical .
Consumers are also increasingly tempted to buy even more expensive items across borders , like washing machines , fridges , financial services and cars .
ADR is a valuable way to access justice providing services and remedies which are appropriate to the cost of the item .
But it is not the panacea to all consumer disputes .
The consumer must still have the right to go to court as a last resort .
In the absence of an agreement directly with the trader or the trading site , the consumer should be encouraged to look at the benefits of ADRs .
It is vital , as Mrs Wallis , has said , that the consumer is aware and informed of this option .
In my own Member State , citizens advice bureaux are acting as a clearing-house .
Consumers who make claims have , therefore , a local point of access and information .
This is vital .
For consumers in the UK there is an even bigger bonus as a by-product of boosting confidence in crossborder shopping on the Internet .
We can shop in a larger market and often buy goods up to a third cheaper .
This has to be a benefit in what we call " rip-off Britain " , by driving down high prices in our own over-priced internal home market .
Mr President , I have been a keen supporter of the alternative and out-of-court settlement of disputes for years .
Not only can this be a means of coping with the ever increasing pressure on regular , judicial bodies ; more than anything , it offers citizens a low threshold for the swift and inexpensive settlement of complaints .
In fact , over the past couple of years , when dealing with different consumer issues , such as remote sales , I have time and again stressed the need for alternative ways of settling disputes in order for the internal market to function well .
Consequently , the alternative settlement of disputes has been included explicitly in a number of directives .
The internal market has given consumers the opportunity to expand their horizons enormously , and they no longer rely on what is on offer within the national market .
Certainly at a time when cross-border sales and purchases are increasingly being made via modern communications methods , the benefits of the European market are becoming apparent .
But the consumer may also be dissatisfied at times . This applies at Member State , as well as international , level .
In the case of cross-border purchases , the complaints procedure is much longer but , above all , also more laborious .
Many consumers are so put off by the complex procedures - not helped by the fact that they are drafted in a foreign language - that they do not pursue their complaints . That is deplorable .
In the light of this , I welcome the Commission ' s proposal with open arms .
I should also like to congratulate Mrs Wallis who has managed to pinpoint a few sore points in her report , with which I could not agree more .
Allow me to mention a few more key words with regard to the information desks to be set up .
These need to be simple procedures , a low threshold for the consumer who is looking for legal solutions and sound regulations governing the use of the consumer ' s own language .
As for the latter , the Commission should reconsider how it intends to implement its plans practically speaking .
I should also like to know when the information desks will be set up in the different Member States .
The Netherlands plans to launch these in 2001 .
In my opinion , the information desks should focus on the role of offering guidance to the consumer .
In that respect , I do not see eye to eye with Mrs Wallis .
The real legal advice must therefore be given by duly qualified people .
I also believe that the information desk should not , and cannot , act in the role of advocate , for then it would be responsible for the advice given .
In my view , the information desk should be a facility and an effective guide and must act as a conduit to channel disputes to the alternative settlement of disputes procedure , for example .
In this connection , I believe that my amendment should be carefully re-read , also by the rapporteur .
We run too many risks when we start issuing them with legal tasks .
I speak from experience as Chairman of the Disputes Settlement Committees Foundation .
Mr President , it is very important that a framework is developed within the European Union in order to guarantee that the rights of consumers are protected at all times .
This entails putting into place systems which will allow the 370 million consumers of the European Union to access justice promptly , and to secure redress when consumer rights are infringed .
Justice delayed is justice denied .
This is why I welcome this communication , which seeks to put in place procedures to deal with out-of-court settlements of consumer disputes .
It is up to the 15 Member States of the European Union to implement the provisions of this recommendation .
Each Member State will have to put in place procedures which can deal with out-of-court settlements of consumer disputes .
Ultimately , these new structures will be able to help resolve cross-border disputes for aggrieved consumers within the European Union .
Each government within the European Union will also have to set up central contact points , which will provide consumers with the requisite information about out-of-court resolution disputes bodies which are operational within their jurisdiction .
Such central contact points will explain to consumers to whom they may address their complaints and seek appropriate redress .
The central contact points will provide information and assistance with regard to the resolution of cross-border disputes within the European Union .
I would urge the European Commission to allocate substantial funds to ensure that this new scheme is widely publicised across the European Union .
If we want these new structures to be a success , wide publicity is going to have to be put in place .
These new procedures are also going to have to be monitored in a structured manner , so as to ensure that any discrepancies in the operation of these new schemes within the different Member States of the European Union are ironed out .
In conclusion , Mr President , this proposal is only part of a range of measures implemented by the European Union to protect consumer rights .
Consumers need to be protected , both in the off-line world and in the increasingly important on-line world where consumers are purchasing many goods and services over the Internet .
A new information technology age has arrived .
We must ensure that consumers ' rights are protected as these technologies continue .
I congratulate the rapporteur on this fine report .
Mr President , we wish we could be considering a perfect and polished Commission working paper on the settlement of consumer disputes , specifically those requiring cross-border solutions .
Nevertheless , and the rapporteur , Mrs Wallis , makes this point very well , the best always arrives late and is often the enemy of the good , which appears in the meantime . We must , therefore , express our satisfaction with the Commission ' s limited initiative .
This indicates a possible way forward for the rapid and inexpensive resolution of often low-value consumer disputes . What is required , as we know , is the creation of a European Extrajudicial Network , which is capable of resolving these disputes by means of the credibility , probity , transparency and technical expertise of organisations that have arisen from the free association of consumers and which are able to form a chain of control that protects consumer rights and the average quality of life of Europe ' s citizens .
This would enable us to move towards regulating the protection of the economic rights of private individuals and removing the burden of bureaucracy imposed on them by the cumbersome traditional legal machinery .
Unlike the invisible hand , the internal consumer market is , in this case , organising its own self-regulation , which will be coordinated and supported by the European institutions , thereby enhancing the credibility of the Union itself and its closeness to the citizens .
Mr President , the way ahead is clear ; Mrs Wallis has explained how we must now progress and my group will therefore vote in favour of the report we are now debating .
Mr. President , I am not only an advocate but a convinced advocate of the benefits of arbitration .
This largely comes from my experience of legal practice , both in the area of domestic law in my own Member State and in the area of international commercial arbitration .
I had the honour of being a member the International Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce for seven years , and drafted the last piece of legislation in my own Member State on International Commercial Arbitration , so I am a convinced advocate of the benefits of arbitration , as distinct from court procedures .
Therefore , I believe that the establishment of the EEJ Net is an essential step in ensuring that consumers have practical access to simple , low-cost and effective means of resolving cross-border disputes .
It is the natural follow-up to the 1998 Commission communication on access to justice and the notification by Member States of their out-of-court bodies applying the principles set out in Recommendation 98 / 257 .
In addition , this is a significant step forward in fulfilling the Tampere Council conclusions in providing better access to justice in Europe .
The continuing expansion of economic activity within the internal market means more and more that consumers ' activities are not confined to their own country .
The continued growth of e-commerce , coupled with the introduction of the euro , underlines the urgency of the need to actively promote consumer confidence to ensure a truly competitive and effective internal market .
The involvement and support of all the Community institutions , including the European Parliament , is essential to raise the profile of this initiative and to ensure its effective delivery and to guarantee its eventual success .
Member States , in close cooperation with the Commission , have already made substantial progress since this initiative was proposed in March last year .
All , with the exception of Germany , have now informed the Commission of the body that will perform the functions of their national clearing-house and the process of setting up these bodies is under way .
The Commission is providing financial assistance for the start-up costs and will examine how best to provide further infrastructure and targeted support .
In addition , both Norway and Iceland have expressed their wish to participate and have been attending meetings with Member States ' experts and with the Commission .
We are also examining how best the enlargement candidate countries can be brought into the network .
Much work has been completed with Member States ' experts and with wider stakeholders to turn the network into a successfully functioning reality .
In particular , one result of this work has been a Memorandum of Understanding , setting out the minimum functions and operational guidelines for the clearing-houses , which is now close to finalisation .
This document marks an important step in ensuring coherent cooperation throughout the network .
It includes requirements for the provision of practical information and advice to be given to consumers , a general system for complaint handling , based on the European Complaint Forum , its translation , and monitoring to ensure the network operates efficiently , the requirement for either the clearing-house or the national authority to make practical arrangements with national ADRs to ensure smooth cooperation and the need to monitor their compliance with the principles in the Commission recommendation .
Network cooperation is envisaged through regular meetings , the development of network strategies and continual review of the network to ensure constant improvement .
Uniform methods for collecting data on the performance of the network , for its evaluation and to identify specific consumer problems are also part of the plan .
The group of Member State experts meets tomorrow to finalise these details .
It is also provisionally agreed that the network should become operational on the 16 October of this year .
This coincides with the launch in Belgium of their Euroguichet , which will act as the clearing-house , and with the Annual General Assembly of the Consumer Associations that takes place on 18 and 19 October .
I see the EEJ Net initiative as a priority .
It is an essential component of a number of initiatives currently being developed by the Commission aimed at creating confidence to enable consumers to actively take part in and benefit from the internal market .
It will also be important for businesses in facilitating greater cross-border trade , particularly of course , for SMEs .
It will put the practical framework in place to allow the ADRs ' potential for resolving cross-border disputes to be fully exploited .
The organic nature of this framework will enable it to be sufficiently flexible and adaptable to meet new challenges and be kept under constant review to ensure the delivery of an effective mechanism for all citizens and for the effective operation of the internal market .
Mr President , I should like to hear what the Commissioner has to say about the amendments .
Mr President , these are amendments to the excellent text that has been put forward by the rapporteur .
As they stand , I do not have any objection to them , in particular the first one which identifies the need to have access to legal staff .
That is desirable and included in our proposal .
The others seem to me to be perfectly reasonable . For instance , Amendment No 3 makes reference to the involvement of the EEA states .
Some of them are already involved and we want more of them involved , including the applicant countries .
So the Commission fully supports this .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
COM in fruit and vegetables
The next item is the Commission statement on the common organisation of the markets in the fruit and vegetables sector .
Mr Byrne has the floor , on behalf of the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission would like to thank the European Parliament for the resolution tabled on the report of the Commission on the operation of the common organisation of the market in the fruit and vegetable sector .
This resolution contains a number of very interesting points and the Commission has taken careful note of them .
As you know , the intention of this report has been to act as a platform for a wide-ranging discussion among Member States , the European Parliament and the sector .
Since January , the report has been on the agenda of the Council working groups and of the SCA meetings and has been discussed in the last Council .
The Commission is taking note of all opinions and positions and is currently actively studying and evaluating aspects related to the report and to the future of the sector and its COM .
In this context , the Commission welcomes the points raised in the resolution by Parliament .
In particular it supports the objectives of increasing the concentration of supply via producer organisations , reducing problems linked to operational programmes and improving the overall market regulation .
The Commission would like to reassure Parliament that it is fully aware of the need to continue to work urgently on several aspects of this report and your current resolution .
When this process of evaluation has been completed , the Commission intends to come forward with proposals to improve the COM where appropriate .
In conclusion , the Commission would like once more to thank Parliament for this resolution .
It is prepared to maintain all necessary contact between its services and Parliament and looks forward to full discussion and cooperation on the future of the COM in the fruit and vegetable sector .
Thank you very much , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . I should like , first of all , to thank the Commission for its brief statement .
I am sorry that the Commissioner responsible is not here , but I am very grateful to you , Mr Byrne , for joining us here today .
I can only regret the fact , however , that you limited yourself simply to making a statement of good intentions and to thanking Parliament , without actually going into the problems or proposing any potential solutions .
A year has passed since the Council instructed the Commission to undertake a specific study of the situation in the fruit and vegetable sector , which is currently suffering more than any other , in a report on the workings of the COM in fruit and vegetables .
In order to prevent disruption to support for this sector , an extension was approved for the improvement plans for the year 2000 .
We have now reached a point where , in 2001 , this extension is coming to an end and the situation is creating considerable uncertainty in the sector , which risks causing farmers to abandon their land despite the gains that have been made as a result of the improvement plans .
This problem requires a decision , which can be implemented immediately by setting in motion support mechanisms replacing the current improvement plans as these come to an end .
The nut sector is of great social and environmental importance to the European Union , and to the southern countries such as Spain , Italy , Greece , Portugal and France , because these countries have many small farms that create a great number of jobs and which also have a considerable and direct influence on the environment .
Parliament has declared itself to be in favour of seeking a definitive solution for this sector , within the framework of the COM in fruit and vegetables .
What we need now , Commissioner , is for the Presidency and the Commission to speed up their work on finding a definitive solution for the nut sector in the European Union within the framework of the COM in fruit and vegetables and , until then , to extend the improvement plans .
With regard to the other problems of this COM and to those discussed in the report , I think that we need to support producers ' organisations and strengthen the instruments that the COM places at their disposal , especially the operational funds .
We would also want to encourage links and mergers between producers ' organisations and to see operational funds belonging to producers ' organisations that have merged - or the actions carried out jointly by various organisations - financed at a rate of 70 % instead of the current 50 % .
They would therefore receive the same treatment that the current regulations give to actions undertaken within the industry or between trade organisations .
I also feel that there needs to be a revision of the regulations in this field , in order to harmonise funding with operational funds or through rural development funds , with the sole proviso that adequate control mechanisms are put in place in order to ensure that funding is not given twice .
This is creating distortions in the sector ' s financing .
Lastly , a more detailed study would also need to be undertaken of other aspects , such as the regulation of citrus fruits , measures for specific products affected by international competition and the standardisation of trade with third countries .
In broad terms , these are the concerns of the Group of the European People ' s Party and of a southern country , about the COM .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for joining us today .
Commissioner , once again , the report submitted by the European Commission on the operation of the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables , with a view to a future reform , is a disappointment .
It is not only a disappointment to Parliament , because it adopts almost none of the recommendations of the requests contained in the Resolution of 26 October 2000 , but it is also a disappointment to the whole production sector .
The report does not adopt the work and the suggestions of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development or those of Parliament itself , despite the fact that Commissioner Fischler stated a while ago that these would be taken into consideration .
The report is incomplete : it fails to present practical solutions and nor does it make an in-depth study of the situation .
Neither time nor energy has been expended on it and , I repeat , it is a disappointment .
No solutions have been suggested for a sector which , in some parts of the European Union , is responsible for 25 % of total agricultural output and provides the most employment .
Are you aware , Commissioner , that out of every EUR 6 received by a fruit and vegetable producer in southern Europe , only EUR 0.012 comes from the European Union ?
Do you think that this can be called a genuine common organisation of the market or a real system of support ?
Is the Commission aware of this sector ' s capacity for absorbing employees , particularly labour from the Maghreb , and does it realise , furthermore , that this sector has been more badly affected than any other by the liberalisation of trade with the countries from which these workers come ?
Do you not think that if it can find work for so many people - in objective 1 territories - we should take this into consideration and support the sector wholeheartedly instead of continuing to force farmers to bear the whole burden ?
Commissioner , please undertake the necessary reforms that will provide real and unequivocal support for fruit and vegetable producers ' organisations .
Please give real support , which has until now been lacking and which will enable these to increase not production , but the already high levels of food quality and safety and which will resolve the environmental problems affecting the sector .
Please use the proposed reform to facilitate the concentration of supply in the face of distribution monopolies , the operators who dominate the market and who set their own prices and conditions .
Please propose solutions that put an end to the problems of the operational programmes and funds , the excessive bureaucracy and the harmful consequences of trade agreements with third countries .
Commissioner , how many times must we in Parliament repeat that the nut sector requires a definitive solution ? How many times must we request that , until the reform of the market in the form of aid per hectare takes place , the improvement plans for the nut sector , which are crucial to preserving rural life in some very underdeveloped areas , which have no real alternatives , be extended ?
Commissioner , let us not make things so easy for the United States , Turkey or China .
Let us protect our farmers and the nuts they grow , at least to the same degree to which these countries protect their farmers and crops .
For months now , uncertainty has reigned in the production sector .
In Andalusia , people have been shouting slogans such as ' We won ' t swap fish for tomatoes ' in an allusion to the agricultural concessions made to producers from the Maghreb during the fisheries negotiations .
The Commission has already ensured that we will not have fish and is now on the way to ensuring that we will not have tomatoes either .
Mr President , at the press conference following the last Council of Agricultural Ministers , Commissioner Fischler made it clear that he would not be making any proposals on the nut sector because he was waiting to hear Parliament ' s opinion on his report on the operation of the COM in fruit and vegetables .
Leaving aside the fact that the issue of nuts has been included in three resolutions tabled by this Parliament in the last year , and that the Commission ' s report was designed for the Council and not for Parliament , it would be appropriate to look at the background of the issue of fruit and vegetables .
A radical reform of the COM in fruit and vegetables was carried out more than five years ago but , unfortunately , time has shown that the concentration of supply has not reached the hoped-for level and has highlighted other issues which seriously limit the effectiveness of the measures implemented in that reform .
In October last year , Parliament adopted a report which highlighted the fact that only 40 % of produce is marketed through producers ' organisations .
Given that the main instruments of the COM in fruit and vegetables centre on producers ' organisations , we can only conclude , as this House did at the time , that what we have is only half a COM .
Consequently , at the time , we tabled a series of amendments designed to improve the effectiveness of the COM , including amendments to resolve the problem of nuts .
In that debate , the Commissioner , Mr Fischler , stated that , although he viewed many of the amendments sympathetically , these went beyond the scope of the proposal submitted by the Commission .
He also declared that since the Commission was due to present a report on the matter in a few months ' time , it would submit proposals to this effect .
In January , the Commission presented a report on the operation of the COM in fruit and vegetables but , regrettably , did not follow this up with proposals .
The report in question is essentially descriptive .
It contains some very interesting information , which broadly concurs with the information contained in our report of October last year .
The difference between the two reports lies in the fact that the Commission ' s report is merely descriptive whereas Parliament ' s report provided assessments and proposals .
There are , therefore , two problems .
The first is the procedure to be followed once the Commission ' s report has been presented and the second is the method to be decided on to resolve the problems affecting the sector as quickly as possible .
As regards the procedure , the problem lies in the fact that the Commission ' s report contains no analysis or assessment .
The Commission reveals that only 40 % of production is marketed through producers ' organisations , but makes no assessment of whether this is too much or too little . It makes no analysis of the effects of this factor on the effectiveness of the COM and nor does it assess the advisability of making proposals .
There is no sense in Parliament presenting a report on supposedly well-founded statistical data .
What is needed is a report that discusses assessments and proposals , but the Commission ' s report does not provide for this and furthermore , the European Parliament put these forward in October last year .
The fruit and vegetable sector has for some time been afflicted by a series of problems which need to be resolved as rapidly as possible : the COM in fruit and vegetables has a budget that does not reflect its importance as an economic activity ; the regulations prevent the appropriations available to the COM in fruit and vegetables being used effectively and producers ' incomes are suffering the effects of upheavals in the market resulting from the gradual deterioration of Community preference and the continual increase in production costs .
We therefore need to assess and compensate for the effects of trade agreements being signed with third countries and we need to encourage the concentration of supply via producer organisations .
All of these issues , and some others - such as those concerning problems of operational programmes and funds - already feature in the report Parliament adopted last October and the urgent need to resolve these problems requires the Commission to present proposals within the meaning defined in the report that we adopted .
Now , in order to respond to the legitimate concerns of the Community ' s fruit and vegetable producers , Parliament must call on the Commission to present proposals , which we shall comment on once they have been made .
I do not wish to end without making a brief mention of nuts , because my fellow Members have focussed mainly on this issue .
If any matter is genuinely urgent amongst all the urgent matters of the COM in fruit and vegetables , it is to resolve the nut issue .
In October , Parliament also put forward definitive proposals on this matter in order to resolve the problems .
I therefore find it incredible that the Commissioner claims not to be aware of the proposals that Parliament has made repeatedly on this subject .
We must , as a matter of priority , provide a definitive solution for this sector and until the Commission matches the proposals already presented by Parliament , we must extend the measures currently in force .
Mr President , I would like to say to the Commission that once again we are faced with a problem which relates to Mediterranean agriculture ; an agricultural problem - fruit and vegetables - in which Mediterranean production in particular is directly involved .
I would like to draw the Commission ' s attention to the fact that this is happening far too often .
I say this to the Commissioner present , but in particular so that he may pass it on to Mr Fischler .
We continually have difficulties with production in the south of Europe , with Mediterranean production , and this is no accident .
It deserves Parliament ' s attention because , in comparative terms , these problems receive much less attention than problems involving northern agriculture .
Furthermore , the Commission must understand that it is irritating for the European Parliament to have to insist on issues which , according to the Commission ' s own words , should already have been resolved .
This is noted in the recitals which head the motion for a resolution which we are presenting on the occasion of this oral question .
In recital A , it is noted that the European Parliament affirms that there is great consistency between the Commission and the Council but , however , later on , we believe that the facts do not reflect this .
There was also a commitment from the Commission to resolve this series of problems caused by the last reform of fruit and vegetables .
This is not reflected either .
In recital C , for example , it is noted that the Commission constantly tells us that it is aware of these problems , but it is not consistent , because it does not translate its projects into facts and is yet to present its corresponding legislative proposal .
This motion for a resolution therefore asks the Commission to present proposals to improve the functioning of the COM in fruit and vegetables , in particular with regard to the reorganisation of the producers ' organisations and with regard to nuts .
Commissioner , you must be aware that the only aid not to have been given continuity by Agenda 2000 has been that intended for nuts .
Mr President , you know as well as I that the roads of Spain are blocked , and the Commission cannot ignore this problem , because this sector is paying for the consequences of a violation of the principle of Community preference and a dreadful marketing policy .
I ask that the needs of this sector be responded to .
Mr President , Members of the Commission , I should first of all like to welcome the Commissioners who are with us today and to remind the Commission , as represented here , that what has happened in the fruit and vegetable sector is totally unacceptable .
Today , in Europe , we basically have two types of agriculture : the first is heavily subsidised and depends on support from the CAP . The second depends on the market and on the risks that farmers are forced to run in this market .
Unfortunately , the fruit and vegetable sector , and particularly the nut sector , fall within this second group of products , a type of poor stepson of the CAP , which has to make a living from the market and which has to run risks in the market , with all the uncertainties agriculture is facing .
The common agricultural policy has not provided an adequate response to this problem .
Nuts , as the Commissioner knows , are a crop grown in parts of southern Europe , in arid and semiarid areas , where there are often few alternatives to dry farming .
One cannot even use the argument that this is an intensive form of farming that damages the environment .
Quite the opposite is true . We have seen this sector being all but abandoned over the last few years and we now run the risk of entering a legal vacuum , because the Commission , for reasons unknown to us , has decided not to submit any proposals .
It is truly deplorable that this should be the case , and so this motion for a resolution that we are tabling in Parliament today is designed to make the Commission aware of this omission , this vacuum , and to make it submit adequate proposals for the fruit and vegetable sector .
In this context , there are three situations that I think we must consider .
The first is the need to provide a response , to legislate on the operational funds for producers ' organisations .
It is also clearly crucial , as Mrs Ayuso González and other Members have said , for cofinancing to be raised to 70 % . Support for the workings of the operational funds must be effective .
Secondly , we must be aware that establishing the operational funds as the main agricultural policy instrument for the sector is not enough , because there are many regions , such as Spain and Portugal , where producers ' organisations are almost non-existent , and where less than 10 % of production passes through such organisations .
We must come up with measures that respond to the needs of producers in these areas and , until producers ' organisations are in place there , it would be unfair and unacceptable to marginalise them .
Thirdly , Commissioner , it is high time that we adopted permanent support measures for nut producers .
Why not consider direct aid ?
If almost all sectors are given such aid , why should this sector , which is so poor and so marginalised within Europe , not be given support ?
I hope that the Commission will rapidly submit the proposals that we are calling for .
Mr President , the motion for a resolution on the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables , especially dried fruit and nuts , is most opportune and we should give it our full support .
The present economic climate has dangerously upset the delicate competitive balance for Community producers in this sector and the Commission needs to react immediately in order to prevent them from going under altogether .
We are all aware of the importance of this sector , of which previous speakers have painted a dramatic picture .
The facts of the matter , and the present economic climate which I referred to earlier are as follows , especially for our products .
As you know , the devaluation of the Turkish lira , on the one hand , and the particularly aggressive policy of other producers , such as the USA , on the other , have put Community producers in a most unfortunate position .
So what are we proposing in order to help the Commission ? That programmes and aid which are about to expire be extended and that urgent , effective support be given to Community producers and ways be found of supporting producers , especially in the present economic climate .
I also want to point out , as other speakers have done , that the producers of these products , especially dried fruit and nuts , are small , poor producers and , more specifically , Mediterranean producers .
Their organisations fall short when it comes to pooling their products and competing with their own resources on this difficult market , as I mentioned earlier .
So what we want , in addition to any other measures , is for special attention to be paid to producer organisations and for ways to be found of supporting them , so that they can organise themselves efficiently and deal with the problem .
So I too am adamant .
We must vote in favour of this motion for a resolution and we want the Commission to respond to this concern on our part .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are all aware of the economic , social and strategic importance of the fruit and vegetable sector , particularly for the countries of southern Europe , including Portugal . It is therefore crucial that the Commission draws up a reform of the common organisation of the market in this area , given that the last reform was carried out in 1996 .
The Commission must put right the most negative aspects of this COM , such as those concerning nuts , the sector 's poor relation , and increase the aid ceilings for operational funds for producers ' organisations .
It is unfair that a sector such as that of fruit and vegetables should continue to receive only 4 % of Community aid when it creates more employment in the European Union than almost any other sector .
It is , therefore , crucial that the Commission takes account of the proposals presented last year in the Jové Peres report , which were adopted by this Parliament , specifically in terms of increasing production thresholds and levels of support , in terms of increasing co ­ financing of the operational fund for producers ' organisations and in terms of safeguarding this important sector of agriculture , which is also suffering from the pressure of imports . These are the result of bilateral agreements in which this sector has sometimes been used as a bargaining chip , with no account being taken of the interests of the southern countries or of the importance that it has for employment and for the development of these countries .
Mr President , a number of Members have raised the question why the Commission has not brought forward some proposals concerning the report .
The Commission is still in the process of listening to opinions and comments .
However , as I mentioned previously , the Commission 's services are already well into the process of evaluating these opinions .
The comments of Parliament are , of course , included in this evaluation .
It is too early to say when any possible proposals and solutions might be presented .
The Commission cannot issue a calendar of any steps ahead .
Many factors are involved , including budgetary aspects and the need to harmonise future policies between market sectors .
I can , however , assure you once again that the Commission services are considering this issue as a priority .
It hopes to move as soon as possible to a situation whereby full discussions can be held with all interested parties in the fruit and vegetable sector .
Regarding the question as to whether the Commission will propose a long-term solution for nuts , the Commission services are aware of the situation in the nut sector and the points of view of all interested parties .
In this context , the Commission is in the process of evaluating whether and to what extent some further support may be available .
This evaluation process is taking place in the wider context of the report .
In any case , any possible future support could only be envisaged if coupled with reconversion .
However , the policy of a one-year stop-gap extension of nut improvement plans does not seem , to the Commission , to be an appropriate way of addressing this particular issue .
The most needed adjustments to the 1996 reform were , in fact , ensured by the adoption in December last year of Regulation 2699 / 2000 .
With this regulation , we simplified and improved the schemes for financing of operational funds , for processed tomatoes , peaches , pears and citrus fruits and also addressed the question relating to export refunds .
Finally , a number of Members asked some technical questions dealing with the different mechanisms of the common market organisation for fruit and vegetables and I hope that you will accept that this is not , of course , within my own daily responsibilities .
I would prefer to leave these questions to my colleague , Franz Fischler .
It has not been possible for Commissioner Fischler to be here tonight , but he has informed me that he would be very pleased to discuss these issues with you in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development at the earliest opportunity .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I have received one joint motion for a resolution , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
International Civil Aviation Organisation ( ICAO ) : Air transport and the environment
The next item is the Commission statement on the International Civil Aviation Organisation ( ICAO ) : Air transport and the environment .
Mr de Palacio has the floor on behalf of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission ' s communication of last December on the Community objectives for the 33rd Assembly of the ICAO , constitutes - and how could it not do so - the frame of reference for preparing and assessing the results of that 33rd Assembly , with regard to both reducing noise and the sound emissions of aircraft and also reducing gas emissions .
I would like to say that the Transport Council of last April saw fit to support this strategy proposed by the Commission .
This communication is very explicit on the subject of reaching agreements within the ICAO , with regard to both the reduction of aircraft noise and measures for reducing gases which increase the greenhouse effect , as well as the restriction of operations of aircraft which only marginally comply with the acoustic standards of Chapter 3 and which are the greatest sources of noise at airports .
Another of our objectives is to reach an agreement as a result of this Assembly , with a resolution which allows the contracting countries to fulfil their obligations in the field of reducing greenhouse gases more easily and comfortably .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is one aspect which we can already say is likely to have a positive result at the ICAO Assembly .
I am , of course , talking about the constitution of the new Chapter 4 , with a reduction of 10 decibels on the maximum emissions authorised in previous chapters .
In this respect , furthermore , the ICAO Council has adopted rules which guarantee rigour in relation to the recertification of aircraft with the aim of preventing repetition of the current situation where recertified or reclassified aircraft have passed from Chapter 2 to Chapter 3 , which is the source of all our controversy with the United States .
Furthermore , the preparations by the ICAO Assembly are intended to ensure that the contracting countries are sufficiently flexible to implement those instruments which allow - in the words of the ICAO - a balanced response to noise management .
This balanced management is based on four elements . Firstly , measures for the reduction of noise at source .
Secondly , rules relating to the occupation of land .
Thirdly , lower-noise procedures , which allow pilots to limit noise at the time of take-off and landing .
And , lastly , measures intended to limit the operations of aircraft from Chapter 3 which are the noisiest .
It is , above all , this last point which - as you know - presents the most difficulties in our discussions with the United States .
In order to facilitate an agreement within the ICAO on this point , we are holding parallel discussions with the United States and with the developing countries .
It should be pointed out that neither the ICAO nor , of course , the United States can ignore the problems caused by aircraft noise for many airports in densely-populated regions .
In this context , we note that , in some large airports , this type of noise disturbance is reaching truly critical levels and that , therefore , it is extremely urgent that we introduce measures to resolve this situation and allow these airports to continue operating .
For others , however , the problem of noise is much less important .
We will therefore have to consider decisions - we are working on this - in which there is a certain flexibility , taking each airport individually .
Furthermore , this point is going to make it easier for us to reach an agreement with the United States .
However , there is a certain degree of risk caused by using certain differing approaches to restricting the operability of Chapter 3 aircraft - the noisiest ones - which may distort competition between the different airports .
In this respect and in order to prevent an explosion of the Community situation , the intention is to negotiate with the United States and , of course , within the ICAO , so that we can frame these individual decisions for each airport within a general framework which lays down different levels of operative restrictions in accordance with specific areas of sensitivity .
In any event , I once again commit myself and the Commission services to maintaining an open dialogue throughout these months with this House and I hope that we will finally reach an agreement within the ICAO which will ensure that we resolve this issue of airports and the noisiest aircraft and , at the same time , avoid any type of confrontation with the United States , which would benefit no-one .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , I should like to start by welcoming the initiative by Vice-President de Palacio in deciding to attend plenary and present the Commission 's strategy to us and , of course , the situation as regards the 33rd assembly of the ICAO in September .
This was one of the matters discussed at our committee meeting last week ; it is a matter which has concerned the European Parliament for a very long time and we , the committee , had intended to put an oral question to the Commissioner .
That is why we are delighted that the Commissioner herself has taken the initiative and come to address Parliament and clarify the Commission 's stance .
This is a matter of vital importance to the electorate which put us here .
For the sake of the environment and for the sake of our quality of life we need to reduce the noise emitted by aeroplanes , especially as air traffic is increasing and the situation is getting worse year on year .
There have been some developments , which the Commissioner has described for us and on which I should like to comment .
I must say that I personally have reservations as to whether these developments can bring about a positive result .
However , we must be resolute and we must demonstrate that Europe is on an equal footing with the United States of America .
We are friends and we want to remain friends , but they must realise that they have an equal partner on the other side of the table who wants to resolve this problem the best way possible and find rules which will be applied as quickly as possible .
And I trust that the United States will take the same approach and speak with one voice and not several voices as has been the case in the past .
We also need to clarify another point , i.e. that we are calling for an international solution because this is an international problem and international problems require international solutions .
We are here to talk .
We hope that they take the same view . Otherwise circumstances will force us , the European Parliament , to take unilateral action and adopt solutions already adopted by the European Parliament .
The 33rd assembly of the ICAO is an opportunity which we must make good use of and not allow to slip through our fingers .
For our part , I should like to say that the European Parliament - and I think I speak for most of the members now - has confidence in Mrs de Palacio 's ability to negotiate on behalf of the European Union and I trust that we shall finally reach a result at this assembly which will resolve the matter once and for all .
Mr President , Commissioner , many thanks for the explanation you have given here in the plenary sitting , although I believe that the meeting of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism was better attended than this sitting .
But anyway , a symbolic presence counts for something as well , of course .
I am left with a few questions .
Chapter 4 is sound , except for 10 db , which is excellent .
It appears that the re-certification or shifting of aircraft between categories has been regulated .
If I have understood you correctly , it is now impossible to have a repeat of what we have experienced in the past , namely a shift from category 2 to category 3 .
That is now ruled out , if I understand you correctly .
I welcome this .
We must at least ensure that it is impossible to make changes for the worse at any airport .
The situation must not be worse than it is at present at any airport .
As you yourself said that the sensitive areas should be examined for each airport , things should therefore start to improve quickly , preferably as soon as possible , for a number of airports .
But my question is , then , whether the agreements for classifying airports apply worldwide ?
Who lays down the standards ?
Does the European Union have a say in this ?
Can we be stricter ? How do we go about this ?
What is happening about competition between airports ?
When we discussed Mrs Lucas ' report , we then stated that competition was one of the key points .
Competition between airports at the expense of those living near airports and the environment is unacceptable .
Do you know yet how we will tackle this in the Union ?
What will be the role of the local authorities ?
You stated that that would be done via the Planning department , but that is typically a local power .
So how will you tackle this ?
As you can see , I have quite a few questions .
Then there is the phase-out .
If I have understood correctly , we have not yet accomplished this , and airport classification should help solve that problem .
If there is no phase-out , in other words if those chapter-3 aircraft remain in the air until they reach retirement age , if I can put it that way , is that not too long ?
Should we not be somewhat more ambitious and introduce new aircraft onto the market more quickly ?
What is the state of play on a uniform method of measuring noise ?
Surely it is a matter of extreme urgency for both Europe and America to measure noise in the same way , in other words for the ' footprint ' to be determined in the same manner everywhere .
I also have a question on air pollution .
You have said very little on this matter .
What is stipulated in the air pollution agreement ?
One final question : what is happening with the directive on hushkits ?
Is it being repealed ?
Will you be making a proposal to revoke it , or will we simply retain it ?
Have the Americans commented on this at all ?
Does it or does it not form part of the package ?
I am still left with a few questions , but I believe we are on the right track .
I hope that we can in any case find a solution in September .
Mr President , I very much appreciate the Commissioner 's statement .
I believe we are all agreed that the forthcoming ICAO general assembly meeting is going to be a key one as far as aviation and environment are concerned .
As Mr Sterckx has said , I was the rapporteur for Parliament 's response to the Commission 's proposals on air transport and the environment last year .
You may recall that Parliament put a very strong emphasis on the need for a positive outcome from this ICAO meeting .
We said , crucially , that if ICAO did not deliver what we need then the EU will have to seriously consider adopting its own complementary measures to ensure that environmental concerns are more properly integrated into the aviation industry .
Let us recall just two key points of the context of those discussions .
First , air transport is growing at a phenomenal rate , with global passenger numbers due to double in less than 20 years ' time .
Secondly , the current policy framework artificially subsidises aviation and therefore stimulates this growth still further .
Aviation fuel is not taxed , it is not subject to VAT and it is not covered by the Kyoto Protocol .
So what does Parliament expect from this ICAO meeting ?
On noise reduction : at the Cape Working Group meetings over the past few weeks and months the EU has proposed phasing out Chapter 3 planes and upgrading Chapter 4 .
That is a minimum requirement : to try to reach the target of noise reduction of , at best , -14 dBA , but at the very least , -10 dBA reduction at source .
If ICAO cannot do that , we will need to look at differentiation , as the Commissioner has said , in introducing operational restrictions on Chapter 3 at a number of noise-sensitive airports .
But the EU may also need to look at introducing an aircraft noise limitation directive in order to achieve that reduction of , at the very least , 10 dBA , in recognition of the particular problems of a densely populated area like the EU .
On emissions , we need concrete and efficient measures to reduce aircraft emissions , including not only voluntary measures but also emissions-related levies .
Aircraft should fulfil ambitious but feasible emission reduction targets .
If ICAO will not deliver then the EU will have to develop its own emission limits .
I very much regret that we are not able to have a Parliamentary resolution on this subject .
I believe a strong message from this Parliament could have strengthened the negotiating hand of the Council and Commission at ICAO .
I hope that both Council and Commission will hear very strongly the strength of feeling which is shared by all groups in the European Parliament on this subject and seek to get the best possible deal in September .
But if such a deal cannot be struck , they must come back to Parliament so that we can work together to ensure that the EU 's own treaty commitments and obligations on integrating the environment into all areas of policy can take proper effect in the field of aviation .
Mr President , it is true that we need an international breakthrough in terms of the ICAO .
If we accomplish this breakthrough , I will be the first to extend my best wishes to Mrs de Palacio in this connection .
Given that the noise certification standards have not been adapted since 1977 and that aviation has expanded so enormously since then , I believe it to be of huge importance that we agree on a drastic approach very quickly .
We must introduce modern , quiet aircraft which meet stricter noise standards , phase out noisy aircraft and , needless to say , reduce the emission of greenhouse gases .
In the light of this , it is my conviction that there is no room for supersonic aircraft which may fly at an enormous speed but use up far more energy than the current aircraft , thus contributing to more greenhouse-gas emissions .
In my opinion , it is of vital importance for us to continue in the same vein , along the lines of the resolution on aircraft fitted with silencers , which we adopted in March 2000 .
I wish the Commissioner great success in the negotiations .
We will continue to follow the proceedings at close quarters for , if no solution is found , we will unfortunately need to act at European level , which I do not consider to be desirable .
Mr President , I very much appreciated the Commissioner 's speech .
She showed clear conviction and also a certain amount of grit and determination in such a sensitive matter as this .
Of course , it is not possible in the three minutes available to me to analyse the entire issue , so I will focus on just a few points .
Firstly : the improvement of aircraft .
Clearly , less noisy aircraft means more modern aircraft and more comfortable aircraft , but , most importantly , it means safer aircraft , and not just in terms of the engines : in fact , for example , during landing , a large part of the noise is made by the landing gear rather than the engines .
With regard to the issue of competition between airports , it is undoubtedly necessary to give responsibility to local authorities as well .
Clearly , the airport authorities can be persuaded to grant derogations , to make exceptions in order to increase the volume of traffic , but if the local authorities have decision-making powers and take a stance , then it will be the communities involved who will decide the interplay between money / trade / profit and noise prevention , not just the airport managers .
On the subject of airports , the rules need to be fairly flexible for , clearly , an airport such as Malpensa , near where I live , where 70 planes take off or land an hour , is quite different from some other airports which only have four or five planes landing or taking off a day .
Obviously , if there is little movement during the day , a small increase in noise levels could be acceptable in view of the almost ridiculously small number of planes passing through .
As regards subsidies , I have to say that , although air transport is subsidised to a certain extent , it is much less so than urban , rail , sea and all other types of transport .
Therefore , it does not seem appropriate to complain about subsidies to the air transport industry .
Finally , I hope that , at the ICAO , the European Union will be able to achieve the goals and results that the Commissioner has set herself , irrespective of Parliament 's resolutions .
Commissioner , please allow me firstly to begin more or less at the end : I wish you all the luck in the world at the next ICAO Assembly .
Please count on the support and backing of Parliament , and we hope that the European Union ' s objectives on this issue are achieved .
The European Union must be at the forefront by adopting a series of measures which do not only relate to the issue of this statement on air transport and the environment , but also to its effects on the quality of life of the citizens of the European Union .
We must achieve some concrete and quantifiable objectives .
And we must also achieve a timetable which makes realistic demands .
Because otherwise , we will not achieve any of the objectives we have discussed so many times in committee relating to noise levels of aircraft , the situation - as Mrs Lucas has expressed very well - of the increase in the demand for air transport , the situation of certain airports which are not in a position to deal with the air traffic they are currently receiving , the measures proposed by you - by the Commission - such as taxes relating to noise , restrictions on the operation of certain types of aircraft within the European Union , or clear policies in relation to the use of land with regard to air transport .
A second problem which I believe to be of concern is that of gas emissions .
There is a lot of talk of the greenhouse effect , caused by CO2 , when air transport could reduce its greenhouse emissions by between two and four times ; I believe that , given the significance of this , we must take a clear and determined position in this regard .
However , at the same time , neither can we forger what air transport has meant for the development of the Communities , for the economic development of the states and also for the quality of life of the citizens , for speed and for the opportunity to visit and discover other places .
I believe that we need sensible , concrete and totally efficient measures which will genuinely improve the environment and the quality of life .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like , as a member of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , to thank you for thinking also of the competitiveness of the European aviation industry in the course of your negotiations .
The Sabena disaster just goes to show how thousands of jobs can be hit within the shortest period of time .
Finally , the costs that have to be borne by airline companies are also a decisive factor affecting ticket prices .
Ticket prices are very important for social , but not exclusively social , reasons .
The crucial problem when it comes to noise is congestion .
When we fly out of Brussels , we often see five , ten or fifteen aircraft queuing on the runway , waiting for permission to take off .
I believe that the fight against congestion in general , but particularly in the field of aviation , must be given priority and that we must make efforts to acquire more efficient systems so that such congestion can be reduced accordingly .
However , the basic and further training of personnel is also crucial , and not only in the control tower and on the aircraft .
If consideration were to be given to providing special training , specifically from the noise and environmental viewpoints , a very great deal could be achieved in this area .
Finally , it is also a question of infrastructure .
We are all aware of the problems with Eurocontrol , and enough is known about the difficulties of dividing air space efficiently between civil and military aircraft .
I believe the Commission should exercise significantly more pressure so that we might more quickly find successful ways of getting on top of congestion and , at the same time , guaranteeing passengers greater safety and comfort .
My final point is that the Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Development is currently being drawn up .
I consider it necessary to press very hard for a solution for the traffic sector in particular .
In this area , we need new approaches in the Sixth Framework Programme .
We know that congestion will be one of the main themes of the next few years .
I believe we need intelligent solutions that will help us guarantee the mobility of the population and , at the same time , get on top of the problems .
With a view to being able to offer the population convincing solutions in this area , we should therefore do more to initiate our own research programmes specifically for aviation in the context of the Sixth Framework Programme .
Mr President , I should like to apologise for coming in late ; this debate has proceeded rather quickly but I have listened to what the Commissioner said elsewhere .
What she said did not appear very clear or precise at all in terms of the situation as it stands .
I find that disappointing .
We gave you a brief in March 2000 .
We expect you to stick to the brief or to come back and tell us something different .
We need to know what progress you have made with that brief .
We need to know what you are doing about it .
We need to know what progress has been made on noise emissions , gaseous emissions , and indeed on fuel economy .
Successful negotiation requires preparation and hard work .
We need to know that is being done and we need to hear from you that it is being done .
We need you to go out there and tell the Americans very clearly that noise and gaseous emissions from aircraft are a serious problem in Europe , a more serious problem than in the USA because we are a smaller place and we have a different infrastructure .
The projected growth of air traffic demands is clearly an issue that requires action now .
We need you to stick to your brief .
We will be watching very closely .
But essentially we need our Commissioner to stand up for Europe , to stand up for Europe and its industry , to stand up for Europe and its environment and to stand up for Europe and its people .
We expect you do it .
Let us hope that you can say something further at the end of the debate that will reassure me .
Mr President , if I could echo other colleagues from all parties and indeed national groups who have said that the time for talking is now perilously short .
We all , Commissioner , whilst saluting the way in which you have maintained your negotiating position , expect you to tell us that it is not indefinite - and neither is your patience .
You have a mandate from every party and group in this House to tackle the problem of the increasing pollution of the skies and the damage to the lives of those who live around airports as a result of the current situation .
There is a belief still that the endless expansion of air traffic is an unmitigated good , that everyone gains from it .
They do not .
There are social limits to growth and to how much we can enjoy even something as life expanding and enhancing as travel .
We heard many threats and some bluster from the United States last year , when it looked as though hushkitted aircraft and Chapter 3 planes would be leaving our skies , perhaps in the year 2002 .
But Europe as a whole suffers problems , particularly those who live around airports who suffer not only noise pollution , but also aircraft emission pollution with consequences for the environment .
We must see the beginning of change .
In the East Midlands of the United Kingdom , where I live , a number of small new airports are coming into being .
Many of them are desperate to compete with ' through-the-night ' traffic .
This means air traffic using older aircraft , which are going to stagger on for another few years , if they are allowed to , with few controls on how they operate .
Obviously , that is something on which the Member States can act .
Unless there is a framework for taking older aircraft out of service , we will never have the degree of control we need .
I join with other colleagues who have spoken .
Mrs Lucas put it very lucidly for us all - in saying that if there is a failure to agree in September we should not just leave the matter there and agree that we tried and failed .
This House does not want the Commissioner to fail , we want her to succeed .
If we are telling her so rather bluntly , it is in a friendly spirit .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us agree on one first thing : airports are a source of wealth and development .
Otherwise , I wonder how you got here if you did not fly .
This is clear : airports are necessary .
What we clearly have to do now is create fewer problems for the surrounding community , but we also have to remember that the community often builds up around the airport because of the activity of that very airport , because of the economic development it generates and the infrastructures which accompany it .
We have to see things fairly .
The second issue is that of the responsibilities of the local authorities .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is a question of subsidiarity .
Each country has its own rules and I am not going to tell the countries what they have to do on this issue .
The third issue concerns the hushkits regulation , which was introduced and adopted in 1998 by Parliament together with the Council , unanimously .
Ladies and gentlemen , if at any point I present or propose to you a modification of this regulation , it will be to replace it with something which is even better for the communities surrounding airports . It will be in order to make improvements .
Furthermore , to do so in a way which does not lead us to controversy and international dispute as has been the case with the current regulation .
Of course , the Commission , the Community as such , is not part of the International Civil Aviation Organisation but rather it is the Member States who are members .
We have a kind of secondary position in one corner .
That is the current situation .
The regulation has been condemned by the United States in accordance with Article 84 and we succeeded in postponing the decision at the last meeting of the ICAO Council a week ago and leave until November , that is until after the assembly , the decision on whether the complaint from the United States against our hushkits regulation is justified .
We will have to wait and see the result .
I would like , together with the United States , the developing countries and the other countries which make up the ICAO , to agree on regulations which improve the characteristics of aircraft and bring about the modernisation of the fleets of the different countries as soon as possible .
There is another issue , highlighted by Mr Sterckx , Mrs Lucas and others as well such as Mr Blokland and Mr Hatzidakis and that is the renewal of the fleets .
There are two different aspects to this .
Firstly , thanks to our regulation , we have managed to move things ahead within the ICAO .
That is why I said before that we have already achieved positive results .
There is going to be a Chapter 4 with a reduction of 10 decibels .
There is not going to be an agreement on phasing-out because , until Chapter 4 enters into force , it cannot take place , as happened before with Chapters 2 and 3 .
That is to say that it will be at the 2004 assembly , surely , when we can agree dates for abandoning the Chapter 3 aircraft .
We have agreed that the methodologies and evaluation systems for a reclassification of aircraft are a key issue .
We must move beyond the current situation , with Chapter 2 aircraft reclassified as Chapter 3 , which meet the criteria of this last chapter only under certain flight regulations and furthermore in a very restricted way , which means that , in other circumstances , they greatly exceed those noise levels and do not comply with the rules of Chapter 3 .
That is the origin of our complaint about hushkits .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are seeking some points of agreement with the United States and with certain other countries , and I believe that the best thing is for us to reach an agreement amongst all of us .
Of course , I am going to defend the positions of the 15 countries of the European Union .
However , I would like to remind you of the situation a year ago , when the pressure - which is now less , amongst other things because we are negotiating and it seems that we are reaching agreement on some points - from the United States was much greater and there were threats of trade reprisals against a number of countries .
This pressure came from various countries , delegations of countries and also various representatives in this House .
I do not want to find myself in that kind of situation again , because it was clearly me who was taking the strain .
What I want is to reach an agreement with the United States which will allow us to achieve the objective we all share of reducing the noise levels around our airports .
That is what I am working on , but I am also seeking agreements with other countries , because the ICAO does not only include the 15 countries of the Union but also the United States and a number of other countries from other parts of the world which have rather different interests from ours and with whom we have to reach agreements .
A further two issues have been referred to : the issue of competition between airports , the noisiest ones and the quietest ones .
That is why we are proposing to take decisions on individual airports on a case by case basis , within a global framework in which the different levels of restriction of operations and noise-levels are reduced to two , three or four in accordance with the specific areas of sensitivity of the surrounding community .
There are certain geographic conditions - I am thinking , for example , of Strasbourg airport , where there is a problem of boxing-in between mountains and phenomena of echoes are produced which aggravate noise problems - and other issues which justify the adaptations and specific measures for protection of these areas .
We are suggesting that decisions be taken individually , which is what the United States is calling for , or that a general regional geographical approximation be carried out , as we are requesting .
The intermediate solution which we are negotiating with them is a geographical framework with a maximum of 3 or 4 levels of sensitivity .
A situation without special limitations and another two or three levels of specific operational restrictions .
Mr President , I will end by thanking all the speakers and thanking you for your support , with the hope that it might be possible for a delegation from Parliament to participate in the ICAO , alongside us .
I believe that there may be a common interest in incorporating a parliamentary delegation into the debates , and we will have to see how we could articulate it according to what happens in other types of negotiations .
It has been pointed out by one speaker that air transport has its limits .
Ladies and gentlemen , everything has its limits .
We all know that airspace is limited , capacities are limited , but I believe that , as things stand , we have not yet reached that point .
What we have to do is achieve better management of all resources , specifically in relation to these transport limits , not just in the case of air transport but of transport in general , with growth possibilities within a sustainable development . I hope that , if things go well and we get through the internal discussions within the Commission , in the coming weeks we will be able to begin to discuss the White Paper on transport where , amongst other things , we propose the high-speed train as an alternative to air transport for journeys of less than 800 or 900 kilometres .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was closed at 7.59 p.m. )
European Council meeting of 15-16 June 2001 in Göteborg - Swedish presidency
The next item is the joint debate on :
the European Council report and Commission statement on the European Council meeting of 15 and 16 June 2001 in Göteborg and
the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council , summing up the Swedish presidency .
It is my pleasure to give the floor to the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Persson .
Madam President , honourable Members of this important Assembly , allow me to begin first of all by thanking you for your constructive cooperation during the Swedish presidency .
It is important for the European Union ' s different institutions to support , inspire , criticise and cooperate with one another but never forget that we have a common mission to develop our Union .
The Swedish presidency ' s objective was to proceed from important decisions to the implementation of those decisions .
Our ambition was not to add new decisions but , rather , to implement decisions already taken .
We wanted to concentrate on three areas , which I had the opportunity to talk about when I was in Parliament at the beginning of the presidency .
These were enlargement of the Union and issues relating to employment and the environment .
In addition , we wanted to develop the Union ' s common foreign and security policy .
I make no claim to provide a comprehensive review of the Swedish presidency in my report . Instead , I would offer some reflections upon the last six months .
We have worked incredibly hard with the Commission in order to press on with the enlargement negotiations .
The objective of this work was to show that the timetable drawn up by the Commission for the enlargement negotiations was realistic .
We can now see that , during the Swedish presidency , we did everything we intended to do , and a little more besides .
The very ambitious timetable drawn up by the Commission proved to be realistic .
This was the basis for the European Council in Göteborg when we said that , in our judgment , we should have completed negotiations with the best prepared countries before the end of 2002 and that we also anticipated the first of today ' s candidate countries ' participating , as Members of the European Union , in the elections to the European Parliament in 2004 .
We were given a clear signal concerning the enlargement we wanted to see .
We were given this because the negotiating work had been successful .
This does not , of course , mean that the enlargement process has been carried out , but an important step has been taken .
What is required is continued concentration and continued support for the Commission ' s work and for the forthcoming presidencies , but also an appreciation of the fact that many of the difficulties represented by the enlargement process are , in fact , to be found within the European Union as it stands and not in relations with the candidate countries .
The most demanding task for us within the European Union is to work out common positions for the fifteen Member States .
There is a further demanding task .
Our friends and colleagues in the candidate countries have the task of implementing reforms in their countries of such a kind as will prepare them for membership of the European Union .
We must not forget , however , that we ourselves have to conduct an internal debate within the Union which , from a political perspective , is probably as difficult as the reforms which our friends have to implement in the candidate countries .
We said in Göteborg that enlargement would be a fact by 2004 .
To cite the French President ' s description of the project , it is an irrevocable process .
At the same time , we also said that we must be realistic and appreciate that there are certain countries , such as Romania and Bulgaria , which need extra support in their preparations .
We are not talking here about extra financial support , but about support in the work of negotiation .
When Sweden took over the presidency , it was also our ambition to develop the foreign and security policy .
We did not , however , emphasise this so much in our presidency programme , even though we mentioned it .
Instead , we adopted the strategy of taking action .
I am convinced that what we have managed to achieve in terms of foreign policy will be something that develops during forthcoming presidencies , for such development is to the European Union ' s advantage when it comes to external relations .
I am thinking , above all , of three important factors .
Increasingly , practical foreign policy is linked , firstly , to values , democracy and human rights ; secondly , to economic relations , especially trade ; and , thirdly , to a just and progressive aid policy , to which , from our point of view , it will continue to be linked .
This last consideration is something to which we devote too little time and attention .
It is an undervalued factor in external relations .
These three factors indicate a development parallel to that of the European Union .
If we are then able to act in concert on the basis of our values , we can also exercise influence .
During the Swedish presidency , we have developed our relations with Russia .
Not for a moment have we concealed our disapproval of the situation in , for example , Chechnya .
Never have we concealed our views on the situation in Russia where the freedom of the media is concerned , but we have , at the same time , developed relations in order to create economic cooperation and a dialogue characterised by trust .
We have also said that Russia is not enough .
Russia is just one important factor .
In that part of Europe , it is also a question of developing relations with Ukraine , which is a large , strategically important country with a European identity and which must have the option of belonging to Europe .
According to the Göteborg conclusions , Ukraine is a country which , together with Moldova , will , in future , be invited to participate in the European conference .
In that way , the European Union is also developing a relationship specifically in terms of foreign policy .
During our presidency , we also met the American president for the first time in the group of Fifteen .
The fifteen Member States took part in a dialogue directly with the American president , just as we had met the Russian president .
In that context , there was naturally a great deal of talk about the Kyoto issue , about which we most certainly do not , of course , have the same views - a fact which there was no point at all in concealing .
On the contrary , there is reason for conducting a very open and tough debate , because we believe that the United States is not complying with those obligations it had earlier sent signals it was prepared to stand by .
I am pleased that the European Union remained completely united in its dialogue with the United States about Kyoto .
That was incredibly important .
Relations with the United States are not just about Kyoto .
They are also , of course , about the situations in the Balkans and the Middle East and other international issues on which we hold similar positions and have every reason to cooperate .
During the Swedish presidency , the European Union ' s active presence in the Middle East has also , of course , been emphasised .
That is important .
The Middle East is the European Union ' s neighbour .
If the crisis in the Middle East escalates further - and we can , of course , all see that there is a very great risk of this happening - it will also become our own crisis , which is something that must be prevented using every political means available .
Where the Middle East is concerned , too , this has been an extraordinarily active period from the points of view of the presidency , the Commission and also Secretary-General / High Representative Javier Solana .
In this way , a list can be made of foreign policy activities .
Think too of North and South Korea , where the peace process must continue and be brought to a conclusion .
The European Union , too , might be able to play a role there in the right circumstances .
A picture is emerging of a European Union which is becoming more and more active in the field of foreign policy because we stand for common values , common views and a common approach .
When we act together , we exercise influence .
That is the signal .
Enlargement , foreign policy and environmental issues - these issues were incredibly important to the Swedish presidency .
The Commission and Commissioner Wallström provided us with a very good basis in the form of the Sixth Environmental Action Programme and , subsequently , the Commission ' s report on sustainable development .
In Göteborg , we were able to establish principles for dealing with environmental issues in the future .
We were able to establish that these processes must now also be integrated into the Lisbon process . In that way , we were able to take a decisive step towards sustainable development in its three dimensions : economic , social and ecological .
That was an extraordinarily sound foundation provided by the Commission and each successive presidency and Commission must now make that foundation more secure and give it ever more practical expression .
Perhaps matters are not progressing quickly enough .
It is my feeling that they never do when it comes to the issue of the environment .
On the other hand , we have the processes .
We have a direction in which to move , and the first necessary political decisions have been taken .
I believe that the decision taken in Göteborg was an extraordinarily important one .
Obviously , we also discussed the economic issues in Göteborg .
We dealt with a number of the decisions which had , as it were , been left over from the Stockholm Summit - European Single Sky , the issues surrounding patents , general economic development , the demographic issue and lasting pension systems .
Also on the agenda were matters which do not , of course , give rise to such a very great deal of opposition within the European Union today but , rather , provide something of an impetus for working together on issues which we know will , in actual fact , be of crucial importance to people ' s lives in our part of the world during the next 20-30 years .
We have also had occasion , during our presidency , to pilot through to the decision-making stage a proposal concerning transparency in the European Union and the accessibility of documents .
Let me say that it would not have been possible to arrive at that decision but for the very active support of Parliament .
This is an excellent example of how Parliament , together with the Council and also the Commission , can implement a change .
I am obviously not completely satisfied .
We could have gone further but , as in all political contexts , not everything is achieved .
We obtained a compromise along the right lines .
It made the European Union more open , but it was not the finished product .
I should like to see the debate continue , but our citizens are nonetheless now better placed to keep track of the things we are doing in the Union and , on objective grounds , to examine these critically and present alternatives - on objective grounds , I say , precisely because the information is available .
During the Swedish presidency , we have also begun the debate on the future .
It will dominate the Belgian presidency and will , when 2004 comes around , result in a major decision being taken .
The guidelines from Nice have been assigned , that is to say what will mainly be found within the framework of the debate .
Now , both you and I know that , in a debate on the future of the European Union , we shall not be satisfied with concentrating on the four issues we cited in Nice . Instead , there will be a broader debate .
Let it be just such a broad debate .
Let it be a debate on what the European Union is , in actual fact , aiming for and on what it wants to do , and let there then be a discussion on how this is to be achieved .
We must not always begin with a discussion on building and developing the institutions and then eventually conclude with the political discussion on what it is we want .
Turn the debate on its head : invite the people of Europe to take part , broaden the debate and do not set any limits to it .
Progressively structure the debate as a proper Intergovernmental Conference aimed at making the European Union more rational and more powerful .
Our ambition was to launch a broad debate , and that is something we have done .
As I said at the beginning , we in the Swedish presidency have taken great pains to cooperate with Parliament .
I was doing some totting up yesterday and worked out that Swedish ministers have taken part in debates and discussions in this Assembly or in other constellations associated with Parliament on 86 occasions .
It has been incredibly worthwhile for us , and it is something I want to thank you for .
I also want to say that we now believe we have obtained a breakthrough with the Members ' Charter and can press for a solution to that issue .
That is the way it looks following an initial decision .
I am pleased that , when we talk about Parliament and relations between the presidency and Parliament , we can also say that we have received a great many good ideas and proposals from yourselves .
Finally , I want to thank all the officials in the Commission , in Parliament and in the Council who have supported us during the presidency .
Naturally , I am also deeply grateful towards my own colleagues in the Swedish Cabinet Office and Ministries who have enabled us to say , as we draw the Swedish presidency to a close , that we have made some progress .
In the course of our six months , we took a few steps in the direction we wanted to go .
I now hope that the Belgian presidency will do some further work on these major issues .
I intend to do what I can to help ensure that my colleague , Mr Verhofstadt , is given all the constructive support he needs , in exactly the same way as I , during the Swedish presidency , have had extraordinarily fine support from Mr Chirac and Mr Jospin , the French president and prime minister .
This was an absolute precondition for the success of our presidency and I am deeply grateful for it .
Finally , I want to say that , as our various parliaments around Europe enter their summer recess , there is an issue which I think we have to take away with us , namely the issue which , in all likelihood , is to be a feature of the debate about the future : that of how we are to make the European Union more open and more results-oriented and of how it is to be brought closer to our citizens .
How is this to happen ?
What is that development to look like ?
What is possible in an enlarged Union ?
The Union will grow .
That is something we now know following this presidency .
It will grow and become a large Union with perhaps a further five , ten or perhaps still more Member States both in this Parliament and in the European Council .
Thank you for your constructive cooperation .
I look forward to a continued relationship with the European Parliament .
Madam President , Prime Minister , honourable Members of the European Parliament , I naturally want to begin by thanking you for giving me the opportunity to come here and present the Commission ' s assessment of the European Council meeting in Göteborg .
This meeting too was , in the end , about issues of widely differing kinds .
Two decisions merit particular attention because they will advance European integration and shape policy in the medium and long term .
I therefore want to concentrate on these two decisions in my presentation in this chamber .
First of all , the European Council has given us a fixed timetable for the first round of enlargement .
It should be possible for negotiations with those candidate countries that are ready to be completed at the end of next year .
The new Member States will therefore be able to participate as fully fledged Members in the elections to the European Parliament in 2004 .
Secondly , the European Council gave its support to a strategy for sustainable development .
This strategy involves the European Union ' s undertaking to take certain measures to ensure that it will be possible for prosperity in Europe and the rest of the world to be maintained in the long term too .
Through the Lisbon process , the environment has ended up at the centre of our policy .
These are important and practical decisions that the Commission welcomes .
The violence on the streets of Göteborg I was also there and saw it with my own eyes - must not overshadow the important political decisions taken in Göteborg .
We all condemn the violence , for stones can never replace arguments .
Nor do they reflect people ' s interests , either in the Member States or in the candidate countries .
I should like to begin by commenting on the summit ' s decisions on enlargement .
The European Council drew the following conclusion , and I quote : ' Provided that progress towards meeting the accession criteria continues at an unabated pace , the road map should make it possible to complete negotiations by the end of 2002 for those candidate countries that are ready .
The objective is that they should participate in the European Parliament elections of 2004 as members ' .
The European Union ' s commitment to receiving new members has never been expressed more clearly or more precisely than in Göteborg .
The process is now irrevocable .
The Union is ready to meet the challenge of enlargement .
In Göteborg , more details were provided of the timetable sketched out in the conclusions from the Nice Summit .
In that way , it has become a realistic possibility that the negotiations with those States that have progressed furthest will be completed at the end of next year , and the objective has been set of their being able to participate in the elections to the European Parliament in 2004 .
The Commission ' s timetable for the negotiations has therefore proved to be realistic .
The Swedish presidency ' s extraordinary way of handling the agenda and its determined way of conducting the negotiations has contributed significantly to this result .
The prospects for a successful conclusion to the negotiations are now better than ever .
The negotiations will continue in accordance with those principles that have been established : the candidate countries will be judged solely on the basis of their own merits ; the negotiations must take place separately for each country ; and those countries which entered into the negotiations at the beginning of 2000 must be given an opportunity to catch up .
We want to be clear on this point : the enlargement process can only succeed if there is enough political support .
The negotiations must therefore be conducted with a certain flexibility so that the candidate countries ' wishes and concerns may be taken into account .
Consideration must be given to the social price which people in the candidate countries will have to pay .
We cannot make unreasonable demands upon the candidate countries when it comes to the financial burden involved for them in adopting EU standards .
On 15 May , President Prodi presented the Commission ' s proposals for a strategy of sustainable development to you here in Parliament .
Today , we are pleased to be able to note that the European Council supports a strategy of sustainable development for the European Union .
Certainly , the meeting was unable to agree to all the individual measures and objectives listed by the Commission in its communication .
Nonetheless , the Göteborg conclusions provide clear indications of the direction in which the European Council wants our policy - and our society - to develop .
The conclusions also include a challenge to the Council to examine the individual proposals from the Commission .
According to the Brundtland Commission ' s definition , sustainable development is a ' development meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs ' .
The Göteborg Summit means that the European Union is making significant progress along these lines .
The Göteborg conclusions emphasise firstly that we must become better at framing our policy : We must get to grips with conflicting interests , or policy inconsistencies , in a considered and open way instead of ignoring them .
We must strive for a policy which can meet quite a few different objectives at the same time .
We must weigh immediate needs against the long-term consequences of decisions and their impact outside the EU .
That applies to all the institutions of the European Union .
The European Council has called upon them to improve the coordination of domestic policy in different sectors .
The most important decision in this context was the decision to supplement the Lisbon strategy with an environmental dimension .
As from next year , sustainable development will be a permanent item on the agenda of the European Council ' s spring meetings .
That is important progress .
The process has been established , and the Commission will prepare for this annual review with a comprehensive report .
From a political perspective , this means that the environmental dimension of sustainable development has now been accorded the same dignity as the economic and social issues .
The Lisbon process has become still more important by having now become the framework for work on promoting all the dimensions of sustainable development .
The European Council also noted that , in its plan of measures for better legislation - to be submitted to the European Council meeting in Laeken - the Commission will introduce mechanisms whereby all important political proposals will contain an assessment of how sustainability will be affected .
The Council also emphasised the importance of enabling parties who are affected to participate .
In the forthcoming white paper on administration , we shall be tabling practical proposals for improving consultation with parties affected .
The Member States are called upon to devise their own national strategies for sustainable development .
It is obviously an important task for MEPs , too , to follow this up in their respective Member States .
These are important decisions because sustainable development can scarcely be achieved if there are no effective procedures or effective decision making to guarantee consistent , long-term policy .
Secondly , the European Council has , in line with the Commission ' s proposal , drawn attention to four priority areas for sustainable development .
These areas supplement the Lisbon programme ' s economic and social objectives .
First of all , climate change .
This is one of the most serious problems of our age .
The Kyoto Protocol is a first step towards getting to grips with this problem .
As you know , the EU is doing its utmost right now to try to rescue the protocol .
Climate change entails enormous costs for ourselves and the rest of the world .
The greatest cost of all is borne by those who live in poor countries .
At the same time , climate policy provides financial opportunities for more efficient energy use , as well as opportunities - if taken proper advantage of - for the use of cleaner , renewable energy sources .
Secondly : public health .
This is threatened by , for example , accumulations of chemicals in the environment and the ever more widespread resistance to antibiotics .
This is an area which affects people directly and which is of concern to our citizens .
Thirdly , the waste of natural resources and reduced biological diversity .
Fourthly , the transport system .
If this is to function in the long term , then limits must be placed upon traffic congestion , the increase in the amount of traffic and the effects upon the environment .
These four areas demand decisive leadership and rapid intervention .
The policy proposals presented by the Commission in its communication are still relevant .
Sustainable development must be given the highest priority when the common policy is reviewed .
The European Council takes note of this fact - with particular reference to agriculture and fisheries .
A number of further specific and overarching measures and objectives for each one of these four priority areas were established at the meeting .
I want to emphasise that sustainable development must not only be focused on the problems , concerns and costs , but that it is just as much a question of innovation , investments , growth and new jobs as of environmental protection , health and quality of life .
Sustainable development as a concept and idea makes for new economic opportunities .
We are very pleased that the European Council shares this view and has emphasised this fact .
Finally : Europe also has an international responsibility for sustainable development .
The presidency ' s conclusions again highlight the European Union ' s commitment to achieving the UN ' s objectives for aid and development aid of 0.7 per cent of GNP .
At the beginning of next year , the Commission will present a communication on how the European Union is to be able to contribute globally to sustainable development .
That communication , together with the sustainable development strategy put forward in Göteborg , will be the EU ' s main contribution to the world summit on sustainable development in Johannesburg next year .
The people of Europe expect the European Union not only to look to today ' s needs but also to secure their children ' s and grandchildren ' s future .
People expect us to be involved in solving the global problems constituted by environmental damage and under-development .
That is what sustainable development is about .
The fact that the European Council in Göteborg approved a sustainable development strategy and also instituted a process for devising and implementing such a strategy therefore constitutes significant progress .
Enlargement is an historic opportunity to guarantee stability and prosperity in Europe for a long time to come .
The practical timetable established in Göteborg is therefore of the very greatest importance .
In our assessment , the European Council in Göteborg was successful and produced practical results .
The meeting marks the end of a presidency with which the Commission has cooperated well and which has done a lot , especially within my own area of responsibility .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to express my surprise that the President of the European Commission is not here today .
This is a debate about the Swedish presidency , about an important summit , and I really am amazed .
This comment is not aimed at you , Commissioner Wallström , I respect you personally and I respect your work .
However , it is not acceptable for the President of the Commission to be represented by a Member of the Commission from the country currently holding the presidency .
This is not just some kind of Swedish project , we are discussing the future of Europe .
In future I expect to see the President of the European Commission here in plenary when such important matters are being discussed .
I would first like to make a positive comment and then a critical one .
First of all , let me remind you that my group has proposed that we should conclude the accession negotiations with the first countries by autumn 2002 , so that the first countries could then participate in the June 2004 European elections .
This has been accepted by this House , by the Commission and by the European Council in Nice , and you are now saying this in an even more specific way .
I realise that there has been strong opposition to this .
However , you have been successful , and we are also grateful that a broad majority of the Swedish people is in favour of enlargement .
Mr President-in-Office , if you are right , if you do something positive , then you deserve recognition for that and I would like to express my thanks and recognition to you for having got the 2004 deadline included in the decisions taken at Göteborg .
( Applause from the centre and right )
While we are talking about the Swedish people , an extremely likeable people , I would like to express the hope - in your own interest as well , Mr President-in-Office , as the Swedish Prime Minister - that agreement to enlargement will , in future , be matched by agreement on the single European currency , so that Sweden will remain fully integrated in our European political family .
I wish that for you and for all of us , because we are a Community .
A decision by Sweden in favour of the euro is also part of this .
( Applause from the centre and right )
But now for a critical comment .
There were some tragic disturbances in Göteborg , but I do not want to judge the police 's handling of the security arrangements , because I know far too little about that .
However , I would like to comment on what you , Mr President-in-Office , said on Swedish television on 17 June .
My colleague Gunilla Carlsson , the chair of the Swedish delegation in our group , has already said something about this .
You spoke about Fascist forces .
To avoid any misunderstanding , let me say that I am most definitely in favour of resolutely fighting Fascists and right-wing extremists wherever they appear , politically speaking , and whenever they use force .
But on Thursday , during our preparatory meeting of the Group of the European People 's Party , we could see that the flags being paraded through Göteborg were red ones , and no acts of actual violence took place until the Friday to Saturday .
You could see portraits of Che Guevara and of Fidel Castro , so you cannot just say that Fascists were involved .
We also know , and I can quote a major European newspaper , that the hard core was an anti-Fascist group of left-wing revolutionaries taking belligerent and critical action against the European movement and against world trade .
We would have expected you to be just as critical of those left-wing revolutionaries who use force as we are against those on the right who resort to violence .
Europe and our legal system are too important for us to turn a blind eye .
We should not , because of superficial party interests , fail to recognise the wider importance of our democratic and constitutional system , and we should join forces against any form of violence , whichever side it comes from , from the extreme right or the extreme left , as an act of democratic solidarity .
( Applause )
Mr President-in-Office , let me make one more observation .
You have made great efforts to achieve transparency , indeed that is one of the hallmarks of Sweden , and we have made a little progress as regards publishing documents .
You can take some credit for that , but not all of it .
For example , our colleague and your fellow citizen , Charlotte Cederschiöld , has helped a lot in ensuring that we have achieved greater transparency in this regard .
We should continue to follow this path .
We also want greater cooperation with the Council of Ministers and a greater presence here in the European Parliament .
There were also some critical comments about this at the beginning , but they did not relate to Sweden , but rather to the Council of Ministers .
However , I believe that we can build on your work .
My final comment is about a positive signal : you invited the President of the Russian Federation , Mr Putin , and the American President , George Bush , to the Göteborg Summit .
It would certainly be a good thing if we in the European Parliament could also invite these two figures to visit our Parliament , perhaps in the reverse order , first President Bush and then President Putin , as our relations with America and Russia are vital for the future of the European Union .
Mr President-in-Office , it is not for me to award marks , but one Swedish newspaper asked me a few weeks ago what mark I would give if I were .
If the next Swedish presidency refrains from scoring veiled party political points and genuinely focuses on Europe 's interests , it might deserve " very good " .
I say that on behalf of all of us .
I wish Sweden a positive future in Europe .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to thank the Swedish Prime Minister , Mr Göran Persson , for once again joining us in Parliament and to say to him that in my Group ' s opinion , he has passed the test of his country ' s first presidency , with the seriousness and skill for which the Swedish government is well known .
I wish to point out that we greatly appreciate his government ' s desire to update our relations on issues as important as codecision and Council ' s presence in Parliament .
I think that we can consider the agreement on public access to documents - which could be improved , but which is an historical first - and the agreement on the information and consultation of workers , which had been on hold for many years , to be significant milestones .
I also hope , of course , that this experience will have helped imbue the Swedish people with a greater sense of affection for the European cause .
One special feature of this presidency has been its work on sustainable development , which it has not only established as a strategy for the future , but which it has also promoted through its clear and robust argument for ratifying the Kyoto Protocol . This is not only an EU-US issue , it is one that affects the whole world , as the Swedish Prime Minister and myself saw at the Council of the Socialist International last week in Lisbon .
Another fundamental issue , that of enlargement , was also an area the Swedish presidency focussed on .
I should like to thank Mr Poettering , who expressed his support for a proposal that was originally put forward by my colleague , the vice-chairman of our Group , Mr Hänsch .
The proposal was not the exclusive property of the PPE-DE Group ; it could be said that it came from Parliament as a whole .
With regard to external policy , Sweden maintained its internationalist approach .
I feel that where the Middle East is concerned , not only was there a European majority behind the proposal in the Mitchell report , but also , for the first time , we are not only handing over money , we are also playing a leading role , as the Prime Minister pointed out .
His presence with Javier Solana in the Middle East was an important step forwards , which we must support , because it is crucial that we make progress with the Mitchell report and move beyond this point of departure .
In Macedonia too , we are sharing the burden with the Americans - which I think they are beginning to appreciate - and are playing a leading role .
The President-in-Office of the Council ' s visit to North Korea - which was initially something of a surprise - has also given us greater acknowledgement and greater influence with our American partners and the rest of the world .
I also wish to highlight the significant work Sweden has carried out in the United Nations with an old friend of ours , Pierre Schiori - whom we greatly miss - who has also done great work on behalf of Europe over the last six months .
I wish to pay particular tribute to the Minister for Foreign Affairs , Anna Lindh , who I would say has acted decisively , graciously and with her habitual charm in implementing all of the presidency ' s work .
One final point , to some extent , cast a shadow over the Göteborg Summit , namely the violent demonstrations that those of us who were there witnessed at first hand and also on television .
It must be said , first of all , that we fully respect people ' s right to demonstrate ; this is a citizen ' s fundamental right .
Many people demonstrated peacefully in Nice and in Göteborg .
This is , of course , to be welcomed and appreciated , because it means that Europe ' s citizens are beginning to take an interest in what we do .
We continually complain that they do not take any notice of us but really , the fact that we are beginning to see active demonstrations about what we are doing is a positive development .
Nevertheless , we must differentiate between the violent actions of small minorities who act like commandos and , with a nihilistic and violent attitude , seek to destroy the things for which we are working .
I wish to point out to Mr Poettering , that the problem is not whether these people are of the fascist or the antifascist persuasion .
The dividing line is between democrats and antidemocrats and we must remember that extremes clash , in politics too .
There is no need , then , to discuss whether the demonstrations are fascistic or not .
What is crystal clear is that these are people who are acting violently and with scorn for the institutions and for freedom .
I feel that given this scenario , we democrats must present a united front .
It is not that some of us feel more affected than others about what has happened . We have to adopt a very firm attitude on this .
My final observation , Madam President , concerns the debate on the future of Europe .
You have not managed to include the convention , but I hope that you will continue striving to ensure that we do so under the Belgian presidency .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , I should like to begin by congratulating the Prime Minister and his colleagues on a successful presidency .
It has been a first presidency for Sweden , and I believe both your government and state can feel a justifiable pride in a job well done .
Of all the jobs well done , the one my group applauds most loudly is the clear-sighted , determined commitment which you brought to the enlargement question from Day One of your presidency .
It has shone through the presidency , not just since Göteborg , but as an appetite to achieve right from the beginning .
That determination has been handsomely rewarded .
I know it was a delicate issue .
But perhaps the shock Irish referendum result helped the politics of clarification , which I welcome .
It is a very important message to the applicant states to say that we want to resolve this issue as soon as we can .
The commitment to try to ensure that the first wave can participate in the next European elections as Member States is an important clarification and a very substantial achievement of your presidency .
I congratulate you on it .
It is also very important to acknowledge the progress under your presidency for the second wave of applicant states , the Helsinki states - again a wonderful tribute to your focus and determination .
I would urge the Belgian presidency and those that follow to maintain that pace , focus and commitment .
You are right , Mr Prime Minister , that we have now got to do some of our homework as well .
Not all the transitional issues are just for the applicants , particularly in agriculture , regional policy and cohesion policy .
Now we have to start biting some bullets ; we have to start focusing on the issues .
I hope that the Irish referendum will not get in the way of this process .
We have until the end of 2002 for Nice to be ratified .
It is a matter for the Irish administration to decide how to proceed .
But in the interim this should not be used as a reason for taking our foot off the accelerator on this important issue .
On a matter which has drawn a number of comments , my group fully supports , recognises and celebrates the rights of citizens in a free society to demonstrate .
But clearly there were , in Göteborg , anarchic groups whose essential , primary purpose was to undermine democracy itself .
You , Mr Prime Minister , more than any of your predecessors at any of these international meetings , went out of your way to meet people , to conciliate , to provide people with places to stay .
For the large majority the issue was peaceful and proper demonstration .
My group would like to extend its sympathy to the citizens of Göteborg on a very difficult moment in a wonderful host city .
I have one or two other brief comments .
On Macedonia , the presidency , along with Commissioner Patten , Mrs Lindh and Javier Solana have proved the value of developing an embryonic common foreign and security policy .
The peace remains delicate .
There is a difficult balance between peace and civil war , but the intensity of the European effort and the unity of the European effort is in marked contrast to the disunity of ten years ago .
That is not just European progress but a measure of significant progress on the ground .
Finally , regarding company law on mergers and takeovers , the presidency has done a wonderful job in fashioning a difficult compromise .
I would appeal to Members of this House not to pull the plug on an important measure of economic reform .
Madam President , I want to begin by thanking the Swedish presidency for showing great respect for the European Parliament and a desire to engage in dialogue with us .
Its presence , both here in the Chamber and in the committees , has been very notable and much appreciated .
Dialogue , transparency and participation are the prerequisites of a functioning democracy .
In Göteborg , there was an attempt at dialogue between politicians , demonstrators and a variety of organisations .
Unfortunately , it was only a well-intentioned attempt for , in reality , the Heads of State and Government were behind the barriers , and there were no opportunities for civil society and citizens to follow the negotiations concerning the future of all of us .
From the closed rooms of this summit culture was born a frustration and impotence also expressed by peaceful demonstrators trying to get their message through to the Heads of State and Government .
Unfortunately , a small clique of agents provocateurs also caused violence and disturbances .
The stones they threw were , of course , directed not only against the police but against the whole of democratic society and against all those of us who really tried to get a message across .
That may well be felt to be very regrettable .
It is also unacceptable that the police should have used live ammunition against the agents provocateurs .
An investigation has now been set up to look into how that could be possible in Sweden today .
I am also disappointed at the way in which EU leaders appear to react to the frustration felt at developments in the EU .
I also think that no account at all has been taken of the result of the Irish referendum .
Instead , an attempt is being made to turn this into an Irish problem , while it is in actual fact , of course , a problem for the whole of the EU .
A majority of the European Parliament too appears now to be making the same mistake , since the Council ' s proposal that an open forum should be set up has been rejected and since no substance has been given to the idea of recommending that the next Intergovernmental Conference should be a convention .
I really do not understand this reluctance to open up the EU and to enter into a dialogue with people and with civil society .
What does the Swedish presidency intend to do in the future to get its colleagues on board and make them understand that this is crucial ?
Where the three ' E ' s were concerned , it was probably on the issue of enlargement that some real fighting spirit was shown and that something was successfully achieved .
I cannot emphasise enough how pleased I am that there is now a fixed timetable for the accession procedure .
However , I do not know how much energy was put into the issue of sustainable development .
In any case , the results were poor in comparison with what might have been expected , for it was a good proposal that the Commission had tabled .
I do not know if it has to do with incredible reluctance on the part of the EU ' s Heads of State and Government to understand what sustainable development really entails .
How is time now to be found for acquiring grassroots support for a plan and a political process prior to the Rio + 10 Conference in South Africa when no practical undertakings have been set out concerning what is to happen to the climate objectives after 2010 , how the depletion of fish stocks is to be prevented and how it might be possible to change our current , devastating agricultural policy ?
EU leaders must assume a global responsibility too .
That is something I believe is demanded by the rest of the world and by the people of Europe
Madam President , Sweden is sometimes described as a well organised but not particularly exciting country .
That is a picture which fits in quite well with Sweden ' s six-month presidency of the EU .
From an organisational point of view , the presidency has operated well .
Swedish diplomats have worked assiduously at cobbling together various compromises .
From a political point of view , it has had a low profile .
Everything has been done to show that Sweden is a loyal EU member - loyal both to the EU system and towards the large countries that dominate the European Union .
This became most obvious of all when the Irish voted against the Treaty of Nice .
Mr Persson immediately made it clear that the Irish people would not be allowed to make use of their right to put a stop to more centralised government and supranationalism within the EU .
The Treaty of Nice was to remain in place .
This is , in practice , an attack on every small country ' s right to prevent changes to the Treaty if it wishes to do so .
Sometimes , compromises have been made at any price .
The new rules concerning access to documents were so weak that journalists ' organisations in Europe thought that the current rules were better .
In the run-up to the presidency , Sweden prioritised enlargement , employment and environmental issues .
The presidency has worked hard on enlargement .
The pace has been maintained in the negotiations governing how the candidate countries are to be brought into line with the EU ' s regulations .
This was important if enlargement was not to be delayed .
The EU ' s policy of increased employment is often singled out as a ' left-wing project ' designed to counteract the right-wing policy of the currency union .
The issue was discussed at the Stockholm Summit , but the only practical decision remembered from that occasion was a decision concerning the deregulation of the financial market .
That is not much in the way of left-wing policy .
In the environmental area , the presidency has had some bad luck .
Work on the most important environmental problem - the climate issue - was effectively sabotaged by the new president of the United States .
At the Göteborg Summit , there was an opportunity to adopt a sound strategy for sustainable development but , when it came to the crunch , the most radical environmental demands had been removed from the text .
In some areas , the presidency has had great success .
In addition to the enlargement negotiations , the decision to remove duties for the poorest countries of all is a clear step forwards .
The presidency ' s work in combating trafficking in women and in pursuit of peace in the Balkans is also commendable .
As usual , however , many of the important decisions are being taken in what is more like secrecy .
Sweden has loyally done further work on the militarisation of the EU and thus , in practice , in favour of the abolition of Sweden ' s policy of neutrality .
During the period concerned , Sweden and the other Nordic countries have entered into the Schengen Agreement , which is the EU ' s most important tool for constructing tough new borders to keep out those who live outside the European Union .
This area is a real blot on the Swedish presidency ' s copybook .
Sweden voted in favour of the proposed fines in the case of transporter ' s liability , a proposal that involves a kind of privatisation of asylum policy , which in turn would mean that airlines and other carriers would be penalised if they did not screen out refugees who did not have their papers in order when they made their way to the EU .
At the start of the presidency , Mr Persson stood here and talked of a refugee policy characterised by solidarity .
We can only regret that , since then , the government has , in practice , taken the opposite line .
Finally , a few words about Göteborg , where small militant groups took the opportunity to attack the police and cause extensive damage .
Irrespective of what these groups purport to stand for , this is behaviour that can never be defended .
Throwing stones and causing damage is not politics but criminal behaviour .
That must not , however , conceal the fact that , in Göteborg , there were also tens of thousands of people demonstrating in a peaceful and dignified manner for a better Europe than today ' s EU with its EMU and Schengen .
What 50 000 people do is , in actual fact , more important than what 300 perpetrators of violence get up to .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we spoke a great deal at Göteborg about sustainable development , a fashionable , but woolly concept if there ever was one .
There is no doubt that we must praise the Member States ' determination to introduce concerns about public health and the environment into all the policies imposed by Brussels .
It certainly is high time to do so , following mad cow disease and the foot-and-mouth epidemic .
On the other hand , the determination to present the Kyoto Protocol and the forthcoming global pact as a panacea is absolute tomfoolery .
It is a deal designed for fools , and Europe is the only party at the table - another instance where the white man is allowing himself to be accused of single-handedly destroying the whole planet .
Neither China nor India will be taking part , because they gain from development , growth and industrialisation .
The US is taking a similar approach , at a time when growth is slowing down against a background of increased international competition .
My second point is that you do not voice any criticism to condemn the violent demonstrations that rocked the summit .
It is a shame that these tones of indignation are forgotten when it comes to condemning the violence and insecurity that affect millions of our citizens on a daily basis .
The governments of Europe particularly the French government are not even capable of protecting their own people .
Their immigration policy , the culture of making excuses , defending the rights of hooligans in the name of human rights , the abolition of the death penalty are all factors which encourage crime , which are favoured over pointing the finger at a handful of left-wing protesters , which , moreover , Mr Barón Crespo rather curiously called fascists unless Mr Barón Crespo had wanted to acknowledge that fascism had found its origins in socialism , all his leaders having been socialist leaders before becoming fascist leaders .


Lastly , it is scandalous that the totalitarian instincts of the European institutions do not offend anyone .
Only here could we want to systematically force people back to the ballot box when the result of a vote is not the desired outcome .
In 1992 , Denmark gave in under threat but Austria quite rightly refused to do so .
The Irish people must resist - their ' no ' vote , de jure and de facto , has sounded the death knell of the Treaty of Nice .
All the people who have not been consulted and who will not be consulted due to a fear of them voting against are lending them their solidarity .
Madam President , Prime Minister , all credit to Mr Persson and Sweden for a competent presidency .
You have set a new standard or transparency with your home page , but the Swedish signature appended to the regulation on transparency paved the way for the EU now deciding what you must come up with in Stockholm .
I asked for the minutes of the meetings on transparency .
You did not dare to issue even those , for they would of course show that France , Germany and Spain are opposed to transparency and , were that fact properly to emerge , the three governments would be pressed by their elected representatives and electorate to approve that transparency which Sweden had as an objective .
This is an area in which Sweden has committed an historic betrayal .
Sweden has also violated the Treaty by introducing qualified majority voting as a method of taking decisions on future changes to the rules governing confidentiality .
Before the unlawful adoption of this method on 19 March , measures constituting progress could be adopted by 8 of the 15 countries .
That alone is difficult enough .
Progress can now be blocked by France , Germany and Spain , even if we can convince all the other 12 countries that progress is what is at issue .
Parliament is now bringing legal proceedings against the Council .
It is embarrassing for a Swedish presidency to stand accused of a Treaty violation in connection with transparency .
I also want to criticise the police action in Göteborg .
Hooded demonstrators threw paving stones at the police and smashed up shops without being caught .
Instead , peaceful demonstrators were taken into custody when they arrived at the ferry port .
They were not allowed to take part in the peaceful demonstrations .
This is something from which we must learn .
Enter into dialogue with the peaceful demonstrators who use arguments .
Tell the men of violence that throwing a paving stone at someone else ' s window may be interpreted as attempted murder .
We who wish to demonstrate peacefully must also learn from the battles .
People with hoods on must be expelled from demonstrations .
It must never be possible to confuse peaceful demonstrators with criminals .
There are no excuses for violence , but there are grounds for consideration and reflection .
Why have so many young people given up hope of being able to affect decisions by using arguments ?
Why do the media give more coverage to people with paving stones than to people with arguments ?
Why , in general , have no European media covered the many serious debates arranged in connection with the Göteborg Summit ?
Madam President , Prime Minister , Sweden has held the presidency of the Union for the first time .
As an Austrian , I know that it is by no means an easy task .
The objectives were ambitious .
The presidency concentrated on a few priorities , in line with the maxim " less is more " .
Above all , some important progress has been made towards enlargement of the Union .
Some agreement has been reached in the chapters on freedom of movement of persons and freedom to provide services , and I would like to offer my congratulations on that success .
However , there is one point on which I cannot agree with the commentators in the newspapers .
I do not seriously think you can say that establishing concrete data for accession is a great triumph .
There are a great many questions that remain to be resolved .
Following the Irish referendum , the process of ratifying the Treaty of Nice has become uncertain .
The question of whether Nice is a sine qua non for enlargement has been the subject of some debate .
But the people of Ireland have given a clear signal that the debate on the future of the Union can no longer be conducted behind closed doors and over the heads of our citizens ; the public has to be directly involved .
One objective of the Göteborg Summit was to work out a strategy for sustainable development .
I see the Council 's commitment to shift transport to rail and to encourage the full internalisation of external costs as an important clarification of this .
The Community will soon have a chance to match its words with deeds .
The forthcoming negotiations regarding the expiry of the transit agreement with Austria will provide a good opportunity in this respect .
Madam President , it is unfortunate that today ' s debate on the Swedish presidency - which was of course something new for our country , with all that that entails - has to begin with an observation that it is in danger of being remembered for stone-throwing anarchists trying to stop the meeting and ruthlessly smashing up Göteborg ' s pleasant main street and , with it , quite a few good intentions .
The advantages and benefits to people of cooperation were pushed into the background , while violence and hooliganism came to dominate the reports from the meeting .
I know that almost everyone here in the Chamber shares the regret I feel , but it would have been safer for the future of democracy if we could have been in complete agreement .
The Swedish presidency ought instead to be remembered for the efforts made regarding enlargement .
Securing European freedom and democracy and extending it to include former Communist-occupied Eastern and Central Europe is the absolutely most important task of European cooperation .
Hand in hand with this goes a growing debate in which the major issues for the future of European cooperation are presented .
Sometimes , the talk is more of how the decision-making processes are to be organised than of what we are to cooperate on and what the EU must not meddle in .
I believe that we all too often talk above people ' s heads and at a far remove from their everyday lives .
Ireland ' s ' no ' to the Treaty of Nice is a lesson for us all and a worry not only for the Irish government .
The debate concerning the EU ' s future must be conducted in more fundamental and more principled terms .
What we say and do here is therefore of less importance than our engaging in greater discussion in our constituencies .
In my own country , if I may take it as an example , it is important now to make the most of the interest aroused by the presidency .
As the prime minister also mentioned , there now exists the opportunity to conduct a debate on the future of Europe that engages people ' s interest .
This means that Sweden must now also tackle the issue of the euro .
The common currency is so central to EU cooperation that the Social Democratic Party and the Swedish government must take their share of responsibility for Sweden ' s becoming a member of EMU .
In other countries , there are other issues which must be brought into focus .
I think it is important for Europhiles to stand up for a Europe which is more open to the surrounding world and in which free markets prevail .
In a number of Member States , Europhiles should take greater responsibility for the fact that enlargement is now becoming a reality .
Since the Swedish presidency was making every effort to be a presidency for the whole of the European Union , what was most important was that we obtain a breakthrough in the enlargement negotiations .
The fact that this did not happen with greater enthusiasm and greater courage is not , in the first place , the fault of the Swedish presidency .
It was others who were putting the brakes on .
I therefore hope that the results achieved through the negotiations have advanced the cause of successful enlargement and that the thorniest issues which are still outstanding - agricultural and regional policy - do not upset or interfere with the decisions taken in Göteborg concerning dates .
Let us ensure that these practical achievements loom larger than the stone-throwing and hooliganism on the part of the left-wing extremists .
Let us all work together to ensure that the parliament of the street does not win out .
Madam President , when I was travelling home by plane last week , I got hold of a Swedish business paper , Dagens Industri , which does not normally praise the Swedish government all that often .
They set their seal of approval on the presidency , and a large headline read , ' Passed with great credit ' .
I should like to say the same .
The Swedish presidency had three important and major ambitions .
There has been a great deal of talk about enlargement .
There is no doubt that this issue was handled very well .
What is now important in terms of the future - for us in Parliament , for Sweden and for other countries in the Council - is to maintain the pace so that we can meet the objectives we have set .
When it comes to employment , the achievement was not perhaps so outstanding .
The examples of deregulation were definitely not so outstanding , for many on the right were disappointed that these were insufficient .
It was a question of passing on the baton in the important process concerning jobs and growth .
A number of new objectives were set .
For example , the subjects of family policy and the older labour force were addressed .
Only a small part of the latter is currently present in the labour market , and that is something that needs to be changed for the future .
When it comes to sustainable development , there are two possible perspectives .
The first involves a comparison with the Commission ' s document and , clearly , not everything from that perspective was achieved .
The second perspective is in relation to the current situation .
Clear , unambiguous improvements have been made , and the most important thing is that the environmental issues have been introduced into the Lisbon process .
What is the problem today as far as these environmental issues are concerned ?
Well , the problem is that they are sidelined and that they always come last .
They are now to be considered jointly with economic and social policy each year as part of an ongoing process .
That , if anything , is a success .
I also want to say something about global responsibility .
The policies on transport , agriculture and fisheries were singled out .
I would also mention transparency , consultation and the provision of information and , in particular , foreign and security policy .
On this subject , I should like to say that it is heartening that Sweden has assumed such a large amount of responsibility in this area .
It is also pleasing that the Swedish people have understood that we are not talking here about some form of militarisation but , on the contrary , about creating peace and stability in a future Europe and the areas bordering upon it .
If Swedish opinion polls are to be believed , there is an incredible amount of support regarding this issue .
Turning now to the debate about the future .
Should there be a convention ?
Yes , but a convention is not enough .
We must broaden the debate so that it extends beyond a convention and is conducted with civil society .
If we are to conduct the debate with civil society , we must do what Prime Minister Persson said .
We cannot begin with the institutional issues . Instead , we must begin with what it is we want the EU to be doing in five , ten or fifteen years ' time and with how we are to do those things .
In that way , the institutional issues come last .
Turning next to Ireland .
We must respect Ireland , but we must also respect the other Member States .
There are those who say that we should now call it a day .
Should not the Swedish parliament or the other parliaments be allowed to discuss the Treaty of Nice ?
What kind of view of democracy is it that says that we should pack it in for the moment because the Irish people said no ?
Are not the other nations presumably also entitled to discuss the issue either in their parliaments or in the particular way they have chosen to ?
We shall then be able to see what the final result is in 2002 , and it will be up to the Irish people to assess the situation at that time .
Finally , a word about the riots .
I fully and firmly support what Mr Barón Crespo said .
We must draw a distinction between the small number of people who throw stones and those who wish to express a view about continued work within the EU .
We must provide the stimulus for a debate with civil society , but we must be tough with those whose only argument is a stone in the hand .
Madam President , I too would like to express my appreciation of the Swedish presidency , of the way it has developed the institutional plan for the Union and , above all , of its contribution to the preparations for enlargement .
I feel that , for the first time , many Europeans are aware that there will be representatives from 25 European countries in this House in just three years time .
However , we are also aware of the problems arising not just from the pause brought about by the Irish referendum but also from the increasing difficulty of involving the European citizens in planning the future Europe .
My opinion is simple : we must give fresh impetus to the cooperation between Parliament and the Commission .
The Commission must - and here I am expressing , once again , my total confidence in President Prodi and the Commissioners - demonstrate that it can handle its responsibilities and is capable of working towards a shared vision .
Parliament must take greater pride in being the representative of a democratic institution which will soon include half a billion people , at precisely a time when such a large proportion of the public is critical of globalisation .
We are the primary example of a supranational power which is still growing , and this , Madam President , must be stressed : this is Europe 's contribution to the future of world government .
I would also like to express my appreciation of the determination with which the Swedish presidency has upheld Europe 's position on the environment and emphasised the key points of the Kyoto agreements , not just in terms of rules but also in terms of triggering off a new debate within the scientific community on research , technological innovation and industrial competition , placing Europe 's position in the context - as Commissioner Wallström said - of the European strategy for sustainable development .
Finally - albeit a day early - I would like to express my best wishes to the Belgian presidency and say that I have every confidence in the presidency of a founding country of Europe .
The Belgian presidency will enable us to contribute to that process which will give us a Europe of 25 countries in just three years , but will also bring us a more democratic Europe which is tangibly closer to the principle of subsidiarity , Madam President .
Many Europeans , including those who voted against the motion in the Irish referendum , are calling for us to reduce the excessive amount of regulations .
Basically , they are demanding that Europe deal more effectively with its strategic priorities and stop wasting so much time on matters of minor importance .
Madam President , as many other colleagues have said , one of the most worrying aspects of the violence at Göteborg is that it detracted from the action of many people who were there to demonstrate peacefully so as to make their legitimate concerns known to government leaders .
The violence overshadowed the real message that came from the genuine demonstrators outside the summit , which was that people want to be more involved in this process of building the Europe of the future .
They want to take part in a real public debate .
The post-Nice process and the Convention are crucial in ensuring that genuine democratic reform can be achieved and that European citizens can play a part in that .
We welcome the commitment that was made in Göteborg to move ahead with accession negotiations so that the newest Member States can take part in the 2004 elections .
We also welcome the establishment of a European sustainable development strategy , albeit a much watered-down version of that originally presented by the Commission , which had contained ambitious targets and concrete measures .
Sustainable development is about people : their economic and social needs as well as environmental conservation .
Putting this into practice has huge implications .
We cannot go on plundering our natural resources and then look to science and technology to try and mend the damage .
We need a new approach .
Mr Persson referred to the importance of establishing the processes .
The Cardiff European Summit in 1998 adopted what is referred to as the " Cardiff process " , integrating environmental considerations into all areas of EU policy as the first step towards sustainable development .
Göteborg did not provide the next major step in practical terms , after the Cardiff process , but the important link is there and the strategy can be built upon .
Hopefully we will see this happen and will see progress in the spring summits from now on .
This is essential if the EU is to make a major contribution to the Rio + 10 world summit in 2002 .
Another welcome decision at Göteborg was the plan to ratify the Kyoto Protocol , even without the USA , before the Rio + 10 conference .
This will send a very clear message , not only to the United States , but also to the rest of the world , about our commitment to this goal and our determination to combat climate change .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the images from Göteborg were alarming .
Vandalism , a blind destructive frenzy and criminal violence , all of which should be condemned , and my Group most certainly does condemn them .
We must never allow anything like this to happen again .
But people who want to make their views known , who want to exercise their right to demonstrate or who want to protest against political decisions should still be able to do so peacefully without any restrictions in future , just as some 20 000 peaceful demonstrators also did in Göteborg .
Committed citizens will continue to see European summits as a political opportunity to express their ideas and expectations , and that is a good thing , because we need to take the public 's views into account more when building a democratic Europe .
Politicians and governments should no longer be allowed to sweep over the heads of the public and ignore their sentiments .
The Swedish presidency in particular has made great efforts in this direction .
It has made an effort to tackle the problem of the democratic deficit in Europe , and we really must recognise that .
Unfortunately , the results have been somewhat disappointing .
However , that cannot be laid at the door of the Swedish government alone - all governments have to be held to account here .
When it comes to a public debate on the future of Europe , that debate should be a wide-ranging one .
It needs to be purposeful and result-oriented . Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , you know that we in this House want a convention to prepare the next intergovernmental conference .
We have done some preliminary work here , and it will now be the job of the Belgian presidency to initiate this convention before Laeken .
I very much welcome the fact that there are already proposals on the table to extend the agenda and to address further issues in the debate on the future of Europe .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is by some strange turn of events that the latest protests , a new phenomenon at European summits , reached their climax at Göteborg .
' Strange ' because Sweden 's various governments have always placed transparency at the heart of European politics , and Sweden has now found itself running the least transparent body , the body to which all the decisions , even the most unimportant , fall , thanks to a false idea of the supremacy of the intergovernmental method . Mr President-in-Office , I hope that your country and you yourself will reflect on this point .
When Parliament requests more powers , it does so also in the name of that representativeness which it undoubtedly has and which the governments , in that form - not in general but in that form - do not have .
Therefore , from that point of view , Göteborg could be a useful lesson for those governments that are still hesitant about a slightly different vision of Europe , a vision which many Members in this House share .
I would like to congratulate the Swedish presidency on one point in particular , and that is the undertaking assumed - which nobody has singled out because it happened rather on the quiet - regarding the International Criminal Court .
The Swedish presidency led the Fifteen to adopt a very important common position , a strong position in favour of ratifying not only the International Criminal Court but also the campaign and , three days ago , it also ratified the Court 's Statute .
This is an undertaking to which I would like to pay tribute because , in this way , Sweden has contributed to the creation of something which , with Milosevic 's arrest , is increasingly close to being achieved .
Finally , there is one thing that I am glad to see you did not manage to do , and that is to decide the locations - mathematically , Italian style - of the agencies , maybe removing the possibility of locating the Food Agency in Parma and giving it to Helsinki instead .
This would have been a mistake which , I am glad to say , did not happen .
In any case , " Well done " to the Swedish presidency for its achievements with regard to both climate change and the Court .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the Swedish presidency will , unfortunately , be remembered for the fact that , for the first time since the European Communities were founded , police officers , who are , by the way , European police officers , fired real bullets at European demonstrators .
The Swedish presidency will be remembered for this violence and this contempt , the contempt with which European leaders have treated the result of the referendum in Ireland .
The Göteborg Summit has shown that the European Union was almost becoming a Forbidden City , as foreign to the people of Europe as the Manchu dynasty to the most remote Mongolian tribes and treating them with just as much contempt .
The EU is totally indifferent to the peoples ' sovereign views remember , if you will , the ' no ' vote of the people of Denmark of 28 September 2000 , which was treated with equal contempt . I believe that the European Union is in the process and I know that this will perhaps cause some shock of reviving a colonial style approach towards the nations within it , with the slight difference that , in this case , the colonial power intends to develop colonisation rather than to initiate it , as has been the case in the past .
That is why I believe that the reaction of the Irish people , who , for a long time , have had their fingers burnt by history , heralds a general feeling of rebellion amongst the people of Europe - to face up to this new type of almost endogenous neo-colonialism that is emerging , which has wanted to rule over them since Maastricht , Amsterdam and now Nice , and to bring them the benefits of an essentially healthy undertaking namely Europe - whether they like it or not .
Mr President , the Göteborg Council took a step in the right direction when it confirmed that the process of enlargement was irreversible and that it had set the goal for the first wave of candidate countries to join in time for them to take part in the 2004 European elections .
At the same time , however , this same Council made a serious error when , in paragraph 4 of the presidency conclusions , it appeared to link the decision on enlargement to the fate of the Treaty of Nice .
This is an error of legal , political and moral judgment .
It is an error of legal judgment , because , as the President of the Commission stated on 21 June 2001 , ' the ratification of the Treaty of Nice is not legally necessary for enlargement to take place ' and , moreover , Mr Poettering , this may also be the reason why the President of the Commission is not here today .
In any case , I shall not go back to this point because , again from a legal point of view , no one has since contradicted what Mr Prodi said .
It is also an error of political judgment because , from a political point of view , the Treaty of Nice is only essential for enlargement for those wishing to build a European ' super state ' .
Do they wish to combine the super state , European enlargement and the Treaty of Nice , therefore , at the risk of causing all these projects to fail together ?
Lastly , it is an error of moral judgment , because , by upholding the statement made by the General Affairs Council of 11 June 2001 , the Göteborg Council showed utter contempt for the democratically expressed opinion of a nation , which shows the Europe that it hopes to achieve in a strange light .
For our part , we want the countries of the East to join a free and democratic Europe , and that is why , Mr President , we are supporting the clear , courageous choice of the Irish people .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , first of all , I should like to underline that the Swedish presidency has most certainly been a great success , unfortunately not in every respect , but that would be impossible to achieve .
The final balance is very positive .
I also welcome the support that you continue to pledge with regard to the Belgian presidency .
Perhaps you will allow me to draw your attention once more to a few elements .
First of all enlargement .
Enormous efforts are being made on that score by the Central and Eastern European countries , but the question of whether the European Union is ready for enlargement is becoming ever more pressing , of course .
For example , if I consider how long it has taken us to adopt a common position on the free movement of persons , I am a little apprehensive about discussing far more complex issues , such as agriculture or the funding of the EU .
It is therefore of the utmost importance to ensure that the European Union is ready on time .
But it is also important to prepare our own public opinion for future events .
That is not only necessary in Central and Eastern Europe , but also in the European Union , as we have witnessed during the Irish referendum .
It is great to have Mr Milosevic in The Hague , but I do hope that the money pledged will also be paid out swiftly to the population in the former Yugoslavia , for we need to offer prospects , particularly in those regions .
We must also ensure that the European Union takes steps in Macedonia to promote the peaceful co-existence of the two nations and the prevention of any future explosions in the Balkans in this respect .
Mr President , I believe that , where Russia is concerned , our relationship with Mr Putin should not purely be amicable .
We should , above all , criticise him for the inadequate enforcement of human rights and , especially , for compromising the freedom of the press .
On that score , our message to Mr Putin should be crystal clear .
Finally , the energy policy was a minor failure on the part of the Swedish presidency .
It is extremely regrettable that the French / German axis has caused the derailment of the liberalisation process within the European energy market .
This appears to me to be a major task for the Belgian presidency .
Mr President , stones are neither left nor right wing , they are simply anti-democratic .
And the best way to deal with stones and anti-democracy is to defend our own European democracy , explain to our citizens why we need Europe , enter into a debate with them and show them concrete results .
My group Chairman has already expressed thanks , and I should like to echo this , in respect of Mr Persson , Mr Danielsson and Mrs Lindh , who have recently cooperated with us in a very concrete manner to give shape to a number of matters .
I would like to say a few words on Europe ' s underlying rationale and on a matter that our citizens understand very well , namely foreign policy .
Citizens realise that Europe was , in itself , probably the most successful conflict prevention project of the last century , and they also realise that Europe can contribute towards peace and stability .
Over the past few months , under the Swedish presidency and in close cooperation with Commissioner Patten and Mr Solana , we have witnessed how , concerning a number of important issues , Europe has played a more pivotal role , as it were .
That was the case in the ' Everything but Arms ' sector , which represented a movement towards a more open Europe in trading terms to achieve a world trade round in which development was central .
That was also the case in our protest against the American ' missile defence system ' initiative and our belief that we need to invest in conflict prevention more efficiently and at an earlier stage .
That is similarly the case now that we are on the brink of a war in the Middle East . Despite this , we have tried to bring both parties around the negotiating table , thus considerably strengthening Europe ' s presence in recent months .
And that was also the case with regard to possibly the most sensitive and most complex problem for Europe , FYROM / Macedonia .
I would like to comment on conflict prevention , because I am very well aware that the Swedish presidency has exerted a great deal of pressure in a direction which appeals to us greatly .
We could , of course , invest enormous amounts in technologies in the hope that that would provide us with a safety shield , as it were .
I do not deny the fact that we need new technological developments , but this American initiative is not the right way forward .
What we need to do is to invest in diplomacy , conflict prevention and citizens ' networks and to enter into all those development aid and trade commitments which , together , create stability in the world .
In that way , we can prevent those dozens of conflicts which are taking place at the moment from continuing to spread .
This form of thinking in terms of foreign policy is a new security concept .
In my opinion , the Swedes have helped shape that new security concept in Europe .
This is a European value which , I believe , is appropriate and which suits us very well . I should like to thank you for this .
Mr President , Commissioner , Prime Minister , the Swedish presidency also deserves praise from those of your opponents in Sweden who are usually niggardly with their compliments .
If it is now permissible to say so , I have often felt both joy and pride during these last six months .
Nonetheless , I have a substantial objection regarding the decision in favour of transporter ' s liability , with large fines for those who do not comply with the EU ' s rules .
In practice , this means that the responsibility of local authorities for those who come to the European Union seeking asylum is to be taken over by airline employees .
That is unacceptable .
Prime Minister , you talked in January here in Parliament about a generous attitude on the part of the EU and about ambitions for a humane refugee policy that go beyond the requirements of the Geneva Convention .
Transporter ' s liability as conceived by the EU is neither humane nor generous . Quite the contrary .
To put it in the terms that you yourself used , we in the EU , which is a wealthy part of a global community , ought in actual fact to be able to afford to be both humane and generous .
You have had the foresight , Prime Minister , to give Raoul Wallenberg the place he deserves in history .
May we never betray his memory .
Mr President , allow me to turn my attention to the European Council conclusions in Göteborg and particularly the situation in the Middle East .
I believe that that attention is justified .
The headline of today ' s Neue Zürcher Zeitung , which reads : " Gewalt statt Waffenruhe im Nahen Osten " [ violence instead of a cease-fire in the Middle East ] , illustrates this .
The end of the Palestinian intifada ( uprising ) is not yet in sight .
At the same time , the tension between Israel and Syria is again rising dangerously .
There is therefore no chance of a return to the so-called peace process in the Middle East , despite all recent diplomatic efforts on the part of America and Europe .
What are the options left to those mediating parties ?
The conclusions of the European Council in Göteborg do not really address this cardinal issue .
They excel in wishful thinking .
Upbeat terms such as " cooling-off period " and " additional trust-building measures " are supposed to ward off the deep-rooted violence .
Should the United States and the European Union therefore leave Israel and the Palestinian Authority to their own devices ?
Not at all !
What is important is that both mediating parties are aware of their diplomatic and military powers .
The High Representative , Mr Solana , has broached the subject of essential distribution of roles .
Without beating about the bush , he recognises , in his Middle East reports at the Göteborg Summit , the United States ' s key position in the required resumption of the peace process .
This sincere statement causes the High Representative to underline the importance of permanent , mutual consultation , thus making ' our efforts complementary ' .
It is precisely this objective that requires balanced , European action in the region .
That is why I would ask the Council and Commission to inform me of the specific conditions they attach to the considerable support they lend to the Palestinian Authority .
Surely , at this moment in time , adequate control of violence must be the primary condition .
For precisely that condition will help break the present deadlock in the Middle East .
Mr President , to many observers , what happened outside the Göteborg Summit appeared to be of greater importance than what took place inside .
I am referring , of course , to the violence displayed by the demonstrators and to relations with the United States .
With regard to the latter , although it is true that points of disagreement still remain , on capital punishment , for example , on the Kyoto protocol and on the anti-missile shield , considerable progress has clearly been made , Mr President , on the joint declaration on the Middle East and on the joint approach to the Balkans .
On the issue of the violence , I think that we must make a clear distinction between displays of violent action - and violence must be eradicated because in a democracy ideas cannot be advocated by force - and the message that was conveyed in the course of the protests .
In the interest of everyone , Mr President , globalisation must be a ship that has more crew members and fewer shipwrecks .
With regard to internal issues , we must make a clear distinction between promises and the reality of the situation .
I think that the repeated wish to maintain the timetable for negotiations on enlargement is a factor , but I also feel , Mr President , that the problem of not knowing how this accession process is to be financed or which of the candidate countries will be in the first wave of accessions is significant .
It is crucial that we bear in mind that our project for integrating Europe does not only gain legitimacy once every five years when elections to the European Parliament are held . Our project must be given legitimacy each and every day .
To this effect , it is not enough for there to be greater and closer police coordination , or for the Commission to set a course for our integration project .
What is crucial is that we reach agreement on a common vision of the Europe that we want .
No such agreement exists today and yet it is essential if we are to ensure that this project is more what it has been until now : it must be much more the fruit of the dreams and the enthusiasm of our citizens than of the will of our leaders .
Prime Minister Persson , Commissioner Wallström , Mr President , I would like to thank the Swedish presidency particularly for its perseverance in seeking to highlight issues which are important for the environment and for bringing the environment to the heart of policy together with economic and social issues during its six-month presidency .
Unfortunately , not all of the Council were able to achieve the progress on environmental issues that the work put in by the presidency merited .
It is true that conciliations were finally concluded , but not perhaps at the ambitious level that Parliament would have liked to see . Nevertheless , there is no doubt that the Swedish presidency really has sought to achieve results .
Sustainable development is an important step in taking the environment into account in European policy .
Strengthening the ecological pillar in sustainable development is also essential since when sustainable development is monitored year by year , we have to be able to set clear targets for the ecological pillar to make this monitoring possible .
We have to have measurable goals , quantitative and qualitative targets , sufficient perspectives on how the environmental situation can be monitored to enable us also to tackle the threats we face successfully .
In my opinion the Swedish presidency otherwise succeeded very well , although it would have been good to see a decision on the Food Authority reached at the Göteborg Summit , as work on this should begin immediately .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Swedish presidency on its success and also express my regret that the Irish referendum result overshadowed many of their achievements , particularly in the field of enlargement .
The European Council in Göteborg was generous in response to our predicament and I welcome its willingness to help the Irish Government find a way forward .
I regret that it is not going to be easy .
With a little more effort by the political establishment in Ireland , a ' yes ' vote could easily have been obtained but now that the referendum has taken place , many people , including supporters of the Nice Treaty , will be reluctant to overturn it .
It also must be said that the recent remarks of Mr Prodi in the Irish media to the effect that enlargement can proceed even if Nice is not ratified , unfortunately adds to the confusion .
However , my major concern arises because of the existence of a strong eurosceptic core at the heart of the Irish government .
While the Taoiseach was speaking to our European partners inside the Council in an attempt to repair the damage inflicted on our reputation , his finance minister , Charlie McCreevy , was outside describing the Irish rejection of the Nice Treaty as a remarkable and healthy development .
I wish to take the opportunity of warning the Council and the Commission to be careful , as Mr McCreevy 's continued eurosceptic approach could well be an indication of his intention to provoke another row with the EU over Ireland 's budgetary policy in the run-up to a possible autumn Irish general election .
I hope that the ratification of the Nice Treaty proceeds successfully , and that when we revisit the issue in Ireland , we will have a different result .
Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate the Swedish presidency on a very successful first presidency of the Union .
Notwithstanding that a handful of extremist demonstrators tried to spoil it in Göteborg , we will ultimately look back on solid achievements under your presidency of the Council .
I say the words " presidency of the Council " advisedly because it is not , of course , the presidency of the Union .
Every institution has its own president .
We have Mrs Fontaine , the Commission has Mr Prodi , the Council has a Member State government by rotation .
There is actually no such thing as a presidency of the Union , yet every presidency often presents itself as the President of the Union .
This contributes to a feeling in public opinion that puts too much weight on the presidency .
Expectations are raised too high .
But when you take over the presidency you are not assuming executive office , you are taking the chairmanship of one of the institutions with an inherited agenda for a very short period of time , and people expect too much of it .
That is why there are sometimes disappointments at the end of the presidency .
Less so this time - and that is because you have done so well - but I would advise future presidencies not to build themselves up into something that they are not , and to get down to the solid work that is necessary for what that post really means .
Your greatest success has been in accelerating the enlargement negotiations and it now looks as though all the candidate countries except Romania and Bulgaria could well be in by the time of the next European elections .
That means that this Parliament will have at least 732 Members , possibly more .
It will be many more if there is any slippage in that timetable , because any country that has not signed its accession treaty by the beginning of 2004 , but comes in during the next Parliament , will have its MEPs added on top of the 732 .
That is going to cause huge administrative and financial problems for this Parliament .
We will do our best to deal with that , but I suspect that , if there are problems , we will get the blame in public opinion for a decision that was taken by the governments .
None of this is of course the fault of the Swedish presidency .
On the contrary , the acceleration of the enlargement negotiations should help in that respect .
But it is something that all Member States , and all of us , should bear in mind as we move to the Convention to prepare the next Intergovernmental Conference .
I hope that it will be a proper Convention , and that the next Intergovernmental Conference is not prepared by the usual small group of foreign policy advisers , but by a wider representative body .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the Swedish presidency on being very successful .
I am particularly pleased that the presidency succeeded in putting sustainable development at the core of European politics .
It is extremely important that the European Union is perceived by our citizens as more than an economic exercise and a free market because that , without any doubt , will alienate them further from the notion of European integration .
It is important to bear in mind that economic integration and getting the economy of Europe right is important .
It is equally important to bear in mind that there cannot be economic development in a modern economy without a strong social dimension .
I would argue that sustainable development and employment are part and parcel of the social dimension of the European Union .
I also wish to congratulate the Swedish presidency on putting the notion of conflict prevention on the agenda in a much stronger way than up to now .
Given the traditions of the Swedish people , this is obviously an area very close to their hearts .
It is very close to the heart of the people of Ireland who , unfortunately , recently rejected the Nice Treaty , precisely because they misunderstood to some extent the nature of the European Union and what we are attempting to do in relation to the Rapid Reaction Force .
I am pleased that the presidency has been a success and that these issues have been put on the agenda .
It is now up to us in this Parliament and future presidencies to develop them further .
Mr President , I can only endorse the conclusions of the final Göteborg document .
Moreover , I would like to stress a few points which I feel are extremely important for Europe 's growth : pensions and the project for financial sustainability , the new cycle of negotiations on international trade reform , the issues relating to public health and a strict relationship between the use of natural resources and economic growth .
On this point , for example with regard to some of the areas related to agriculture , we might have wished for more ambition , partly because the current fear is that some of the situations which have been consolidated within the European Union , specifically those relating to the agricultural sector , will be sacrificed to enlargement matters .
With regard to food safety in the context of enlargement too , in our opinion , the tendency is sometimes to subdue rather than aim towards a way of working which will provide guarantees to the consumer .
We are still too fresh , if you will pardon the expression , from the crises we have had in recent years - dioxins , mad cow disease - not to see food safety as a priority in the political decisions we have to take over the next few years .
Now , on a political note , we feel that , in some areas , the relationship between the Council and the European Parliament has not been what we would have wished it to be , and on extremely important political matters such as the relationship with Russia and the space shield , for example , we have seen alarming acceleration .
If we do not have an adequate debate in Strasbourg , we will be in danger of creating a series of points of no return which could cause deep rifts , particularly in a politically sensitive period such as this one , where some countries - such as Italy , Spain and Great Britain - have stable governments but in others - such as France and Germany - things will change every time there is an election .
Therefore , some positions might be subject to pressure which is due more to electoral positions than overall European positions .
In our opinion , the European Parliament must have the extremely important role of redressing the balance .
Mr President , the European Council at Göteborg took two conflicting decisions .
On the one hand , it confirmed the timetable for enlargement , as the European Parliament hoped it would , by moving the goal to complete negotiations forward to the end of 2002 .
This is wonderful news !
On the other hand , at the same time , the Heads of State and Government decided to disregard the implications of the Irish ' no ' vote at the latest referendum . Yet , this ' no ' vote casts major doubts over the timetable for ratification , and perhaps even as to whether ratification will be achieved .
In order for the Treaty of Nice to be ratified , we must now wait for the national elections in Ireland and for these elections to produce a victory in Dublin of a more united majority than the current majority on this issue , and for this majority to be willing to gamble its credibility on this now highly sensitive area .
We also need the new leaders to find persuasive arguments to convince the Irish people to change their minds .
Those telling us today that this will be a mere formality are the same people who were burying their heads in the sand before the recent referendum .
This means that , for the candidate countries , the Treaty of Nice is no longer the key to the door of the European Union it has now become the lock , a stiff lock , firmly bolted into place by the Irish people and there are no guarantees that it will be reopened .
That is why opening accession negotiations on the basis of the current treaties , in other words , the Treaty of Amsterdam , is the only thing that can guarantee that the timetable promised at Göteborg will be respected .
That is what Mr Prodi attempted to say and he was made to keep quiet .
The policy of burying one ' s head in the sand is not the right strategy to follow .
Institutional reform still has to be carried out , whether or not we have the Treaty of Nice .
The European Parliament believes that the reform can only form part of a constitutional approach .
In the meantime , however , it is our duty to tell the candidate countries that the only way for them to ensure that the proposed timetable will be respected is by negotiating on the basis of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
If the Treaty of Nice is finally ratified by the autumn of 2002 , there will still be time to support it .
If it is not ratified , enlargement can still go ahead .
Mr President , the topic of sustainable development has been afforded a very prominent position in the second chapter of the European Council ' s conclusions .
Mr Persson talked about sustainable development which has social , economic and ecological dimensions .
I share his view .
I agree that sustainable development should be added to the Lisbon criteria .
I wholehearted agree with everything that has been written in this connection , for example to the effect that trends which threaten the future quality of our lives must be reversed .
I also agree with the statement that ' sustainable development will present significant economic opportunities .
This has the potential to unleash a new wave of technological innovation and investment , generating growth and employment . '
But , Mr President , paper can wait .
The ink with which these fine conclusions were written was not even dry when , for the discussion of two matters of environmental legislation last Monday , the entire Council cried off .
I actually wonder whether those Prime Ministers speak on their own behalves when they reach those conclusions , and I also wonder whether they actually follow what has been agreed in Europe in their weekly cabinet meetings ?
Also , do they ever stop to think whether those conclusions are consistent and in line with what they tell each other in the first six months , or once every six months ?
The moral of the story - I am addressing the Swedish presidency , but this applies equally to all other presidencies - is that the European Parliament , but also the European citizen , cannot be fooled any longer .
We are actually fed up with one fine declaration every six months .
We also want you to proceed with the agenda and add a concrete dimension to the issues .
We have heard too much idle talk .
This chatter is no longer acceptable or even believable .
Mr President , I want to begin by congratulating Mr Persson on what has , in many ways , been a successful presidency .
There are many positive things to be said about , for example , its approach to enlargement towards the East and to the issues surrounding transparency , as well as about its efforts for peace in the Balkans .
I only have a short time in which to speak , so allow me to address two issues concerning which the results have unfortunately , in my view , been relatively poor .
One area in which more ought to have been achieved is , of course , the European Union ' s sustainable development strategy .
The result from Göteborg was , in the main , a framework decision with extremely little content .
I can only hope that , even once the presidency is over , the prime minister will continue to push on with these issues and ensure that we obtain lucid content , clear objectives and timetables when it comes to taking the long-term view in a number of areas .
I note with satisfaction that the prime minister particularly mentioned relations with the Third World , which are naturally a very important part of the work on sustainability .
We cannot bring about sustainable development without adopting a global approach from the beginning .
I think , however , that the results have been poorest when it comes to the debate on the future .
I do not think that Sweden took the opportunity it in actual fact had as the country holding the presidency to discuss in depth not only the content and direction of the European Union ' s future , but also the organisation .
I believe that things have , in a way , been made too easy for those who follow .
I have heard more from Belgium on this issue , before the country takes over the presidency , than I have heard from Sweden .
That is serious , because it is important that we get to have a debate on this issue , especially with a view to transparency , democratisation and the business of securing grassroots support .
It is important for Europe , but it is important , above all , for Sweden for , there , we still have a debate which very often comes down to a ' yes ' or a ' no ' to the European Union and which is not focused upon the content of the Union or upon the way it should look as an organisation .
I can therefore only hope that , during the next few months and as part of the troika ' s work , the prime minister will play an active part when Belgium now most certainly pushes ahead with these issues .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I too have to pour some cold water on the matter , since as I see it the Swedish presidency failed in two ways , because it did not manage to settle the dispute between two Member States over Gibraltar and thus free up the logjam in European air transport policy .
The public finds it incomprehensible that although important legislative projects like the one on increased compensation arrangements for overbooking in passenger air transport was negotiated in Council , they have not been adopted .
It is just as incomprehensible that important legislative initiatives like the creation of a single European sky are already blocked within the Commission .
Mr President-in-Office , this would have been a good example of an area where the Council could have done something , because everyone knows that disputes like the one over Gibraltar cannot be settled at ministerial level , between transport ministers .
It is a job for the top man , but in this case the top men have failed on two counts .
I do hope at least that the minutes of the Göteborg Summit are factually correct .
I say that because the Göteborg minutes say that the Council hopes that this dispute over Gibraltar can be settled over the next few weeks .
So we are keen to see if a result will be forthcoming at least two weeks after the Swedish presidency .
Commissioner , I also have a request for the Commission , an urgent appeal in fact .
The Commission absolutely must adopt the legislative initiative on the creation of a single European sky before the summer break and forward it to the Council and Parliament .
You know as well as we do that the many delays , the incidences of planes circling above the ground , are not just annoying for the public , because of delays in reaching their holiday destinations , and because of business appointments that cannot be kept . It is also expensive .
You know just as well as we do that the ridiculous combustion of air fuel in the sky is environmentally unacceptable .
That is why we need a sensible European system to bring an end to these delays .
We look forward to seeing your proposal on this before the summer is out .
Mr President , like Mr Jarzembowski , I wish to refer to the transport issue .
I read with concern in the conclusions to the Göteborg Summit in particular that the Commission is to proceed with its plans to propose a framework to ensure that " by 2004 the price of using different modes of transport better reflects costs to society " .
This clearly reflects the principle of infrastructure charging which has been promoted by the Commission since the publication in July 1998 of its White Paper on fair and efficient pricing in transport , subsequently approved in the Costa Neves report , which Parliament approved in January .
These proposals are anything but fair and efficient , especially as far as road transport is concerned .
The Commission 's own research shows , for example , that the per kilometre cost of running a car in the UK under infrastructure charging would increase by 97 % by 2005 .
Surely we have learned some lessons from the fuel price protests which brought many Member States to a standstill last autumn .
Road users are already being forced to pay through the nose to subsidise other forms of transport , in particular the United Kingdom , and the Commission 's proposals will only aggravate this .
Despite several years of study and consultation , even the so-called " experts " within this field admit that the science involved in so-called social marginal costing - the process by which these charges are set - is untested and uncertain .
Charging people off the road will not encourage the general public to change their travel habits , it will merely provoke widespread dissent and anger .
The road user should not be the target of a witch hunt .
Member States should be free to set their own tax regimes and decide their own priorities for infrastructure charging and improvements .
I urge every Member of this Parliament to acknowledge the horrendous impact this would have and encourage them to join me in opposing any such proposals every step of the way .
Mr President , the Göteborg Summit was the first summit in the history of the European Union at which top priority was given to safeguarding the sustainability and viability of the social economic development model .
If we judge the results of the summit on the basis of which strategies were supported , the most substantial success achieved was the introduction of a step-by-step procedure for monitoring environmental policy with the annual control introduced by the spring summit of the European Council .
Similarly , the requirement to devise national strategies and coordinate the policies of the Member States will be particularly important for countries lagging behind in this sector .
We might also describe the initial objectives and measures defined in four sectors - climatic change , safeguarding sustainability in transport , dealing with public health risks and responsible management of natural resources - as being of major importance .
I say " might " because no specific concomitant measures on pollution management costs aimed at individuals or companies were adopted .
Likewise , the summit was clearly backwards in coming forwards in protecting public health , a sector in which there are huge risks ; one need only cite mad cows and foot-and-mouth .
Just yesterday , the first confirmed case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy was reported in Greece .
The summit was also backwards in coming forwards in the biotechnology sector , where the European Union basically needs to get moving and apply a technology which will offer important advantages to society in the 21st century .
So the summit clearly failed to come up to expectations and consequently I would not say that it was a landmark summit .
However , it is a starting point for moving from declarations and intentions to the application of an integrated environmental protection policy closely bound up with social and economic development .
To conclude , the summit may have announced that the objectives of environmental sustainability are to be incorporated but , unfortunately , it failed to adopt any timetables , binding indicators , objectives or specific measures .
Mr President , I witnessed the violence at Göteborg .
To me it symbolised the growing distance between the leaders and the led .
I regret that the summit came to the conclusion that it should set aside the Irish referendum result and proceed with business as usual .
The referendum in Ireland gave us an opportunity to sit back and think about the way in which Europe develops .
The purpose , apparently , of the Nice Treaty was to provide for the enlargement of the European Union to include the new democracies .
It is the paramount duty of all politicians in Europe to achieve that as soon as possible .
However , I disagree with the President of the Commission , who wrote in The Wall Street Journal last week that Nice was essential for enlargement .
Nice is not essential for enlargement .
We could , within the accession treaties , make the necessary adjustment to QMV , voting rights , the number of MEPs and so on , for each country which accedes to the European Union .
We should take this chance now of providing for the peoples of Europe , represented by their national MPs and by their Members of the European Parliament , by establishing not a Convention , but a parliamentary conference .
That parliamentary conference should prepare the ground for the next Intergovernmental Conference .
Above all , it should begin to identify the sort of choices that Europe needs to make for the future in the economy , social policy , the environment , transport , and the budget - the sort of Europe that the two great political families , the centre left and centre right of politics in Europe , actually look for .
That would provide , at the European elections of 2004 , a real choice between the proposals of the centre left and the proposals of the centre right .
That would make the European elections meaningful and would actually accord with the views of most people in this House that the business-as-usual approach , the top-down approach , cannot be sustained any longer .
Mr President , I would like to comment briefly on a few speeches , but let me first express my warm gratitude for the praise which the Swedish presidency has received from various party groups in Parliament .
I would like to extend thanks to everyone who has worked hard and enthusiastically for the Swedish presidency .
The group of senior civil servants led by Under-Secretary of State Lars Danielsson should also , of course , receive particular mention in this context .
First of all , I would like to say something about the demonstrations in Göteborg : We are democrats .
We support the right to demonstrate .
We are against violence .
We condemn anyone who uses violence to subvert political processes .
What happened in Göteborg was that we had a wide-ranging democratic dialogue with people of different opinions to ourselves .
That was good , as the point of democracy is to be able to get together and exchange views .
What happened beyond that was that there was a relatively small group of hooligans who are very active internationally , whom we have seen before in other circumstances and whom I fear we may see again in the future .
They must be treated very firmly by the forces of law and order , who did an excellent job in Göteborg , by the way . These militant hooligans often call themselves anti-fascists .
That is their own way of describing themselves .
I must say that I have never seen anything more fascistic than their methods of operation .
Their whole way of addressing politics is fascistic .
Their whole way of using violence is the way of fascism .
When I use the fascist label for these communists , this is in fact to show that both extremes have merged .
We have seen many examples of this before in European politics .
Perhaps we will see further examples , but never let us as democrats be pitted against one another in this context .
We must present a united front against violence , fascism and communism .
That is the lesson to be learned from Göteborg .
I am sorry that the leader of the PPE-DE Group , Mr Poettering , is not present .
It would have been valuable if he could have listened directly to these humble views from a representative of the Council .
I hope , even so , that he will be able to read these simple thoughts in the minutes .
In his elegant and well-formulated speech , Mr Cox touched on a matter to which I attach great importance , and that is the conciliation which we have achieved on company takeovers .
I would be extremely concerned if Parliament did not support the conciliation results .
This is a unique event and something which will have fundamental consequences for Parliament ' s work in the future .
I therefore urge Parliament to show support , in the way described by Mr Cox , for the conciliation process that has taken place .
Let me also say that I value what Mr Van Velzen said about the tendency we have , and to which I referred in my introduction , to see the candidate countries as the ones facing the greatest difficulties .
It is clearly difficult for them to adapt to the demands we set , but their reform process is run with energy and clear goals .
As we approach the final chapter of the negotiations , I believe that it is within the circle of the Member States that it will be most difficult to formulate positions .
In our experience during our short presidency , that is what we had to spend most time on .
I fully support the view that we have difficult chapters ahead of us , for example agricultural and regional policy , matters which naturally also form the foundation for the structure which we currently have in European politics .
Let me also say that Mr Corbett from the UK made a very good point about the character of the presidency .
I would warn against the development we are now seeing whereby every time a new country holds the presidency of the European Council , there is a belief that the Union must be fundamentally changed .
It is incredibly important that those who lead the Council see their task as a continuing responsibility which means that one presidency interlocks with another .
Policy must remain stable and , if appropriate , be taken forwards .
However , the guiding principle must be the common interests of the Union , and the national aspect must therefore be pushed into the background .
This is the way we have operated .
Some have seen this as boring , but I am convinced that it is a necessary approach if the working method of a rotating presidency is to survive in the future .
I strongly support what Mr Corbett said .
Mr Wijkman regrets the lack of debate on the future of Europe during the Swedish presidency .
Let me say directly to him that I have heard this before .
What exactly have we been doing during the Swedish presidency ?
Foreign policy , environmental policy , enlargement of the EU that is as much of a debate about the future as you can have .
However , by debate on the future of Europe , some mean the Union ' s structures and often add that you have to have some sort of federal impulse to qualify as a debater of the future in the EU .
I myself do not share this view , but believe that the debate on the future must now address what we want to achieve .
So let us gradually , during the Belgian presidency , the Spanish presidency and the Danish presidency , enter into discussions as to what this political will requires in the form of expanded institutions within the EU .
This is the way we should look at it , and that is why what we have contributed during the Swedish presidency has been to the very highest degree a debate about the future .
The issues are enlargement , foreign and security policy and the environment .
Let me say to Mr Bradbourn that I am grateful for his words as , from his Conservative point of view , he put his finger on an important point .
It has , of course , been said that the environmental conclusions in Göteborg should not be detailed and should not in any way be compulsory or challenging .
The criticism from Mr Bradbourn to the effect that they go too far and are too detailed shows , however , that they are exactly that .
They are detailed .
All those who criticise these conclusions for not going far enough have , in actual fact , been answered quite well and clearly by his speech .
I am grateful for Mr Bradbourn ' s contribution , but I do not share his view .
That is more or less where I stand .
Let me finally say that Mr Dell ' Alba brought up what may prove to be the biggest event of the six months of the Swedish presidency .
What I am spontaneously thinking of , namely the extradition of Milosevic to The Hague , is not of course a direct consequence of action by the Swedish presidency , but it is a consequence of the firm action by the European Union and others on this issue .
It is a consequence of a value-based approach to relations in terms of foreign policy .
It is a consequence of our promoting human rights .
It may well be that the extradition of Milosevic to The Hague will in future be described as the vital , major event which changed the character of foreign policy , as those who turn on their citizens or others or who wage war on ethnic grounds - wherever in the world it may be - are observed and monitored , made to answer for their actions and held accountable before internationally united political opinion , based on values of democracy and human rights .
The extradition of Milosevic to The Hague is a major political event and a victory for all those who believe in a foreign policy based on common values .
Thank you for such excellent cooperation during the Swedish presidency .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Takeover bids
The next item is the report ( A5-0237 / 2001 ) by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on company law concerning takeover bids [ C5-0221 / 2001 - 1995 / 0341 ( COD ) ] .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank my fellow Members for their cooperation during the discussions , and in particular Jimmy Provan for the very fair opinion that he has just presented here in plenary .
Nevertheless , I am going to stir things up a little . I say that quite simply because we should not forget that our amendments at second reading last December have been at the heart of this debate .
We wanted to create a level playing field in Europe as regards company takeovers .
It is quite clear that the result that emerged from the Conciliation Committee did not give us what we wanted .
Parliament offered all kinds of compromises during the negotiations .
Jimmy Provan has explained that a compromise was not reached because the Council rejected any kind of compromise , dug its heels in over the key issue in its common position , and was absolutely unwilling to budge a single millimetre .
One of our offers for a compromise , one of the last that we made , was for a directive on the level playing field to come into force . This is , by the way , something we proposed some time ago , and which the Council , as I discovered last weekend , has had before it since 1972 , that is to say much longer than the 12 years that have been mentioned here .
The entry into force of the duty of neutrality is to be made conditional on such a level playing field directive coming into force .
Even this , although it really seems quite self-evident , was rejected by the Council .
There was merely agreement with the idea of the Commission convening a group of experts to address this subject and then possibly develop some proposals .
I would like to know what the logic is of convening a group of experts once the directive has already been adopted .
Normally , you set up the group of experts first and then adopt a directive on the subject in question .
I am not convinced at all by the procedure being adopted here .
I have therefore come to the conclusion that this is not so much a compromise as a capitulation by the majority of the Parliament delegation in the face of the Council 's position .
All this in the context of a number of important decisions going through the conciliation procedure . I have in mind , for example , the Directive on money-laundering , the whole subject of the Lamfalussy follow-up , and everything else in that area .
I believe that if we agree to this directive , we are debasing the institutional role of this House , and for that reason alone we should not agree .
Quite apart from that , there are any number of objective reasons why we cannot agree to it .
The result of this directive will be that in future protected companies will be able to take over unprotected companies .
That is the clear consequence of this .
Because if we do not have a level playing field , if national legislation in certain Member States makes it permissible to protect companies by limitations on voting rights , by golden shares , by multiple voting rights , by a variety of means of intervention by the administration , and if this is in fact not the case in other Member States , then I would like to know where the level playing field is .
Alternatively , let me draw a comparison between the United States and Europe . The Americans have gone in exactly the opposite direction .
They have introduced a " business judgment rule " according to which company boards can protect themselves if they wish , whereas in Europe we forbid that .
So what will the results of a decision of this kind be , if it is easier for American companies to take over European companies than the other way round ?
Furthermore , the trend in America also gives the lie to much of what we have been able to read in the papers this morning .
The papers always maintain that things would degenerate into chaos or that it would have a negative impact on Europe 's financial market if we suddenly rejected this directive .
The American experience suggests the opposite , they have gone down exactly the opposite path , and no one could say that America 's stock market is less dynamic than Europe 's .
So it is evident that these connections do not apply .
I would also like to remind you about the vital concept of location advantages .
Delaware is a state that has relatively restrictive legislation on company takeovers .
It is interesting to note that 40 % of the companies quoted on the New York stock exchange are based in Delaware , rising to 60 % of indexed companies .
My question to you is : why should that be ?
I can only suggest that I believe these conditions to be a very important factor when companies make decisions about their location .
No one has anything against protecting shareholders .
I am a shareholder myself .
So it goes without saying of course , as a matter of logic , that like most individuals who are shareholders , I am in favour of protecting shareholders , but on equal terms .
The phrase used by Jimmy Provan , " one share - one vote " , simply does not apply in Europe .
That is the key problem .
Because this phrase does not apply , it would be wrong at this stage to introduce strict neutrality which would ultimately lead to major imbalances in Europe and would thus probably harm the internal market more than benefit it .
To sum up , the Swedish Prime Minister called the directive unique .
I agree - in its present form , it is uniquely bad .
That is why it must be rejected .
Mr President , as chairman of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , may I thank all concerned who were involved in achieving a result on this directive .
I would like to thank the presidency for its work , and the European Commission and Commissioner Bolkestein in particular who acted as a facilitator .
Thanks also to all my colleagues on Parliament 's delegation who went through numerous tortuous meetings and lost a night 's sleep in Luxembourg trying to achieve this result .
Also , I must thank the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , who throughout conducted a robust defence of the European Parliament 's position and his own views .
The result of the delegation 's considerations is before us today and we have to adopt or reject the joint text agreed in Luxembourg on 6 June .
This power of rejection or acceptance is a power granted to the European Parliament under the Amsterdam Treaty .
The Commission and Council have been working for 12 years to achieve rules and safeguards that are acceptable across all Member States .
They achieved this only to find that the European Parliament took a different stance on a number of issues and articles .
Fifteen amendments in Parliament 's second reading were not acceptable to the Council .
On 29 May , we reached agreement on 8 amendments , leaving three major areas of contention : defensive measures , squeeze-out and minority shareholders and the level playing field .
Squeeze-out and minority shareholders have been the subject of a Commission declaration , and a group of company law experts is being set up to look at the overall situation - including the equitable price .
Also , we had difficulties with the Council on employee rights to information .
On all these issues , Parliament 's delegation made strong representations to the Council in the negotiations and won many concessions .
Indeed , from most points of view , it could and would be assumed that the negotiations were a success .
However , Article 9 and Amendments Nos 20 and 17 , in particular , remained a point of fundamental difference .
The history is therefore important in this case .
Fifteen Member States reached common accord and a common position , along with the Commission .
That meant that there were two European institutions in agreement whilst the European Parliament took a different position .
One Member State then withdrew from the common position - the first time this has ever happened .
The Council was then in the position of being unable to concede anything to Parliament by way of negotiation on these matters .
Had it done so , all 14 Member States would have felt cheated , having already conceded much to achieve a common position .
For one Member State to achieve something , having withdrawn from the common position , would have caused the Council great difficulty in future negotiations .
Therefore , Parliament 's delegation was in a very difficult position .
I say to Parliament that the delegation itself was divided on the main issue , and that is not a happy position for the chairman of a delegation .
The European Parliament had already made its decision clear , and what it wanted was to achieve a directive .
We had to take a decision .
A vote in the delegation was necessary and that vote was achieved .
We had the minimum majority required to approve the negotiation with the Council , and indeed had the support of the Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
My own position as chairman was made clear and well understood .
While fighting for the powers of the European Parliament , it would have been wrong for half of the delegation to have rejected this directive one late night in Luxembourg , without the full Parliament having the opportunity of the third reading we are having today .
The real issue is whether managers of companies are in control or whether shareholders that own the company should decide .
In other words : one man , one vote .
Today we have a third reading and , tomorrow , a vote to accept or reject this proposal .
I recommend that the European Parliament accept the outcome of this negotiation , otherwise we will do serious damage to Europe 's future economic development .
We might also do serious damage to the European Parliament , as the European press seems to be totally opposed , along with the Council and the Commission , to what we want to achieve .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Provan and Mr Lehne .
I will take as my starting point the position which was adopted at the second reading of the European Parliament on 13 December 2000 with 399 votes for the motion .
An amendment adopted at this time radically changed Article 9 of the common position , enabling an administrative board to take defensive measures without consulting the shareholders once the bid has been made public .
The defensive measures could have been subject to prior authorisation of the supervisory authority by the administrative board or in response to a request from shareholders holding at least 1 % of the voting rights .
Then we had conciliation .
Conciliation was a lengthy operation on an extremely difficult subject .
In view of the Council 's downright refusal to take this amendment into account , amongst other things , we presented a substantial series of compromise solutions which ranged from the possibility of shareholders holding 20 % of the voting rights requesting that a meeting be convened to discuss defensive measures to the introduction of a clause linking the entry into force of the directive on takeover bids to the entry into force of a directive creating a sort of level playing field , that is common rules of play under European company law .
Nothing was achieved and the Council continued to refuse any form of compromise we proposed .
I recall , amongst other things - and I am reminding myself more than anyone - that a proposal for a directive whose objective is to create a level playing field does exist : the fifth directive on company law , concerning the obligations of shareholders and third parties in respect of the structure of public limited companies and the powers and obligations of their social organs .
This proposal was adopted by the Commission in 1972 and then lay untouched in the Council 's drawers for over 10 years pending the common position , after which the European Parliament expressed its opinion on it on several occasions .
The five years necessary to transpose ....
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , as Mr Provan pointed out , the two institutions with responsibility for adopting this directive , Council and Parliament , are divided .
In the Council , a minority opposes it and Parliament is divided more or less down the middle , given that in the delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the final evening of debate , the voting was concluded with 8 votes for and 6 against , with one Member abstaining .
I would say that the divisions now also extend to the various political groups .
My own Group will decide this afternoon on how it will vote , which means that until tomorrow we will probably not know for sure whether or not the directive will be adopted .
I should like to begin by saying that I disagree with Mr Provan ' s assessment of a possible rejection of this directive .
Because the problem we face is whether , as a consequence of the directive being adopted , European businesses - as Mr Lehne pointed out - could be held to ransom by the major international financial operators , who are known colloquially as the ' Sharks of Wall Street ' .
This is the danger we are currently facing and , as a Member of this Parliament , I state my intention , of course , to vote against the directive , because I believe that the danger of our businesses being devoured by these financial operators , and of being stripped to the bone if they have assets - I am talking here about heavily capitalised companies - immediately condemning workers to unemployment , is much greater than the alternative danger , which is that the operation of the internal market may be impeded .
As Mr Lehne pointed out , the Americans themselves have adopted the rather expeditious solution of having at least one State - Delaware - in which highly capitalised companies can be based and where the monitoring of these companies by financial sharks can be prevented .
With regard to public opinion or the press , I also disagree with Mr Provan , because his words do not match what is written in the newspapers that I read .
In my opinion , a vote against , at this time , by the European Parliament on an issue as important and significant as this would enhance the prestige of this institution .
Because the information that I have from governmental institutions indicates that many governments would probably change their position within the Council if they were aware of the impact of this issue on the business world and , above all , on the unions .
Now , in the formula laid down in the proposed directive , the workers are the unwanted guests .
The workers are invited to the table but they cannot join in .
They cannot take part in the meal and cannot take part in the decision-making . They are simply informed of the decision that is to be taken and , once it is taken , the document provided by the workers is just seen as another document - similar to what the Council does when Parliament has a consultative role - and then the decision is reached without any account being taken of the workers ' opinions .
I and most of the Members of the Socialist Group will , therefore , probably vote against adopting this directive .
Mr President , I wish to begin by paying tribute to Mr Provan 's chairmanship of Parliament 's Conciliation Committee .
He did a marvellous job in very difficult circumstances .
I should like to say , on behalf of the ELDR Group , that we are fully and undividedly behind the agreement reached in conciliation and will vote accordingly .
Most of the reasons have been well rehearsed before and we have heard some of them again this morning .
This directive is crucial , indeed critical , to the financial services action plan .
Therefore if we are genuinely interested in the competitiveness and good functioning of Europe 's economy , we have to proceed with this directive .
My Group believes that it is in the long-term interests of Europe 's citizens .
I want us to consider the interests of those we are really trying to protect with this directive , namely the minority shareholders , so that we can begin to secure investment and ownership in enterprises across Europe .
It is now beginning to be the case , and will increasingly be so in future , that many of those investors are Europe 's citizens investing for their future , savings and pensions .
Recent events have shown that citizens are becoming increasingly frustrated with the inability of politicians to deal with the effects of globalisation and other aspects of corporate life .
For example it seems quite possible that a group of motivated shareholders may be beginning to achieve an about-turn on the projected building of the Ilisu dam in Turkey .
Shareholders can act against the Wall Street sharks .
Shareholders are property owners ; they have rights and responsibilities which can be exercised in many ways this House would wish to endorse .
Shareholders will often also be employees .
The conciliation result represents a substantial compromise .
This directive has the potential to be the means to allow our citizens to be investors in the future of Europe 's enterprise and to secure the health and vitality of our economy .
Mr President , it is a privilege to have the opportunity of taking part in this debate .
As one of the majority at the conciliation group in Luxembourg on 5 June , my primary motive in voting was to ensure that Parliament would have the chance to vote on this third reading .
It would have been a scandal if , at 1 a.m. in Luxembourg on 5 June , 15 of us had voted it down and prevented Parliament having this debate .
We can assure all those visiting this House today that there will not be a more important decision affecting the well-being of industry in Europe than this one .
My group will have a free vote on it and I believe others will as well .
We will , as individual Members of Parliament , stand by our consciences on this issue at tomorrow 's vital vote .
Sometimes I feel I am living in a looking glass land when I hear that all sorts of disastrous takeovers will occur if the directive is carried .
Members must remember that takeovers will go on in all events .
The issue is whether we have a common set of norms in Europe which govern us all .
Will we have a single basic law for takeovers or will we let the chaos continue ?
Mr Lehne makes a powerful point about the damage that can be done by golden shares , about the unfairness of the absence of a level playing field .
We will not move closer to a level playing field by throwing out this directive .
That will make it impossible over the next decade to get anywhere near a level playing field .
We must , therefore , move forward on this occasion .
It would be shocking not to do so .
It will probably take four years , if we carry this tomorrow , before it comes into effect .
Trade unionists and employees of companies throughout Europe will still have to wait four years to get what Mr Medina Ortega already regards as not enough .
But they have far less at the moment .
If the directive goes through , the board of a bidding or offeree company will have to declare its hand at the time of the bid .
It will have to declare its intentions in regard to jobs and the location of work .
The trade unions or other employees ' representatives will have the right to comment on that before the offeree company comes to a decision .
The shareholders of the offeree company will need to know what the view of the employees is .
None of this is law at the moment .
We are about to deprive people of something of vital importance , unless we carry this !
Mr President , Commissioner , European companies , workers and savers urgently need a European capital market which is free from protectionist constraints , integrated and efficient .
The strength of the euro itself will depend on the strength and attractiveness of the financial markets .
The competitiveness of public limited companies is an essential factor for an efficient capital market which is geared to the creation and protection of value for large and , in particular , small shareholders .
In this sense , precisely the most disputed article of the directive - Article 9 - is a step in the right direction towards providing , within the single European market , a reliable , homogeneous legislative framework for public takeover bids .
This is why the Italian radicals of the Bonino List are going to vote for the directive .
Moreover , when we refer to the United States model , I feel that it is not right to pick and choose : either we take the entire model , Mr Lehne , or else we reject the model completely .

In recent weeks , the conservatives and protectionists , who have opposed this measure , have had a wonderful excuse in the shape of the asymmetries between the different countries .
The case of the bid by what was actually a subsidiary of Electricité de France to take control of the second Italian private electricity group , Montedison , is symbolic .
EDF is a company which is not quoted on the Stock Exchange , which is 100 % the property of the French government and which enjoys a legal monopoly in France .
Clearly , its aggressive policy of shopping around in Europe is an intolerable distortion of the European capital market .
In promising to reinforce competitiveness and competition in the markets of some public services , we are letting statism and monopolistic management in by the back door .
In conclusion , Mr President , in order to avoid these types of operations prompting reactions such as the golden share , block decrees or rejection of legislation such as that which is to be put to the vote tomorrow on the competitiveness of companies , it is necessary for the Commission to intervene with its powers with regard to State aid and abuse and facilitation of dominant positions , to prevent these asymmetries from destroying the European capital market .
Mr President , I should like to start by acknowledging the work which Mr Lehne has put into this report , even though I have not always agreed with him .
When publicly listed companies are subject to possible takeovers they should be able to take defensive measures , but when management acts it must behave even-handedly towards all shareholders in any one class .
That must be included in the rules .
If that does not happen , the integrity of the market is eroded .
That leads to an unwillingness of capital to invest and thus under-capitalisation , and hence under-performance of Europe 's economy .
In turn , pension funds will not be able to secure proper retirement provision for their members and the currency will weaken .
This conciliation has seen 15 new provisions introduced into the common position , so it cannot be maintained seriously that Parliament 's rights have been trampled on .
To claim that could undermine our credibility in the future when we may have real cause for concern .
The principle of having a takeover directive has been supported at first and second readings and now , after 12 years , we have a final agreed text .
In this Parliament we frequently complain that we are unfairly perceived as immature and irresponsible , and hence disregarded .
Let us now prove these critics wrong and vote for the conciliation .
It is one which most commentators and all but one European country , Germany - a country which I normally hold in esteem but which welched on a unanimously agreed position of the Council - support .
This , as Mr MacCormick very lucidly pointed out , is the first step towards creating a single market in corporate ownership .
It is an integral component of the single market and is in the interests of all Europe 's citizens .
Mr President , when it comes to adopting a position on this final interlegislative phase of the directive , we must not base our positions on its content , but instead consider the role of the European Parliament in the codecision procedure .
If we look closely at what has happened , we will reach the conclusion that , so far , the system has not worked .
I know that it is difficult for decisions to be reached in Council , for governments holding divergent positions and countries with different legal traditions to reach agreement , but I have the feeling , or rather I am certain , that this consensus in Council is being sought with no awareness at all of the European Parliament ' s thoughts on the legislation ' s content .
Of course , when agreement is reached within the Council , any proposal by Parliament which goes against this comes to be seen as a threat to an agreement that has been reached , sometimes in extremis and which may hang in the balance .
In these circumstances , the Council ultimately becomes intransigent and adopts a position that always implies : either you do what we say or the law will not be adopted .
Mr Provan ' s words have shown that the Council has attached less importance to achieving an agreement with the European Parliament than to the feeling that a certain country would not meet a commitment that it had previously given .
When Parliament studied the content of the common position at second reading , it was particularly concerned about two issues : workers ' participation and the obligation to neutrality imposed on boards of management .
With regard to these two items , a majority of the European Parliament had the audacity to oppose what had previously been decided on in Council .
I consider it to be extremely serious that no consideration was given at first reading to the positions of the European Parliament on workers and their representatives being fully informed and being able to state their opinion on the takeover of their companies and this justifies the European Parliament ' s opposition to the common position .
Furthermore , the fact that this Parliament sought a balance between those for and against allowing defensive manoeuvres , far from deserving the criticism heaped upon it by certain self-interested sectors , should have their gratitude , because the European Parliament ' s position was not to allow any type of defensive manoeuvring as was suggested , with considerable bias , to the media .
You simply have to study the content of the amendments tabled to see that this statement is false .
We do not look favourably on the Council position of rejecting any possible agreement with the positions of this Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner Bolkestein , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to say a few words about this report .
In my opinion , the guiding principle we should all abide by is not only to talk about the internal market , but also about the European social model , as opposed to the Anglo-Saxon model .
This evening , we will be talking to one of the Commissioners about socially responsible entrepreneurship . And that means that we will not only be talking about shareholders , but also about stakeholders , along with consumers , environmental organisations and employees .
Information and consultation are also currently under discussion .
Not simply information , therefore , but also consultation .
Having a say in the broad sense of the word .
We are looking into the request to review the Works Councils Act .
We argue in favour of an observatory for industrial change .
That is what is happening on the one hand .
On the other hand , there are also people who would like to see a European company statute , and who want takeover bids to be regulated .
In my view , we should be sufficiently grown-up , to slowly but surely reach a package deal in which matters of this kind can be regulated in one fell swoop .
At the moment , however , we are witness to a more gradual approach .
Returning to this Directive , I gather from Articles 6 and 9 d ) , in particular , that these are only concerned with disclosure of information .
I am drawing on my practical experience as advisor to works councils and trade unions , when I encountered difficulties of this kind on a daily basis .
With regard to this directive , one could revert back to a situation where all that is required is information and where one hardly has the time to form one ' s own opinion .
This being the case , to say that the opinion may be sent along with a bid is a hollow phrase .
I have heard such hollow phrases all too often , and I do not welcome them .
What we are about to see , therefore , is a very strange coalition tomorrow , with divisions within all the political parties .
I naturally defend the proportion , and that will be the largest proportion , of the Greens who will be voting against .
A strange coalition indeed , made up of people who defend the pearls of their national industries , as well as people who stand up for more say and better consultation as a matter of principle .
I quite definitely belong to the second group .
As Mr Simpson has said in connection with the postal issue , I would have liked the ayatollah of liberalisation to have had a bit more nerve and to have regulated this consultation aspect properly from the outset .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have great admiration for what Commissioner Bolkestein has achieved and is achieving within the internal market .
Unfortunately , I do not see eye to eye with him today , for I am of the opinion that the mediation outcome should be rejected for the following reasons .
First of all , the proposal conflicts with legislation and practices in my own country , the Netherlands .
Although the Dutch Finance Minister may well have stated in a letter yesterday to the Dutch Parliament that the Directive should , in his opinion , be introduced , whoever seeks advice from the social partners in the Netherlands knows better .
In fact , until two years ago , the Dutch government was also opposed to this directive .
Things can change .
The Dutch system makes provision for protecting companies against hostile takeovers .
It aims to afford the Board of the target partnership the opportunity of weighing up all the vested interests in the event of a hostile bid .
In this connection , the Board must have the company ' s continuity in mind .
The approach in Mr Bolkestein ' s proposal is completely different .
It leaves the decision concerning a hostile bid to the shareholders .
A second argument against Mr Bolkestein ' s proposal is the inequality which it creates within Europe .
Article 9 only prohibits the legal protection structures .
All other methods of countering company takeovers , such as government intervention , are being left out of the equation .
Mr President , one final point . One of the arguments used in favour of adopting the directive is that it has undergone a great deal of doctoring for twelve years and that , if the compromise is rejected , all the work will have been in vain .
That is not an argument , in my opinion .
Mr Bolkestein has agreed to have studies carried out into a number of points .
Besides , I am of the opinion that studies should have been carried out during the twelve years of preparation , not after adopting the directive , but that is just by the by .
The Commission could prepare a fresh proposal for a directive very quickly which , if handled intelligently , could indeed provide a level playing field in Europe and could enter into force before the current proposal , which , after all , has a five-year transitional period .
Mr President , Mr Bolkestein , ladies and gentlemen , conciliation is a question of reaching a balance , a question of compromise .
It involves give and take on both sides .
As part of the European legislative process we often find Parliament and the Council negotiating hard in the conciliation procedure .
However the outcome is generally a balanced result that the European Parliament can accept .
But this does not apply in the case of the " takeover directive " , which , after many years ' work , should now be before us in its final form .
The European Parliament should reject the result which emerged from a night session in Luxembourg .
It is worthless .
I am saying that to you quite frankly , although I was a member of this House 's delegation to the negotiations .
However , I can also tell you that we have never been treated so frostily in any of the Conciliation Committees in which I have been involved .
There was not a trace of mutual give and take !
By an overwhelming majority , the Council 's negotiating team largely swept aside the ideas adopted by the European Parliament .
I do not want to go through the details already mentioned again point by point .
However , I would warn against this House sweeping the decisions it took by a convincing majority under the carpet and accepting an obscure conciliation result .
We would lose face and the public would quite rightly ridicule us for our weakness .
In fact the result of the conciliation process that we have before us is so poor that after that night in Luxembourg Commissioner Bolkestein stood before the press and said that legal fine tuning would still be needed .
I think that must have been a joke , because there really has been plenty of time for legal fine tuning over all the years .
But we should let the Commissioner have his wish !
We should reject the text that emerged from the Conciliation Committee and Commissioner Bolkestein can present a workable new draft before long , one which matches not only his ideas but also the ideas of the elected representatives of 370 million Europeans .
Mr President , the job Parliament has here today is quite simple : to adopt or reject the compromise achieved in conciliation .
What did we achieve in conciliation ?
Out of 15 amendments tabled in second reading , compromises were reached on 11 .
In this House we have a duty to deal with the facts , not to listen to the jungle drums beating from misinformed sources .
I welcome the changes in amendments , made by my own political group , to recognise the legitimate interests of employees in a takeover bid .
Here the common text has been modified from a requirement to provide new information to a requirement to provide information to employees at three points in the directive : in Article 6 ( 1 ) , Article 6 ( 2 ) and Article 9 ( 1d ) .
There are minimum standards .
There is nothing to prevent boards of companies or Member States going further than the requirements in this directive , nor does it prejudice obligations to inform and consult under either national or EU directives .
We can only , in conciliation , go as far as amendments allow us in second reading .
No amendments were tabled requiring the board of a company to consult prior to a takeover bid .
It is no secret that Article 9 , and the right of boards to take defensive action without shareholder approval , was the bone of contention in conciliation .
But is simply not true to state that the board of a company faced with a hostile takeover cannot take action or is obliged to remain neutral or passive .
Defensive and frustrating action is possible with shareholder approval .
Indeed , our amendments to the common position mean that a board can get fast-track approval in 14 days .
I have always believed that politics is the art of the possible .
In conciliation the Council and the Commission stuck to their key objective in this directive , of protecting the minority shareholders , protecting the interests of investors and defending shareholders against unscrupulous directors and inefficient company boards .
Article 9 and restrictions on frustrating action was the Holy Grail of this text .
Therefore we had no scope to rewrite it to allow unapproved poison pill action .
But we did achieve a deal on Article 9 : we forced the Commission and the Council to freeze the article and to have a group of company law experts to examine key issues , and to come back to Parliament in March 2002 .
This also includes - as the Commissioner can confirm - the possibility of reviewing Article 9 in the light of the findings of that group .
The entry into force of this directive is therefore postponed and Member States can postpone compliance with Article 9 until 2006 .
My delegation will vote for this directive .
Mr President , the Commission is delighted that Parliament and the Council have at last come to an agreement in the Conciliation Committee on the proposal for a directive concerning takeover bids .
I should like to thank the Parliament delegation and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , and Mr Provan , who chaired the delegation , for their important contributions .
Once again we have shown that the institutions are capable of finding an acceptable compromise .
This proposal for a directive is important for the European Union , it is important for the Financial Services Action Plan , which has been identified as a priority by the Lisbon European Council .
It is equally important for industry , for all sorts of companies , because it will provide a secure legal framework for restructuring operations .
Some fears have been expressed about the directive .
First , some say that it leaves the companies defenceless when faced with a hostile takeover bid .
However , I would remind you that the directive allows any company to take any defensive measure deemed necessary provided that the shareholders agree with it .
Secondly , it is claimed that some European companies would be put at a disadvantage compared to American companies , because the managers of American companies can defend themselves without consulting their shareholders .
However , I may point out that if they do not take shareholders ' interests into account , management decisions may be contested by any shareholder before the courts .
Thirdly , there are concerns that there is no level playing field in Europe for the protection of minority shareholders .
But this directive provides for a first step towards creating such a level playing field by protecting all shareholders , and in particular minority shareholders , in the case of a change of control in their companies .
In particular , it provides for a mandatory offer to all shareholders for all their holdings at an equitable price , and with an obligation of cash consideration in certain conditions .
Fourthly , some claim there is no protection for the employees of the companies involved , but this directive provides for complete and immediate information for employees and also gives them the opportunity to state their opinion on the offer .
And , of course , the companies involved must obey national and European regulations , especially the employment directives .
Fifthly , some claim that we shall see a huge number of aggressive takeovers across the Union , but the facts tell us otherwise .
Today , only 2 % of all notified mergers or acquisitions are hostile .
The Commission has undertaken to monitor and ensure that no such distortions emerge .
Fourteen Member States and the Commission are in favour of this improvement in company law .
The Commission will undertake further work on the definition of equitable price , the squeeze-out procedure and the level playing field for protecting shareholders in the Member States , particularly in response to the European Parliament .
We shall produce this work by March 2002 .
In conclusion , the adoption of this directive will build confidence in the European institutions and in European financial markets .
The efforts made jointly by your parliamentary delegation , the Council and the Commission in order to reach the agreement of 6 June make it worth sending a message that , after 12 years of work on this proposal for a directive , there can be a compromise between the co-legislators in this field .
This makes it worth encouraging the further development of company law at European level .
I trust in the judgment of Parliament and am confident that it will vote in favour of adopting this proposal for a directive .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Commissioner Bolkestein has just joined a long list of his colleagues who have been subjected to a procedure in this Parliament which is no longer acceptable .
He was making an important speech to a full House but the only people listening were members of the public and our electorate in the Gallery .
I insist that this matter now be referred to the Bureau and that , as of September , we see no further repetition .
We are all guilty of talking .
We can , of course , all listen to the Commissioner through our headphones .
However , if this Parliament is not conscious of the image it portrays to the public , then it should be .
So , as of September , however it may be done - perhaps you could let off a siren at ear-piercing levels - the Commissioner should be heard , like any other speaker in this Chamber , in dignity and silence .
( Applause )
Thank you for your speech , Mr Beazley .
However , as you see , I am afraid we only have a small wooden hammer with which to keep order and this is not sufficient .
I would like , first of all , to say that I agree with you .
However , I must also inform you that this matter is not the responsibility of the Presidency Bureau but the responsibility of the Conference of Presidents .
In my opinion , provision should be made for an interval to be left between the last speech - which is almost always the Commissioner ' s speech on behalf of the Commission - and the start of voting time , in order to allow everybody the time to listen to the Commissioner ' s speech carefully and to be present here for voting time .
I must also say - and I apologise if I offend the people sitting in the public gallery - that the public is not supposed openly to express its opinion or its opposition regarding what is said in the Chamber when it is present during sittings .
I am saying this because I noticed several visitors applauding just now : this is not permitted by the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I wish to draw your attention to Rule 22 ( 3 ) , which states that : " The Bureau shall take decisions on matters relating to the conduct of sittings " .
It is a Bureau responsibility and I ask the Bureau to take its responsibilities seriously .
Of course , Mr Corbett , but the agenda of the plenary sessions is set by the Conference of Presidents .
If the agenda does not leave us enough time to apply Article 22 , the final result is that , at every part-session here in Strasbourg , we will end up listening to a Commissioner who is talking amidst great confusion because not all the Members are listening properly .
In our opinion , too much has been packed into too little time .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
VOTE
Mr President , I should not speak on this document because artists do not retire : like love , art never retires .
Therefore , I should not speak about this document for I represent pensioners , but , Mrs Echerer , Mr President , many pensioners are also artists .
At the end of their working life , many pensioners paint or create works of art , and so I want to protect the pensioners who are also artists .
In the same way as there are pensioners who continue to be in love and to live out that love , there are also pensioners who are artists and create works of art .
Therefore , like Mrs Echerer , I support this document .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of the resale right directive was to harmonise the common market .
This aim has been achieved , but with rather dubious success .
Quite apart from that , it is questionable whether there is really any need for harmonisation in this area .
Particularly at a time when things are being streamlined and efforts are being made to achieve transparency , introducing another Community tax is counterproductive .
It impedes trade ; in fact it could even be said that it will bring it to a halt , because it is only a question of time before the art market shifts away from Europe in favour of the USA or Switzerland .
In fact an imbalance will arise in the art market , with all the negative consequences that implies .
Small galleries and the young artists they promote will be particularly affected by this new tax , however small .
Even established artists , for whom this directive ought to bring some monetary advantage , have spoken out against it .
It is a total mystery why this directive should be used to force something on the people affected that they do not want .
By saying yes to this directive , Europe has had its day as a patron of art .
That is why we in the Freedom Party have voted against it .
. ( DE ) Austrian artists are opposed to the introduction of the resale right .
They see the resale right as being a major economic disadvantage , because it will inevitably lead to a drop in the initial sale price .
The introduction of the resale right will lead to a migration of the art market from Europe to countries such as the USA or Switzerland , because there is nothing of the kind there and resale prices for works of art will not therefore be forced up .
Small gallery owners will be particularly hard hit , as they are far less able to withstand this pressure on prices .
It is impossible to see why the resale right should be imposed on artists against their will as a form of copyright .
For these reasons the Freedom Party is rejecting this report .
.
Although the " droit de suite " compulsory art resale levy report by Mr Zimmerling has been improved on at conciliation , it is still flawed .
It has usefully raised the threshold for art work affected to EUR 3 000 but , although the large art galleries and auction houses favour this , as the volume of work is reduced , it does nothing for unknown contemporary artists .
It introduces , as a sweetener , a 6-year derogation before application , but my fear as a London MEP is that our world renowned auction houses , such as Sotheby 's , Christies and Phillips , will seize this period as an opportunity to move their businesses to offshore jurisdictions outside the EU , such as Geneva , Monaco and New York , with a loss of jobs in London .
This will both directly affect employed personnel and indirectly cause damage to ancillary businesses such as framing and specialist art insurers .
Therefore I voted against this measure which seems designed solely to create a level playing field for the French auction houses , who have had such a concept in place for many years already .
. During today 's vote on the Zimmerling Report ( A5-0235 / 2001 ) I voted against the report and I also urged all my " Nea Dimokratia " colleagues to do so .
It is my strong belief that the approval of this directive will lead to the displacement of the art market to the USA as well as to Switzerland , and to an unfair advantage that all the artists from the United States will have when they try to sell their artistic work in Europe .
I also believe that the proposal for national limits lower than the Community ones , as far as " droit de suite " is concerned , will eventually harm European artists and will boost the profits of the gallery owners and the auction sales companies .
For all these reasons , and since I am a European artist , I decided to vote against .
Rothley report ( A5-0174 / 2001 )
Mr President , before I came to Strasbourg , I met Mr Fortunato Rossi , a pensioner of 80 , who said to me : " I have had a terrible car accident .
A Member of the European Parliament - what a coincidence - ran into me : I have got a broken foot and a broken arm and my head is in very bad shape ; I have suffered greatly as a result of this .
I went to the insurance company and they said that I am 80 years old , I am not worth anything any longer , I cannot earn anything and , therefore , they are not going to give me any compensation .
However , if , on the other hand , it had been I who had run into the Member of the European Parliament , I would have had to pay him at least ITL 2 billion .
Does it seem right to you , Mr Fatuzzo , that an old man does not have the right to compensation when he is hit by another car ? "
I replied : " You are right , Mr Not-Very-Fortunato Rossi .
I will call for the next report on the subject to provide for fair compensation for elderly pensioners . "
If the genuine aim of this report was , as it claims , to improve the legal protection of accident victims , we would have voted in favour .
Even if , however , the recommendations accompanying the report contain some proposals that would make the situation of accident victims slightly easier , this is essentially a complicated balancing act to avoid harming the interests of insurance companies .
So , for example , in this Europe which claims to be united , insurance companies will be allowed to make people they insure pay an extra premium if they are considering living temporarily in another Member State of the European Union .
All this talk of unity within Europe is worth very little when faced with a small additional premium .
We therefore abstained from voting on this report .
. I support my socialist colleague , Willi Rothley , on his report which calls for a new car insurance directive to improve the legal protection of accident victims .
Our citizens have a right to receive equal legal protection wherever they are in the European Union .
Every year , thousands of people drive across the continent on holiday .
Holidaymakers driving from Bolton to Barcelona must be protected on a legal basis .
The overall aim of the directive is extremely important in ensuring that there is a consistent and high level of legal protection .
I wholeheartedly support the drive for improved compensation for national road traffic accidents , by obliging insurers to provide either an offer or a refusal of compensation within three months of receiving a claim .
Clear and swift decisions are the best way of reassuring victims of the outcome of their claim .
Furthermore , this report welcomes an EU minimum of EUR 2 m with future increases in line with inflation .
Minimum amounts insured are out of date and this figure is a much more realistic sum .
It is not just holidaymakers who will benefit from this new directive .
People buying cars in other countries will also gain confidence from this measure .
Insurers should be able to provide insurance for a maximum of 30 days for anyone who wishes to buy a vehicle registered in another Member State and drive it back to their own country to re-register it there .
Public confidence in the legal aspects of road safety across the European Union must increase so that our citizens can travel freely from country to country without fear of huge legal fees and 15 intimidating legal systems .
Only by improving the legal protection of accident victims can our citizens take full advantage of driving across the EU and make the most of freedom of movement .
Wallis report ( A5-0134 / 2001 )
Mr President , the pensioner who talked to me about the previous report was with a friend of his , Mr Tranquillo Verdi , also from Bergamo , and he asked me : " Why is it that you get so absorbed in resolving disputes between consumers and producers of consumer goods but you do not do anything about pensions and pensioners ' disputes with the State over pensions , which are also consumer goods ?
Or maybe pensioners are not consumer goods ?
I would like you , Mr Fatuzzo , " he added , " to ensure that we receive our pensions quickly and on time " .
And so this is what I am asking you to do , Mr President .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.30 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. ) .

ECB and the euro
The next item is the joint debate on two reports :
( A5-0225 / 2001 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the 2000 Annual Report of the European Central Bank [ C5-0187 / 2001 - 2001 / 2090 ( COS ) ] ;
( A5-0222 / 2001 ) by Mr Maaten , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on means to assist economic actors in switching to the euro [ 2000 / 2278 ( INI ) ] .
It is my great pleasure today to present the third Annual Report of the ECB , two and a half years after the launch of the euro and less than half a year before the single currency will become fully visible for our citizens in the form of banknotes and coins .
The year 2000 was a remarkable year for the euro area , as economic growth reached its highest level for over a decade and was accompanied by continued strong job creation .
The HICP in the euro area has also , alas , been above 2 % since the middle of 2000 , mainly owing to oil price increases and the depreciation of the exchange rate of the euro last year .
While this increase in the HICP to above the ECB 's definition of price stability is not welcome , the ECB cannot and should not avoid short-term price fluctuations caused by such temporary factors .
Nonetheless , it is crucial to prevent any spillover of transitory short-term pressures into medium-term inflation expectations .
During 2000 the ECB had to be particularly vigilant in this regard in a context of strong economic growth and given that monetary developments clearly indicated the existence of upward risks to price stability .
It was for this reason that we raised interest rates six times in 2000 .
By doing so , the ECB contributed to ensuring the sustainability of non-inflationary economic growth in the euro area .
In this respect , the evolution of long-term interest rates in the euro area in 2000 indicated that financial markets generally expected medium-term price developments to remain in line with the definition of price stability .
The forecasts which became available in 2000 painted a similar picture .
This is a clear indication that the ECB affirmed its credibility in 2000 .
Before sharing with you my analysis of the current situation , let me turn to some issues raised in the draft resolution prepared by your Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs concerning the monetary policy strategy of the ECB .
I should like to begin by saying that I share the view expressed in the draft resolution that the ECB 's two-pillar strategy can be understood as a means of analysing all the pieces of information relevant for monetary policy .
However , there are other points in the resolution with which I would not agree .
These concern the doubts expressed with regard to the definition of price stability , the importance that the first pillar should be given in our strategy and the role of projections under the second pillar .
The Governing Council of the ECB has defined price stability in the euro area as " a year-on-year increase in the HICP for the euro area of below 2 % " , and has stated that " price stability has to be maintained over the medium term " .
The definition provided by the Governing Council ensures accountability and gives clear guidance to expectations of future price developments .
The phrase " below 2 % " clearly defines the upper boundary of the rate of HICP increases which is consistent with price stability .
This upper boundary is in line with the practice of the national central banks of participating Member States before the start of Stage Three of EMU .
In addition , the word " increase " clearly signals that prolonged declines in the level of the HICP index would not be deemed consistent with price stability .
There should be no doubt that the commitment of the ECB to maintain price stability is compatible neither with inflation above 2 % in the medium term nor with deflation .
In this sense , the monetary policy of the ECB is fully symmetric , fighting both upward and downward pressures on prices which may result in outcomes not in line with our definition of price stability .
Within our monetary policy strategy , the first pillar assigns a prominent role to money .
This reflects the fundamental monetary nature of inflation - as supported by empirical evidence , much of which is available from our Working Paper Series - which indicates a stable long-run demand for M3 and good leading indicator properties of M3 growth for inflation in the medium term .
The need to follow monetary developments is therefore crucial to analysing risks to price stability in the euro area in the medium term .
I should also emphasise at this point that the quality of monetary statistics is among the highest of all statistics available in the euro area .
These monetary statistics are based on a fully harmonised reporting scheme across all monetary financial institutions in the euro area .
The quality of monetary statistics has recently been further improved by identifying , as a separate item , non-resident holdings of money market funds .
Furthermore , we expect that it will be possible for the non-resident holdings of other negotiable paper to be appropriately measured and published towards the end of the year .
For all these reasons , M3 will continue to play a prominent role in the monetary policy of the ECB .
With regard to the projections , and in particular to the suggestion that they should be explicitly endorsed by the Governing Council , let me remind you that the Governing Council is accountable only for maintaining price stability .
It is up to the Governing Council to take the decisions necessary to ensure the performance of the tasks entrusted to the ESCB by the Treaty .
In this respect , the Governing Council decided , for several reasons , to follow a two-pillar strategy .
In particular , it was decided not to follow a strategy under which monetary policy decisions would be made solely on the basis of inflation forecasts .
While the staff projections play an important role in the analysis , the Governing Council conducts under the second pillar , it is important to understand that this analysis is not centred on these forecasts .
Given the difficulties of forecasting over longer-term horizons and the uncertainty regarding the appropriate economic model , the Governing Council does not deem it advisable to use only a single projection to analyse risks to price stability .
The uncertainty surrounding forecasts has also been appropriately reflected in the manner in which the ECB publishes them , namely in the form of ranges rather than point estimates .
Turning to an analysis of current economic and monetary developments , after the decision on 10 May to lower the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points , at its meetings in June the Governing Council considered that , on the basis of the information available , the current level of key ECB interest rates was appropriate to ensure price stability in the euro area over the medium term .
Since the last meeting of the Governing Council , there has not been any new information that would justify changing this assessment .
As regards the information contained in the first pillar , monetary developments point towards a favourable outlook for the medium-term maintenance of price stability .
After having followed a gradual downward trend since spring 2000 , the three-month average of annual M3 growth rates has tended to broadly stabilise over recent months .
When account is taken of the upward distortion to monetary figures , M3 would have been growing at around the reference value in the most recent period .
Moreover , the annual growth rate of loans to the private sector has continued to moderate , mainly driven by the slowdown in loans to households .
With regard to the second pillar , we continue to expect the currently high rates of inflation to remain a transitory phenomenon and , in the absence of further unfavourable price shocks , inflation rates should fall below 2 % in 2002 .
These developments are expected to take place in an environment of weaker economic growth , which should , however , remain broadly in line with trend potential growth of the euro area .
In this context let me turn to an issue which has attracted considerable attention just recently : the potential impact of the cash changeover on price pressures .
In general , price transparency and competition are likely to limit inflationary pressures from the cash changeover .
In this respect it is also worth noting the commitment of finance ministers in the euro area , as reflected in a statement issued by the Eurogroup , that , overall , the conversion into euros of all prices , charges and fees administered by their governments will be price neutral or else " smoothed " in favour of the consumer .
We call on governments at other levels but also on firms to follow this example set by central governments .
In addition , the public 's vigilance in monitoring prices and price changes will also be important during the conversion period .
The ECB will continue to pursue its mandate to maintain price stability over the medium term , irrespective of whether prices are quoted in euros or in the component currencies .
We shall therefore continue to remain vigilant as regards future developments affecting the balance of risks to price stability , including - in particular - monetary developments , real GDP growth , price-setting behaviour and wage developments .
At this juncture , when price developments are mainly being affected by transitory factors , it is crucial that the current upward movement of prices does not become a more lasting one , and it is therefore important that wage moderation continues .
With a view to the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins , I can report that the Eurosystem 's preparations are well on track .
At the end of June 2001 the total number of euro banknotes produced so far amounted to about 9 billion , which is about 90 % of the initial launch stock .
Moreover , as an insurance against potential production risks , in March 2001 the ECB decided to establish a Eurosystem central reserve .
This reserve will amount to about 10 % of the launch and logistical stocks taken together .
On 1 January 2001 the Eurosystem launched the " Euro 2002 Information Campaign " , which is designed to complement other information campaigns being conducted at the national level .
The main objective of the campaign is not to sell the euro - the euro will sell itself - but to familiarise the general public and specific target groups with the visual appearance of the euro banknotes and their security features and to raise the awareness of citizens about the overall changeover modalities .
The information campaign is progressing on schedule .
It will become fully visible for citizens once the mass media part of the campaign starts on 30 August 2001 , after the unveiling of the final visual appearance of the euro banknotes and their security features .
The Eurosystem is fully aware of the importance the successful introduction of the euro banknotes and coins will have for overall confidence in the single currency , and the careful and comprehensive preparations being made by the Eurosystem are commensurate with this task .
We should all bear in mind the fact that the cash changeover is an unprecedented challenge and a huge logistical exercise and that all the parties involved will have to assume their part of the overall responsibility for making the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins a success .
At this point , I should like to comment briefly on the issue of the sub-frontloading of euro banknotes to the general public , a matter on which I have reported to you in greater detail on previous occasions .
Let me remind you that the ECB 's decisions have been taken in full respect of the general interest , and after a thorough assessment of all the aspects involved .
No new elements have emerged which would justify renewed reflection on this issue .
Turning to issues related to banking supervision also raised in the draft resolution on the ECB 's Annual Report , I should like to recall , at the outset , that the framework for financial stability in the EU relies on two building blocks : national competence and cooperation .
It is our firm belief that the impressive changes in financial markets prompted by the introduction of the euro call for a substantial enhancement of the mechanisms for cooperation between national authorities and with the Eurosystem .
This is so because EMU is changing the nature and scope of systemic risk .
It is no longer possible to assess threats to financial stability or the potential channels for the spread of contagious risks only at the domestic level .
I was therefore particularly glad to see that the contribution of the ESCB to improving the institutional framework for financial stability and , in particular , the development of macro-prudential analysis have been acknowledged and supported in the draft resolution .
The draft resolution also refers to the need to avoid conflicts between supervisory responsibilities and the responsibilities of the monetary authorities .
I should like to say , first , that the empirical evidence of potential conflicts between the objectives of financial stability and price stability is unclear and , second , there is no possibility for such a conflict to arise in the context of the institutional arrangements in the euro area .
Indeed , the introduction of the euro has entailed an institutional separation between monetary policy decision making , which is addressed to the euro area as a whole , and the exercise of supervisory tasks , which relates to domestic institutions and markets .
The decision-making mechanisms for the two tasks no longer coincide , and the risk of conflict has been overcome by the institutional set-up .
To conclude my statement , I should like to underscore that the introduction of the single currency has indeed reinforced the need for the strong involvement of central banks in prudential supervision and financial stability .
Many thanks , Mr Duisenberg , for your speech .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to extend an official welcome to Mr Alejandro Toledo , Peru ' s newly elected President .
Mr Toledo has taken a seat in the official gallery and will be joining us this afternoon in the company of his wife and daughter .
Mr Toledo , welcome to this House .
ECB and the euro ( continuation )
Mr President , you have made it clear that all the partners in the European single currency and also in the European Union need to pool their efforts if the historical event of completing the currency union of the 12 is to be achieved , and I can assure you that you have the support of the European Parliament .
The European Central Bank is a very young institution .
The euro , for which it is responsible , is not yet even a truly tangible currency .
That is why it is so important for the ECB to establish its own credibility .
That means that the ECB 's mandate needs to be very clearly expressed through its monetary strategy .
So far , the ECB has been fairly successful : even commentators who are usually very critical of the ECB 's monetary policy are increasingly and quite rightly recognising that Europe needs a specific solution in monetary policy terms and that asset prices should not be the main parameter for monetary policy decision making .
Nevertheless , there is still a lack of coherence in justifying individual policy measures .
They may well be correct technically speaking , but purely technical explanations are not enough to convince Europe 's markets and its public once again that the ECB is committed to price stability and to build up public confidence in the euro , which has unfortunately not improved since it was introduced .
Against this background , the European Parliament 's demand for immediate publication of the arguments for a decision or otherwise , together with the counter-arguments and the underlying reasons , and also of the summary minutes , could facilitate greater understanding of the ECB .
Max Weber once spoke about the three sources of authority : tradition , charisma and reason .
The ECB should develop the form of authority that Weber considered modern - rational authority - as a means of achieving lasting respect and efficiency .
Rational authority depends on a reliable assessment of the facts .
Forming a judgment in this way provides a basis for a sensible public debate on the issues surrounding European monetary policy .
This is essential if one considers that monetary policy is now , more than ever before , effective above all through the channel of the expectations of the financial markets , which have a considerable influence on the behaviour of the economic players .
Without a lever of this kind a central bank can fail to achieve its objectives .
Accountability and transparency do not mean that the ECB should publish more and more material .
Quality is more important than quantity , and in this respect I would like to specifically acknowledge the quality of the monetary dialogue with the European Parliament .
The ECB has improved the transparency of its monetary policy decision making .
Nevertheless , more openness and transparency cannot do any harm , indeed in the coming months they should increase confidence in and acceptance of the single currency .
The single European currency depends on this , and the following measures would be helpful :
First , the definition of the secondary target of monetary policy in accordance with Article 105 should be set and published in order to make it clear when the ECB can and must support growth and employment in the euro area , and that the ECB also supports conditions for sustainable growth effective in terms of employment at the highest level , as it did at the EU Summit in Lisbon with its target of 3 % growth .
Second , it would be helpful in this respect to publish the models used .
As long as the European Central Bank does not opt for an inflation target , it should stick to the two-pillar approach , but it should continuously improve its calculation of M3 by increased analysis and research activity .
An analytically disciplined extension of the second pillar is also needed .
Third , the ECB 's forecasts must be more precise and should not be broad ranges as they have up to now ; these need to be narrowed .
They should also be issued four times a year .
In order to achieve greater understanding and transparency , the ECB should adopt the forecasts produced by its own staff .
Fourth , summary minutes should be published containing the arguments made for and against when making decisions on monetary policy , together with an anonymous account of the voting pattern .
Fifth , we need to establish whether , as part of the revision of the Treaty , Parliament should not be given a kind of right of confirmation in respect of nomination of members of the Executive Board .
Sixth , as an important partner in macroeconomic decision making , the ECB should make its contribution to improving the coordination of economic policies and the generation of an appropriate and balanced policy mix , just as other independent central banks do , without diminishing its independence in the process .
The ECB 's priority target of guaranteeing price stability is not , after all , an objective in its own right , but rather a key condition for economic growth and job creation .
That is why monetary policy should not be formulated in isolation but rather supplemented by still closer macroeconomic policy coordination in the euro area .
The situation still leaves a lot to be desired in this area .
This could prevent economic integration being driven solely by the markets without any account being taken of employment policy and social issues .
Another reason for enhanced macroeconomic coordination involving the European Central Bank is the accelerating globalisation of financial markets , which less and less reflects the turnover of goods and services .
This suggests that interest rate variations will have a greater influence on the price of financial assets , while their effect on the real economy has become weaker than it used to be .
Concerns about the independence of the European Central Bank which have been raised as regards the effectiveness of its participation in the macroeconomic policy dialogue are equally difficult to understand .
Quite the opposite : I believe that enhanced coordination would not endanger but reinforce the independence of the European Central Bank . A higher degree of economic convergence would also facilitate its task as it would even alleviate the problem of a " one size fits all " monetary policy , and therefore reduce the risk of putting the ECB under political pressure .
The European Central Bank 's position is not the same as that of the US Federal Reserve Bank .
Its stakeholders are not just one President , one finance minister and the public , its stakeholders are 12 presidents , 12 finance ministers and the public of twelve European countries , who do not always speak with one voice .
As the representative of the European public , the European Parliament would like to be a genuine partner in this dialogue regarding the creation of a new political culture in the European Union , which , on the one hand , guarantees the independence of the institutions but which , on the other hand , also takes account of the responsibility of each institution to be transparent and accountable in the interest of a properly functioning democracy .
Mr President , this report on switching to the euro cannot be viewed in isolation .
It builds on previous reports submitted , inter alia , by Mr Karas and Mrs Torres Marques and upon the recent correspondence between Mrs Randzio-Plath and our President , Mrs Fontaine .
I am delighted to note that the European Central Bank and the European Commission are talking the same language as the European Parliament .
Only eight amendments have been tabled to this report , by a group none of whose members , I notice , are present in this debate .
The euro is already a success , as Mr Duisenberg pointed out convincingly a moment ago .
It is also the most exciting European project to date .
After all , the European Union is no longer a theory but a tangible reality for all citizens in the euro-zone or , rather , all citizens in Europe and all world citizens .
That is happening for the first time in the history of our European cooperation .
The launch date is 1 January .
The issue will then not simply be about confidence in that currency , it will be about confidence in the European project as a whole , and that European project is , of course , open to all kinds of criticisms at the moment , the most recent case in point being the Irish referendum .
Provided it is done well , the introduction of the euro could , silence all that criticism .
It could ensure that all citizens in euro land are proud of the way it has been done , maybe against all expectations .
Where it is not done well , on the other hand , the introduction of the euro could also intensify criticism not only of the euro but also of European cooperation .
After all , citizens need not read about the introduction of the euro in their newspapers .
They can witness it for themselves .
Current criticism with regard to European cooperation is that the decision-making process is not transparent , that citizens are not being heard and that the people at the top know it all .
But those people at the top can also subsequently be brought very much down to earth in the eyes of the public .
That applies to all of us , in fact .
Consumer organisations , as well as organisations in the medium-sized and small business sectors , have informed us of their wish to have small euro notes distributed during the last days of December - as is , in fact , also to happen in the case of euro coins - maybe in the form of packets that can be bought in banks or by switching over cash machines sooner , or in whatever other way .
The public at large must gain access to those notes .
That is an effective way to discourage counterfeiting .
After all , citizens will then know from their own experience what the notes , obtained from a reliable source , look like .
It benefits the safety of shopkeepers who will need to stock far fewer euros in their shops in order to have sufficient change on 1 and 2 January .
It benefits the public .
Fewer exchange problems arise when old currency is handed in to shops and euros are given in return .
You know you will receive the right amount of the correct money if you pay in euros and get your change in euros . It can prevent a general sense of irritation .
I can understand the argument of Mr Duisenberg who says : we want to adhere to a decision we have taken .
We want to be trustworthy in that respect .
I can understand that well because many critics would , of course , exploit this and say that the European Central Bank has changed its mind again .
That is not how things work .
However , we do believe that there are fresh facts .
These have surfaced following research carried out within industry , which shows that the practical problems would really be enormous if we were not to distribute euro notes beforehand .
I am not saying that frontloading is a guarantee that there will not be any problems , for that is not the case .
Neither am I saying that , in the absence of frontloading , there will be considerable chaos .
I have a reasonable amount of confidence in the consumer , who will know how to deal with these problems .
I do believe that by frontloading , we are , in a relatively simple manner , reducing the risk of problems arising .
We would welcome a review of your decision .
It would also be a sign of wisdom .
Moreover , what happens if , by the end of the year , the pressure mounts and Ministers perhaps decide to change their minds and want to frontload in their own countries after all ?
I would like to make a few final points .
Of course , there are technical measures that could be taken , and I know that the ECB is also in favour of these : banks opening on 1 January , frontloading of euro coins , as is happening in a number of Member States , providing shopkeepers with better insurance and loading cash machines with small notes .
Furthermore , those cash machines are a cause of concern , as far as I can see .
We have , in fact , been supplied with recent figures in this respect from the European Commission .
I would certainly not object to testing them in different Member States during the last days of the year .
I would welcome your opinion on this matter .
The first days of January will be crucial to how much confidence 300 million citizens , and the whole world , can place in the euro .
I wish you all the best in the implementation of that project .
I do hope that you yourself will be prepared to reflect on our considerations .
Mr President , Mrs Randzio-Plath ' s report is , bar one paragraph , a balanced report .
The Paragraph in question is the ninth .
In our opinion , it compromises the Bank ' s independence .
The Bank ' s task is to monitor price stability in the medium term , not overnight .
We want an independent Bank .
It is therefore inappropriate for Parliament to prescribe the Bank ' s monetary policy .
This is an essential point , in our view .
Without this adaptation , we will be voting against the report , despite the fact that we give our wholehearted support to the rest of the report .
Looking back to the year the report was drawn up and - inevitably - this year to some extent , we still have a wish list with regard to the bank ' s communication policy .
There is room for improvement in its communication with the financial markets and society .
Mr Duisenberg , I asked you at your hearing whether you are able to stay on .
You then replied in the affirmative , yet your stepping down is well documented in the press , as if it were a fait accompli after all .
There is a desperate lack of good candidates .
You have gained a great deal of experience .
I would ask you once again : are you able to stay on to complete your term in office ?
Concerning the conversion to the euro , you know my position .
Finally , I should like to comment on cross-border payments .
Banks and companies will all earn back the costs incurred during the currency conversion , or they will receive compensation .
People in Europe will surely not be the only ones footing the bill and experiencing the disadvantages without gaining any benefits .
Mr Duisenberg , I insist that both the Bank and the European Commission assume their responsibilities , assigned in the Treaty , and ensure that cross-border payments which , after all , are no longer cross-border in a European home market , will , on 1 January 2002 cost about the same as remittances at home .
You are undoubtedly aware that they have not become cheaper of late , but have become more expensive , by half a euro on average !
I should like to inform the Directorate-General Competition of the fact that Parliament will resist a fixed fee of EUR 3 for receiving banks .
That would mean that , in some countries , the price would , in fact , increase rather than decrease , and that would be unacceptable !
Mr President , Mr Duisenberg , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the debate that we are holding today has the virtue of enabling both a discussion on the macro aspects of the euro and the practical aspects of the euro and I believe that this is the right time to hold it .
Is there one person in my group that questions the independence of the European Central Bank ?
No , there is not .
Does this prevent us from discussing monetary policy ?
It does not .
And I even believe that the changeover to the euro , if we can make a success of this final phase , assumes that we are discussing economic policy as a whole , including monetary policy and , from this perspective , I can only congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Randzio-Plath , the chairperson of Parliament ' s Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposals that she has made , and I can only regret some of the votes that were cast in committee .
If we want the euro to be the tool of the future that we hoped for , to enable Europe to be in harmony with prospects of growth for all , we must also discuss the monetary policy that you are implementing , Mr Duisenberg , and this is a subject that the people of Europe have a duty and the power to tackle .
Next , to turn to the practical aspects of the euro , I would like to congratulate Mr Maaten on his report , and to remind him that some of the authors of the amendments are here to discuss them and to go over two or three points .
With regard to the issue of frontloading , Mr Duisenberg , I understand that this is very much like a rearguard action ; as proof of this , I refer to the agenda of the recent Ecofin Councils and , once again , as I said to you in committee , this is something that I regret .
As well as the symbolic changeover to the euro on D-Day , there was a psychological aspect regarding the time between Christmas and New Year which meant other provisions were required .
You decided against these and we are sorry to see this .
As for everything else , we still have some months left during which we can run a major publicity campaign so as to ensure that the changeover to the euro is as smooth as possible .
In order to do this , the campaign that will be run must emphasise two main points : first of all , the issue of sensitive groups of people and , secondly , the psychological aspects of the changeover .
I believe that the aim of the whole campaign should be that as many citizens as possible take on board the idea of the changeover from day one and that they cease using two currencies , mentally as well as physically .
To this end , I hope that Parliament will be able to adopt an amendment that we re-tabled on behalf of our group , which would ban dual pricing after a period of one year .
This year should give people time to adapt - a real changeover should occur if dual pricing is banned after one year .
We must eliminate ambiguity from the changeover to the euro , which we must ensure is an experience shared by all citizens , whilst hoping that they will all join us in using the common currency .
Mr President , given the time constraints and also the feeling in my group that the ECB has essentially been doing a good job in difficult circumstances , I would like to concentrate on some remaining structural issues concerning communications and accountability .
As Mr Duisenberg will remember , Parliament has repeatedly adopted a transparency package advocating five separate measures to increase transparency .
I am delighted to report that the ECB has so far agreed three of them , and we must give them credit for this .
We have had no problems in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in inviting members of the governing Council to appear before us .
Last year , we had eleven such appearances .
Secondly , the ECB began to publish regular forecasts or , as they prefer to call them , " projections " in the December 2000 monthly bulletin , and that was a very welcome development .
In addition , econometric models are now published in the working paper series .
It would be nice if they were in more user-friendly form , for example , on CD-ROM , but there is progress .
The two remaining measures that Parliament is again calling for are a publication of a " Beige Book " setting out conditions in each Member State and publication of summary minutes giving the views for and against interest rate changes .
In addition , this year we are asking the ECB Governing Council to deal with a specific problem it has faced in a couple of recent interest rate changes .
There was confusion in the markets about what was perceived as an unpredictable decision and the marketplace was clearly not prepared for that decision .
Indeed , some people went as far as to say it was arbitrary , so we are calling for the publication of votes on an anonymous basis .
Mr President , Mr Maaten 's report makes constructive suggestions for the imminent introduction of euro coins and notes in the 12-member euro zone and refers also to the low level of public and small business awareness of certain aspects of the changeover .
In particular in the report I support the comments on the need for frontloading the general public with notes and coins .
I also welcome its emphasis on the role of local and regional public administrations in the changeover .
It is essential that every effort is made to ensure that this so-called flagship event is managed effectively and that the changeover is smooth .
Most of my comments , however , are based on a view from the outside , from Scotland , for the time being part of the UK .
There may be some problems with public awareness within the euro zone , but we have a much bigger problem within Scotland and the rest of the UK .
A Scots newspaper this week published a survey of public attitudes to the euro in Scotland and this showed a lamentable lack of awareness , which was directly linked to a low level of enthusiasm for the currency .
The level of awareness in Scotland may be lamentable but it is not surprising given the attitudes of the political leaders in the Scots and UK governments in recent years .
The new Labour London government has been afraid to show support for UK entry , or even to provide factual information , while the Conservatives have simply shown an almost deranged hostility to the euro and have attempted to mislead the public on the implications of joining .
In principle my party favours the euro subject to entry terms suiting Scotland 's economy and after a referendum , but ideally as an SNP member I would like to see Scotland an independent EU Member State being in a position to make the decision based on Scots priorities , while retaining domestic control over taxation .
In the short term , though outwith the euro zone , there is also a substantial need for factual information campaigning on the implications after 2002 in our relationship with the euro zone , whether we ever decide to join or not .
I welcome recent statements from some high street retailers in Scotland that they will be accepting euros in their tills , alongside sterling , from 2002 .
This can only enhance Scotland 's position as a welcoming tourist and business travel destination , as well as familiarising Scots with the euro notes and coins .
I call on the UK and the Scots governments to encourage the process of public information and to seek the support of the European Central Bank and the European Commission in encouraging Scots businesses to gear up for the acceptance of the new coins and notes .
Mr President , Mr Duisenberg , people feel that they are paying for the lamentable situation with regard to the euro .
According to yesterday 's Financial Times Deutschland , 49 % of Germany 's population are against the euro .
Over 50 % do not believe that it will boost the economy or emulate the stability of the Deutschmark .
30 % expect a decline in the value of their assets and 67 % expect price increases when we switch over to the euro .
The euro has certainly not become a job machine or acted as a brake on inflation , which is precisely what was rashly promised to the public earlier on .
I am very grateful to you , Mr Duisenberg , that the decline in the euro exchange rate is cited in the ECB report as one reason for the increase in inflation , and that the report at least refers to the increasing inflation rate differential between the euro countries rather than putting all the blame for the euro 's weakness on the dollar .
Monetary stability in the euro area and the external exchange rate stability of the euro are inextricably linked .
It needs to be said just as clearly that the ECB 's monetary policy has failed to achieve its own stability targets and that the euro is now even associated with a decline in real income .
The responsibility for this is not , however , chiefly attributable to the ECB , whose scope for action is becoming ever more restricted .
It is more that the policy of the euro countries has contributed far too little to economic convergence .
What is really incomprehensible is that the French proposal to establish an " economic government " has gone unheeded .
The differences in inflation and growth between the individual euro countries , which are in fact increasing , are dangerous and I believe that they should be analysed in great detail in future ECB reports .
Uniform interest rates are too restrictive for some euro countries and too expansionary for others .
A European monetary policy geared to monetary stability is totally at odds with conflicting national economic , tax and social policies .
Mr President , on 2 May 1998 , in Brussels , I pledged the support of the Alleanza Nazionale delegation for the euro . However , I observed that the European currency was getting off to a bad start : the Union had no economic policy and the Council of Ministers had not even issued an outline plan or guidelines so that the national States could work together to tackle major areas such as unemployment , flexibility , the conversion of some sectors and the social and cultural effects of the increase in pace that technological innovations such as the Internet were bringing not just in the market place but in other areas of life as well .
Europe had no foreign policy and no strategies of its own for orienting globalisation and world finance , and this , together with the lack of economic strategy and the indifference displayed by institutional bodies towards the citizens , who had been neither consulted nor informed about the matter , meant that the launching of the euro resembled the building of a cathedral in the desert .
Yet there was still hope , for there would have been time to introduce political , economic and financial initiatives to cultivate that desert , if only the political will had been there to develop and implement them .
However , in recent years , the euro has not been doing well , and the date of its impending entry into force is looming up like an unavoidable appointment for which the citizens have no enthusiasm and which is often viewed with trepidation by some of those very politicians who have contributed , in recent years , to the barren path the euro has taken .
It is a currency which has consistently been undervalued in relation to the dollar and which has consequently penalised investments and savings .

In the same report , Mr Maaten points out how the criticisms we made then - criticisms which , in recent years , we have brought to the attention of Parliament and the Commission on a number of occasions - were justified : indeed , medium-sized enterprises , trade , the craft trades and the agricultural sector , all of which are major production categories , are not yet ready for the transition to the euro .
The banking system is not ready either , despite the multibillions invested in purchasing the necessary equipment . These and other issues which remain unresolved give rise to the fear that there will be negative consequences , both for the citizens and in terms of the correct assessment of the real value of the euro .
I will conclude by saying that we support the many suggestions made in the report , but we nevertheless condemn the fact that both their proposal and their implementation are long overdue .
This is why we want to know clearly , once and for all , who is responsible for delays , bad planning and failure to assess the situation with regard to the economic sectors and social situations in the field .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are six months away from the fateful day , and it is time to concern ourselves with how citizens are going to handle the disappearance of their national currency .
They are the last people to be consulted and also the last people to be informed .
The most fervent supporters of Europe will feel an unexpected surge of anxiety when reading Mr Maaten ' s report , which describes a state of almost total unpreparedness , the limited , even non-existent , use of the euro in international transactions , including between the countries within Europe , the doubt surrounding the possibility that the banks will exchange citizens ' coins free of charge , the absurd charges for cross-border transactions , even though they are made using the same currency and the excessive price increases that the currency changeover is bound to provoke .
The litany is long and it does not paint a joyful picture .
The governments demanded the euro for ideological reasons whereas large financial organisations demanded it for reasons that are purely self-motivated . The euro has been around for two years and it has failed to catch on even amongst its most ardent supporters , and still less so within the international markets .
The euro has lost its value against the dollar and nothing points to an imminent recovery .
The changeover to using euro notes is , therefore , a useless and costly operation without a doubt . It will cause a rise in inflation and cases of public or private embezzlement .
It would be better to stop all this while we still have the chance .
Mr President , now that consumers will soon be carrying euros around in their pockets , we would benefit from a smooth transition .
Rapporteur Maaten was right to commit himself to that cause .
The euro ' s uncertain success as a currency should not be further frustrated by uncertainty during that transition .
Confidence in a currency is fundamental to every modern economy .
The basis for that confidence , however , is rather shaky in the case of the euro .
That is why we have nothing to lose by taking precautionary measures during the changeover .
It is therefore only fair to do justice to the concerns of all the parties involved .
The ECB ' s attitude , however , can be described as somewhat inflexible .
Further to the Maaten report , Parliament has arrived at a compromise date of 27 December as the date on which to make the first small notes available .
It ensures that the changeover is spread out .
Those few days leave little scope for counterfeiting .
I fail to see why this compromise would not be acceptable to the ECB .
Along with the availability of euros , payment by bank card is another bottleneck .
The way in which those transactions are to be processed is not equal to the temporary massive increase in the use of that method of payment .
It is to be feared that people will therefore be forced to use the national currencies longer than necessary .
This leads to uncertainty when paying in old currency and receiving change in euros .
The availability of cash machines and the extent to which payments are made by bank card differ quite considerably from one Member State to another .
In the light of this , has the ECB looked into additional methods for distributing the money ?
Is it possible , prior to the changeover , to buy euros electronically , for example through transactions on the Internet whereby certain quantities are set aside .
If payment for these could take place electronically , the amounts would only need to be paid out in January .
That would render conversions in January redundant .
It would give an indication of the amount requested and would make it possible to plan ahead .
In addition , it would increase the reliability of electronic payments and provide a stimulus to these .
If something of that kind is not possible , we must ask ourselves whether online transactions are mere pie in the sky for the time being .
Mr President , like the 2000 Annual Report of the European Central Bank , Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report makes the usual assertion that the euro will make a decisive contribution to ensuring price stability within the euro zone , by making it less vulnerable to external shocks .
This is the out-dated ' shield ' theory .
However , it appears now that that theory is only true up to a point , in that it will eliminate currency fluctuations between Member States .
On the other hand , which is more serious , the euro no longer plays the role of a shield : it is now aggravating the crisis stemming from the economic slow-down in the US , since the euro is preventing each country from taking specific targeted action .
In fact , Chancellor Schröder recently called upon the ECB to shoulder its responsibilities by supporting growth in Germany .
He is wrong and he should realise that he is a victim of the rules of the monetary unification game .
The ECB cannot make a drastic reduction in its interest rates in order to please Germany , because other countries are calling for opposite measures .
And , incidentally , if rates were lowered , this could cause the value of the euro to fall even further , which would give a terrible impression when we are just about to embark upon the physical changeover of coins and notes .
It seems , therefore , Mr President , that the citizens of Europe might have to pay a very high price for wanting a single currency when we have different economies , especially since , according to the latest available statistics , it is this , even more than the euro itself , that seems to be contributing to causing greater divergences in terms of both inflation and growth .

Mr President , Mr Duisenberg , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank Mr Maaten for his report and also for having incorporated the content of previous reports including mine into his own , and for reiterating those points that have not yet been fully implemented , because they have not lost any of their importance .
Thank you very much for that .
Secondly , there is a lot of juggling with figures , but they are all relative .
I would just like to mention a couple from my own country , where we heard yesterday that 63 % of people think it is right that Austria should be a member of the economic and currency union from the outset , 43 % see the euro as an advantage and 24 % are neutral on this , which means that 67 % are in favour .
That does mean , however , that we still have a great deal to do .
I would also like to make a few points clear for the benefit of the public .
The euro is not " coming " , as you see on many posters , it already exists , and it is a success .
Every country has benefited from it , price stability has grown , Europe 's economic independence has been enhanced , exports and tourism have been given a lasting boost by eliminating exchange rate fluctuations , and a start has been made on reducing government and budget deficits .
I call on the governments of all the Member States to inform their parliaments and the public about the advantages of the euro in the euro area and not just to give the impression that something new and unknown is about to arrive .
The next point that I consider important is that the euro is not a political project and , please excuse me , Mr Duisenberg , you cannot say that it is just a matter for the ECB - that is a point in your favour , you are doing your job well in this respect - and for the banks , nor is it just something for finance ministers .
It is a political project and not just a financial product and I therefore believe that we should involve education policy , small and medium-sized enterprises and consumers more in information policy .
Mr President , Mr President of the European Central Bank , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are debating the exceptional report by Mrs Randzio-Plath on the annual report of the European Central Bank .
We do this every year and it is the only opportunity which Parliament has to debate the policy of what is now an important and independent European institution .
This debate is being held within the context of a radically changed global economy .
The downturn in the economy , which has brought us to the brink of recession , has created a great deal of pressure .
The European Central Bank and other central banks throughout the world are under a great deal of pressure to relax their monetary policy .
This pressure emanates mainly from the capital markets , which went into free fall recently and which sometimes appear to have become absurdly pessimistic , just as they were absurdly optimistic until recently , at least according to Mr Greenspan .
The moral of the story is , I think , quite clear .
The central banks must not be guided by short-term prospects on the money markets , be they on a peak or in a trough .
You must be guided , Mr President , by principles of monetary stability and economic development , as laid out in the Treaty .
But if there is to be greater confidence in the euro , the people of Europe and money markets throughout the world must have greater confidence in how you exercise your policy and how you intend to achieve monetary stability .
At this juncture , I think that we need to rethink the system of the two pillars of monetary policy .
Mr President , with just six months to go before the introduction of the euro notes and coins , we must focus clearly on this event .
The report is timely and Mr Maaten 's observations are very welcome .
The one clear fact about ' euro day ' , 1 January 2002 , is that it is truly irreversible .
It is going to happen and , therefore , we must be ready .
We have made substantial progress on all fronts .
Taking public information first , the surveys of public awareness about the euro are heartening .
The most recent survey carried out in May by the Irish Euro Changeover Board show that in my country , 95 % of people know the name of the single currency , 91 % have same prices in both Irish Pounds and the euro and 79 % know that euro notes and coins will be introduced in 2002 .
Seventy-eight percent have seen pictures of the euro notes and coins and 64 % know that an Irish Pound will get you EUR 1.27 .
There is still a distance to go , however : only 36 % of people are aware of the length of the dual circulation period , which in my country has been shortened to 9 February 2002 .
In addition , there has been quite an amount of legislation to cater for the introduction of the euro , covering areas such as finance and social welfare .
In all cases , it is essential that we act on the principle of favouring the citizen .
There are essentially two tasks for national and European authorities : they have to oversee the successful changeover to the euro and provide the public with information about it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to tell you about the difficulties that the people I meet in my country complain of every day .
It is strange , to say the least , to see that the method of self-persuasion used to create the euro has now been replaced by heavy-handed tactics .
I am sorry to say that , in my view , the changeover to the single currency has been forced through .
First of all , the people were never consulted to find out if they were in favour of replacing their national currency .
In this respect , the example of Ireland is a prime example of the way that Europe works .
The people are not consulted any more extensively now about the practical introduction of the euro , even though they are the most important element in this equation .
Indeed , the information campaigns in which politicians have participated continually place the responsibility on the citizens - their message is that if the euro is a failure , the citizens must understand that it will be their fault .
In other words , the task of young people and the retired is to provide information , following the example of governments and civil servants .
Lastly , businesses can give practical training .
For example , who is dealing with the difficulties experienced by businesses in rural areas , which are faraway from the centres of learning that are based in towns ?
How can we ask businesspeople who work 12 hours a day to go to their local Chamber of Commerce to attend information sessions ?
To sum up , for all the reasons I have given , I do not think it is acceptable to allow the citizens to shoulder all the responsibility .
It is too easy to leave what we are incapable of doing ourselves at the door of others .
It was Europe that wanted a single currency , so Europe will now have to put take responsibility for it !
Mr President , Mr Duisenberg , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is taking place at a difficult moment as regards economic policy .
Growth is declining and inflation is on the increase .
The Federal Republic of Germany , which accounts for a third of the euro area , is bringing up the rear in terms of growth , inflation and net government borrowing .
It is no longer the locomotive it once was , it is now the last coach in the train .
At this difficult time it is , above all , important for the European Central Bank , which is a young central bank , to gain credibility .
For this reason we too will not be voting for three of the proposals made by the rapporteur in her report .
The first proposal was that core inflation should be the key factor in economic decision making , that is to say inflation excluding energy and food .
This would amount to looking at the world through rose-tinted spectacles , because what matters to the public is not core inflation but inflation including energy and food prices .
The second proposal that we will be rejecting is that of setting inflation targets .
I am convinced that the European Central Bank was right to establish its own definition of stability shortly after it was set up , according to which monetary stability is an inflation rate of less than 2 % .
That cannot be altered now .
If anything , it is precisely in the current difficult situation that the European Central Bank should be measured by its own yardstick .
That is the reason why we cannot vote for this second proposal .
The third proposal relates to the accession countries .
The proposal that the accession countries should not in fact be required to meet the inflation criteria of the Maastricht Treaty in the same way , which would also mean a weakening of stability , is something else my Group will not agree to .
Mr President , 1 January 2002 marks another significant step in European integration .
The change from 12 different national currencies to a single currency is the culmination of months of careful preparation and yet I fear some citizens , even at this late stage , have not grasped the significance of the change and its implications , which I believe are extremely positive .
No other EU policy change will impact in such a profound and personal way on all citizens and at the same time .
From children to pensioners , from the corporate sector to small business , each will be exposed to this significant milestone in European administration .
Because there is a degree of complacency with regard to all EU change , every effort must be made in the months remaining before 1 January to alert consumers to the importance of what is happening and , more importantly , to assure them that their interests are placed at the forefront by those whose job it is to manage this important change .
I am satisfied that everything possible is being done , but nothing can be left to chance .
We know that there are some people who are sceptical .
Their views are important to the debate , but we must establish beyond doubt that their worries will not be realised .
For example , we all recall the introduction of decimalisation and , despite our assurances at that time , consumers experienced price increases .
We all need to put beyond doubt the absence of a cost factor in the exchange mechanism .
The House will be aware that banks availed themselves of the transition period to cream off excessive exchange charges and , to some extent , this is still happening .
What assurances can the European Central Bank give that these matters will be scrutinised with the utmost vigour and with appropriate sanctions ?
Mr President , by the end of the year , euro notes and coins will be in circulation , and that is almost ten years to the day since the political and legal foundations were laid in Maastricht .
Despite this , many people will not realise until then - and it will come as a bit of a shock - that Europe does affect their daily routine .
That fact on its own is reason enough to pull out all the stops in order to make the transition as smooth as possible , that is to say without causing irritation among the public .
Otherwise , I fear that we will be paying for this in years to come in the form of distrust of the European integration process and , as we stand at the crossroads in Europe today , I do not think that we can afford this .
Excellent work has already been done , but we have not completed the task yet , and I would therefore urge that the following be implemented .
Firstly , information must be more extensive , more dynamic , more effective and oriented more towards the target group .
Secondly , consumers must be frontloaded , in terms of both notes and coins .
And if the European Central Bank remains opposed to this , I wonder , Commissioner , if you would not be able to take action in order to make this possible , by amending the Regulation of 3 May 1998 .
Thirdly , electronic payment must be encouraged , that is true , but it must also become cheaper .
A complaint has been lodged with the Directorate-General for Competition in that connection .
Commissioner , I would urge you to ask Mr Monti to finally deal with this complaint .
Fourthly , cross-border payment transfers must become cheaper , and I could not word it better than Mrs Peijs did a moment ago on behalf of my Group .
Mr President , Mr Maaten has done excellent work for which he deserves our appreciation .
Let us hope that a political Europe will follow the economic Europe , so that our European currency will also receive the credit it deserves .
Mr President , Mr President of the European Central Bank , the first thirty months of operations of the European Central Bank can be considered a success .
The bank has achieved stability in monetary policy in the mid-term despite the sudden rise in oil prices , the great uncertainty on the currency markets and heightened tension on the money markets .
The faith of citizens in the European Central Bank is primarily based on price stability .
It is important to citizens that the currency is stable and that the real level of earnings and purchasing power remain unchanged .
However , trust can also be increased by increasing openness and transparency in the work of the ECB .
Transparency goes without saying for national central banks , and should also be the case for the European Central Bank .
The changeover to the euro is a unique event in economic history for which there is no precedent in terms of magnitude .
Adopting a single currency is a concrete indication of how far European integration has come .
Our citizens expect us to do all we can to ensure a smooth transition to the euro .
It is important that we prepare carefully to avoid unnecessary problems and thus giving rise to a negative image among citizens .
However , we must remember the fundamentals .
The euro will not fail due to practical problems encountered during a transitional period of two or three weeks .
If it fails due to anything , it will fail because the currency is not sufficiently stable or strong .
Our single currency is as strong as the economy behind it .
A strong economy , healthy business structures and a functioning internal market are vital prerequisites for the trust of citizens and the global competitiveness of the Union .
In this context I would also like to mention my concern regarding the fate of the Directive on Takeovers to be addressed tomorrow .
The directive has taken twelve years to draw up .
After much wrangling , the European Parliament and the Council have managed to reach an agreement through the conciliation procedure .
If the directive fails tomorrow we will be able to say that while many fine words were heard in Lisbon , here we need action .
The value of our single currency depends considerably on these actions on the part of Parliament , the Council and all the institutions of the Union .
Mr President , Mr President of the European Central Bank , ladies and gentlemen , the efforts of all of us , of the European Central Bank and of Mr Maaten , whose report has dealt with practically all the foreseeable questions that could arise when the new currency is introduced , are certainly commendable .
Since this is , in any case , a historic event - indeed , hitherto , all the Member States have had to handle currency exchange internally whereas , now , the entire Community will be changing to a single currency - it may be that all the aspects and consequences of the introduction of the euro will not have been foreseen and that some situations - as yet not clearly defined - might arise after the fateful date of 1 January 2002 .
From this point of view , it is the duty of all of us to endeavour to make contributions which will not just facilitate the transition but also highlight positive or negative aspects closely linked to the event itself .
This is why I feel I may be allowed to focus on three points .
Firstly : in the period which remains before the established date of 1 January 2002 , information must be must stepped up in the peripheral and decentralised areas , since it must not be forgotten that people in rural areas still practise a form of hoarding under the mattress which must be overcome in this difficult situation .
Secondly : after the transition period , during the following decade in which it is laid down that it will be possible to change national currency into euros at Member States ' central banks , all the bureaucratic formalities should be reduced in order to allow the poorest people to change small sums of money without any burden being imposed .
Thirdly and most importantly : up until the final exchange date , I call upon the qualified intermediaries , particularly credit institutions , to pay greater attention and apply greater rigour to cash transactions .
I am sure that organised crime networks amass cash supplies for illegal transactions ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
I hear that , at the end of this debate , Mr Duisenberg would like to say a few words .
I will then give Commissioner Solbes Mira the floor .
I am now giving Mr Duisenberg the floor .
Mr President , I shall try to answer some of the points raised by Members .
I have already addressed in my introductory statement the most important ones contained in the two resolutions .
I wish to add some points .
Mrs Randzio-Plath asked about the secondary objective in the Treaty .
It is our strong belief that if the ECB is successful in maintaining price stability , and thereby creating an environment of predictable stability for entrepreneurs , that is the best contribution that the ECB can make to fostering growth of output and employment .
Should the European Parliament be involved , if the Treaty is ever changed , in the appointment of the Executive Board ?
That is an issue the Executive Board should stay out of .
However , the European Parliament is already involved in appointing members of the Executive Board in the same way as the Governing Council of the ECB is involved .
On a proposal by the ministers of finance , the European Parliament and the Governing Council of the ECB , Parliament can offer advice so as to enable the Heads of State and the Council to reach a decision .
I fully agree that monetary policy should work not in isolation but in ever closer coordination .
However , the ECB will never engage in coordination of our policies with other policies in the economic and financial field , because this would prejudice our primary objective under the Treaty , namely to preserve price stability .
Many points were made about the resolution .
I have already addressed some of them in my introductory statement .
I am grateful to Mrs Peijs and Mr von Wogau for their support on various points , namely the guarantee of the independence of the Central Bank .
I say to both Mrs Berès and Mrs Randzio-Plath , that in no way - and they already know it - would the ECB shy away from a dialogue with the European Parliament or its committees .
That has been proven in the past and we will continue to prove it in the future .
Mrs Peijs asked the obvious question : can you stay ?
The answer I always give , and give again , is " yes " .
She also pleaded for cross-border transfers to be as costly or as cheap as domestic transfers .
I agree with her completely .
It may take a little longer than 1 January 2002 to achieve it .
However , I believe that in a single market with a single currency , the distinction should disappear , but it may take some time .
I turn to the important subject of frontloading , which has been mentioned by Mr Maaten in his draft resolution and by many other Members .
Specific questions have been asked : is it possible or advisable to change the automatic teller machines a few days earlier than 1 January 2002 .
The answer is " no " .
That would seriously damage the payments system at the busiest time of the year , namely the last few days of December .
The automatic teller machines must still be able to distribute national currencies .
If they were disabled for that purpose , the payments system would be seriously damaged .
It has to be remembered that between 70 % and 80 % of total bank note distribution is through automatic teller machines .
It is also important because we too see the potential for problems arising . It is important that the machines are converted as soon as possible .
In five countries the old automatic teller machines will have been converted by 1 January .
That applies to the Netherlands , Germany , Belgium , Ireland and Luxembourg .
In other countries it may take a little while longer , but that is mainly due to the fact that some of these machines are in very remote areas which are not serviced every day , for example in Finland and Spain .
It will take a little longer there but in the majority of countries the conversion will take place within one week .
In five countries it will occur within one day .
Mr Maaten also asked in his resolution for some priority to be given to the dispersal of small EUR 5 and EUR 10 bank notes in automatic teller machines .
This point is well covered in the national changeover scenarios .
Apart from Finland , in all other countries it is envisaged to dispense , at least in some of the automatic teller machines , the EUR 5 and EUR 10 notes exclusively via ATMs in the first few days of next year .
There are in place fuller steps that could be taken to smooth the changeover , for example establishing temporary exchange points , for instance in supermarkets .
We encourage that .
In countries where welfare payments are still largely paid in cash we encourage the use of lower denomination bank notes .
We are encouraging banks to open their counters on 1 January 2002 .
At this juncture , this is envisaged in Austria , Germany , Luxembourg and the Netherlands .
We urge other countries to consider the same measures as well .
In its resolution the European Parliament has also made various suggestions .
I will not comment on all of them but the European Parliament also suggests what I just said , namely encouraging banks to open their counters on 1 January , a point which is fully welcomed and supported by the ECB .
It has been suggested that the date of the annual sales should be changed , postponing them by a few weeks .
The ECB is neutral on this point , but I see the merits in it .
Lower fees for credit cards and other electronic means of payment have been mentioned .
This is currently envisaged in Austria , Belgium and Finland .
Here , too , the ECB , because of the nature of the subject , is neutral but I would encourage national authorities to listen carefully to the European Parliament .
Returning to the questions that have been asked , I would say that instead of frontloading , our information campaign , as it develops from 30 August onwards and intensifies over the months to come until the end of this year and in the first couple of weeks of next year , will be such that the public at large will , I am sure , be fully familiar by 1 January , with how the bank notes will look with their security features .
One element of this campaign is that , in the first or second week of December , we will distribute 300 million leaflets to every citizen of the euro area , fully describing the new bank notes and the procedures of the cash changeover .
Mr Maaten asked a question which amused me : " What if , in the last few days ministers do change their minds and do nevertheless start frontloading bank notes ? "
With all due respect , not only to Mr Maaten but also to the ministers , the ministers cannot take such a decision because in the Treaty they have handed over the competence for the issue of bank notes to their national central banks and the ECB .
Only the ECB , the Eurosystem , can decide when the bank notes will be distributed and that will be on 1 January 2002 .
Mr President , following the speech by the President of the European Central Bank , Mr Duisenberg , I wish to comment briefly on a few points .

I shall refer basically to Mr Maaten ' s report , since I agree with Mr Duisenberg ' s comments on the report by Mrs Randzio-Plath .
First and foremost , I should like to point out that access to starter kits for coins is not limited to one per person .
I agree with the decisions that have been taken by the various countries .
It is possible to obtain more than one kit in all of these countries .
Mr Duisenberg referred to ' frontloading ' , which is the advance circulation of low denomination notes in automatic cash machines .
I should simply like to make one comment , which is that the Commission report to which some of you have referred is a simple report for calculating how much time would be needed to fully replace a national currency with the European currency according to the quantities currently being made available through automatic cash machines .
This is a statistical analysis , which therefore assumes that there will be no increase in the rate at which this money is used and nor does it take into consideration sources other than automatic cash machines .
In any event , I wish to point out that the existence of transitional periods is justified precisely because the entire operation will not be able to be completed immediately .
With regard to sales , the Commission takes the view that these should be delayed for two weeks so that they do not coincide with the introduction of notes and coins .
Nevertheless , this is a national decision , which must be taken by each Member State .
I must make one comment on the risk of price increases resulting from the changeover to the euro : the Commission has considered the matter and takes the view that the crucial factor for preventing the changeover to the euro being used as an opportunity to raise prices is the dual display of prices in both the national currency and in the Community currency .
We have , of course , insisted on other measures , such as requiring public administrations to round down their charges or , in any event , maintaining the principle of neutrality .
Some of the positions held by the Commission have been accepted by the Eurogroup , which issued a statement on 4 June adopting these points .
I should also like to recall , in response to some of the speeches I have heard today , that the period for the dual display of prices should in principle be limited to the first six months of next year and then dual pricing should disappear .
The practical messages for the public that you are proposing as regards the awareness-raising campaigns can be introduced by means of the cooperation that Parliament is pursuing with the consultative group on the practical aspects of the changeover to the euro , which is made up of the individuals in charge of the various national campaigns .
I should just like to make one comment on electronic payment : the Commission has tried to ensure that for the purposes of the changeover to the euro , European banking federations and associations move ahead with reducing charges for electronic payment . We have not , however , made any headway on this matter .
Both the Commission and the European Central Bank are committed to moving ahead with reducing charges for cross-border transactions .
We are aware that this is not an easy task and that varying approaches between national and cross-border payments might give rise to some conflict with internal market legislation .
The Commission is studying potential occurrences in order to facilitate and speed up as much as possible this process of reducing cross-border charges .
1 January 2002 will mark a milestone in the history of European integration .
The whole world will be closely observing what happens in Europe .
I am convinced that the institutions , the Member States , and the Central Banks will prove up to the task and I wish to thank Parliament once again for the cooperation it has given us in all aspects of preparing for the process of replacing national currencies with the euro .
Institutions for occupational retirement provision
The next item is the report ( A5-0220 / 2001 ) by Othmar Karas , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the activities of institutions for occupational retirement provision [ COM ( 2000 ) 507 - C5-0596 / 2000 - 2000 / 0260 ( COD ) ] .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission proposal before us and the report of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is , I am proud to say , a very good example of successful , dialogue-based work on a Commission proposal between all the groups and experts in this House , while remaining open to compromise .
It is also a good example of how seriously we take our work and of how we implement our projects , observing schedules , and also of how good we are at preparing decisions , unlike the Council .
This example highlights the differences between the European Parliament and the Council in dealing with Commission proposals and decisions .
I would therefore like to start by very sincerely thanking all the coordinators , and in particular Mr Kuckelkorn , Mr Hume , Mr Ettl , Mr Pronk , Mrs Lulling and many others for their cooperation .
Why is this directive needed ?
It is needed because we have all committed ourselves to creating an internal market for financial services , because we need to eliminate the financial obstacles from the Action Plan for Financial Services - of which this directive is a part - as quickly as possible , because the second pillar does not include any Community legislation for activity under the second pillar , for retirement provision .
What is this directive about ?
It is principally concerned with issues around coordinating supervision , with the question of approving cross-border activity , with investment rules and with certain necessary accompanying measures .
We in the committee have come up with many suggestions for improvement .
We are convinced that with regard to the Commission proposal we have had wide-ranging discussions and taken points on board .
But let me make it clear right away that we also thought that a change in title was needed to make this clear .
This is the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the activities and supervision of institutions offering occupational retirement provision services .
It is a financial services directive .
It is not a directive that regulates occupational retirement provision as a product taking into account the mobility of employees and all its consequences .
It regulates the activity of the companies offering financial services .
This clarification is necessary .
In connection with this clarification we need to say that this is an initial and essential step along the path towards a European system for the second pillar and occupational retirement provision .
A third point of clarification is also necessary : the second pillar complements the first pillar , but is by no means a replacement for it .
Nor is it a compromise .
In reality , it represents an agreement between the two sides of industry in the context of legal provisions in force between employers and employees .
It therefore has to strike a balance between liberalisation of the financial market and social security .
Social security and employee information need to be accorded a special significance .
I would just like to list the key amendments .
First , we have given great emphasis to the principle of the level playing field , that is to say equal access for all providers as long as they meet the requirements .
Secondly , we have clearly defined the prudent person principle , we have set a limit for the switch from quantitative investment rules to qualitative ones , and we have called for a report from the Commission after three years ; furthermore , more flexibility in assessment and in guaranteeing security for consumers is needed .
Thirdly , we have called for a switch to the principle of deferred taxation , because in order to avoid distortions in competition we need certain common rules , and we are calling on the Commission to clearly control non-discrimination , as stipulated in the Treaty , and to make that a starting point .
We have defined the work of the pension forum , and we have established biometric risks as an option .
It is not the product that is defined , but rather the obligation to make it available .
To conclude , we have more clearly worded the issue of the country of origin principle and that of information relating to employees and employers and their representatives .
We believe that we have succeeded in striking a balance between a financial services directive and social security and that we will obtain a large majority tomorrow .
I hope that the Council will accept our proposals so that we are not blocked when it comes to implementing this directive in line with the European Parliament 's decisions .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
( NL ) Mr President , I want to extend a warm thanks to the rapporteur for his enormous achievement in which he also managed to incorporate the work of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , not by copying everything verbatim , but by including the essence of what we tried to say .
I also want to thank the Commission for the extremely enjoyable way in which we were able to work together , so much so that our joint effort has culminated in a tangible result .
That must give the Commission food for thought , to the effect that something must be done on this score fast .
Some people believe that , when we talk about this directive , it concerns an abstract , econometric matter .
That is not the case . It concerns an essential financial directive which has major social implications , and that is what this is all about .
Millions of people are involved in one way or another in the way in which we want to give shape to our future pension system in Europe .
In this connection , the Commission was right to use three pillars as a starting point .
Here , we are regulating a major component of the second pillar .
The first pillar is currently under discussion in the Council and will also be debated in this Parliament in due course .
The third pillar has been regulated in the past .
But that is an extremely important matter , and we must very much bear in mind the specific nature of this second pillar .
The specific nature means that the social partners have an important role to play , that it remains a financial directive and that we should not mix the pillars up .
The rapporteur has managed to achieve these objectives .
I believe that we managed to do the same in the opinion we issued , but the rapporteur has adopted this in his report very skilfully .
The only point that we wanted to take further than the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs - and I actually find it quite amusing as a member of the Employment and Social Affairs Committee - was further simplification of the directive .
Mr President , I should like to thank everyone and hope that the Council will produce a Directive soon .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , my colleague Mr Karas , for the time and the effort he has put into this report .
As draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , I would primarily like to stress the importance of respect for the principle of equality between men and women - which is laid down in the Treaty - by institutions for occupational retirement provision , upheld , moreover , by the directives on equal treatment in public and professional social security systems .
I am pleased to underline the fact that my ad hoc amendment has been adopted and is included in the report .
I also tabled an amendment specifying that the institutions for occupational retirement provision should take into account careers that have been atypical or interrupted owing to family responsibilities of both men and women by also providing solutions to guarantee the continuation of membership .
This amendment was not retained in the text but , in my opinion , the institutions for occupational retirement provision clearly cannot escape from providing adequate solutions for these situations .
We have had and we will have in the future more epic debates on the question of knowing whether supplementary pensions must include mandatory cover for biometric risks .
I am in favour of a pragmatic approach - which was also advocated by Mr Karas - namely that institutions must offer cover for these risks as an option , in the form of , for example , disability pensions and provision for survivors .
This will obviously incur a cost , which should not , however , be dependent on gender or an individual health check .
One of the issues which must be resolved in order to establish a genuine single market in supplementary pensions and pension funds is that of providing a tax treatment to avoid the dual taxation of contributions and benefits , as well as the tax exile of pensioners who are trying to avoid paying taxes , but also the mass of bureaucracy involved in the exchange of information and the recovery of taxation between countries .
The Commission only tackled this problem in a statement , and not in this directive .
Caution is the watchword , do you not think , Mr Bolkenstein ?
I therefore believe that it is premature for Parliament to issue an opinion now in favour of a specific model - in this case , the TEE regime - as has been done in the report , albeit only in a recital , given the fact that direct taxes fall within the sovereign affairs of the Member States .
Let us wait before issuing an opinion in favour of one particular model in this extremely sensitive area .
Having said this , Mr President , I think that the lights are flickering from the shock of these thoughts ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I should like , first of all , to welcome some visitors from Kent who we are fortunate enough to have in the gallery today .
I would also like to thank Mr Karas for all the very hard work he has done on a very difficult report .
We have to bear in mind that what we are creating here is an optional scheme for companies and financial service providers to take advantage of if they want to .
If we do not create an attractive framework , this directive will be a dead letter because no one will use it .
If we overload this directive with prescriptive detail , with centralising details , it will not reflect the diversity of pension arrangements across the EU and , again , we will not have people taking up the opportunities provided by the directive .
So where would we lose out if companies decided that they were not going to bother to use this directive ?
We would lose out largely on the prudent investor principle .
A European Commission survey recently said that , had we used this principle across the European Union over the last 15 years , our pension funds would probably have performed at least twice as well as they have in fact performed .
Private sector estimates put the increase in the return on savings that could result from using the prudent investment principle at up to 3 % .
Pension assets could be around 21 % larger across the European Union if we had been using the prudent investor principle already .
What we have here is the potential for increased return on savings without increased risk .
That is a very real and practical benefit to the people who elected us to serve in this House on their behalf .
That is a benefit that we should not throw away by piling into this directive overly prescriptive details , for example , on authorisation , on biometric risk , on guarantees .
We need to take a pragmatic approach in order to gain those benefits of an increased return for our savers in a first attempt at defusing the pensions time-bomb .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to make a couple of fundamental points about the Commission 's proposal for a directive .
We have said quite enough about the technical details in recent days , weeks and months - we have exchanged views , we have sometimes argued and sometimes agreed .
I would like to particularly address the Commission and the representatives of the Council .
I would especially like to say a few words to the Commission about the history of this and about the development of this directive .
As rapporteur for the resolution , I have had an opportunity to deal with both the Green Paper and the Commission communication on the results of the consultation .
Whereas in the Green Paper you were still talking about supplementary retirement provision in the internal market and tried to make the European public believe that something was being done for the majority of Europe 's citizens , your present proposal for a directive simply reflects the interests of the European financial sector .
As I see it , you have either done a U-turn or you were only concerned about the internal market for financial services all along .
Your intention now is to give the financial market pride of place .
You are shifting this issue onto totally new ground .
This would be acceptable in itself , if we were really only dealing with a pure financial market directive .
However , your proposal encroaches way into the territory of the product formulation of the occupational retirement provision systems already in existence and , as I see it , you are giving the investment sector a significant competitive advantage over traditional providers . This is because you want to give financial products equal tax treatment but without obliging the financial sector to offer the same security as second pillar institutions , which in return benefit from their own security , that is to say from tax advantages .
I am not giving away any secrets if I tell you that we have obtained all the position papers and proposals drafted by the finance industry , and in particular the investment sector .
It is already easy to get the impression that a large part of the Commission 's text bears the hallmarks of lobbyists .
I regard the similarities with the finance sector 's proposals as a great cause for concern .
I would also like to take this opportunity to give a brief indication of the main themes underpinning our actions in relation to the Karas report in recent months .
Security of occupational pensions is the top priority for us .
In this respect we are responsible for something that we wish to establish , something that , at the end of the day , must work and must benefit our citizens .
Permit me to make a few more comments on the subject of registration and authorisation .
Does the institution have to be authorised before it starts its activity and be checked by the authorities , or is it just registered ?
Mr Karas has made a new proposal on this , one that we shall be supporting .
Furthermore , the collective nature of the second pillar is important .
This provides a demarcation from the third pillar .
We are not just talking about any savings product here , we are talking about occupational pensions , the nature of which is totally different from speculation in blocks of shares .
We have also considered it important to achieve improvements in relation to codetermination .
However , in this case we agree with the reference to national employment law .
With regard to biometric risks , we support the rapporteur 's wording .
We have executed something of an about-turn here , but I think that it is in everyone 's interest for us to be able support this directive or this proposal .
In addition to these substantive points , we also regarded a number of other considerations as being important .
We parliamentarians should not let ourselves be frightened off by technocrats who say that all this would not be possible and that it would not be compatible with the treaties .
We are involved in the codecision process and have to act in line with our own views .
We are elected so that our views can act as a correcting force .
The European public expects us to ensure that law is not just made by officials and lobbyists , but rather that political decisions are chiefly made by Parliament .
Nor should we tie our own hands by arguing that it is impossible to negotiate a hundred amendments with the Council .
My message to the Council and the Commission is a clear one : stop playing about with this directive !
To some extent , there have been major differences between us over this report .
There have been heated discussions not only between the groups , but also within them .
Tomorrow we shall be voting on a text which tries to reflect all strands of opinion .
At this point , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Karas , for his work .
If the voting goes as promised , I shall be recommending that my Group votes for your report .
Mr President , I will be brief in saying that my Group had two fundamental objectives in dealing with this proposal from the Commission .
The first is to support the Commission as far as possible in its effort to keep it simple and not to include unnecessary complications such as biometric risk .
The compromise which Mr Karas has engineered in Parliament is one that we can live with .
We would have preferred to have the original Commission proposal in its simplicity , but I recognise the considerable political difficulties which Mr Karas faced and thank him for his efforts in engineering that .
The second key objective of my group was to stiffen the resolve of the Commission , to be more liberal and more ' market opening ' in its approach to the abolition of quantitative rules .
The Commission 's draft directive envisages that Member States will be able to continue to set quantitative limits on the operation of pension funds .
I am delighted that Parliament looks as if it is going to insist that there is a five-year time limit .
I very much hope that the Commissioner abandons any attempt at realpolitik , involving dirty compromises in the Council , and sticks to what is Parliament 's clear desire .
We want to ensure that pensioners have high returns without any additional lack of security , applying the prudent person principle .
Those are the two key objectives for us and if we manage to get them voted in Parliament tomorrow , this legislation will lay the ground rules for a vast growth in private pensions in the Union .
It will improve the investment returns to existing pension schemes and thereby improve pensions . It will establish , for the first time , a pan-European investor base for growing and integrated euro-area financial markets .
Mr President , Commissioner , the vote taken within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on which the committee was divided and following which , in fact , 133 amendments were reintroduced in plenary , is more than enough evidence of the differences in the approach to this draft directive .
In our group , we are interpreting it in the following manner : the main aim of this directive on occupational pension funds is to eliminate all the conditions restricting financial institutions , particularly in the choice of financial shares , with the exception of general prudential rules of a so-called qualitative nature , and the principle of mutual recognition will be fully applied in addition to these rules .
We are faced with a situation which is well-known in the establishment of the internal market .
As for the degree of harmonisation or integration , or even the degree of liberalisation and openness that is desired , but with regard to what Fritz Scharps calls positive integration not going as far as the objective of liberalisation , from this perspective , I would simply like to bring up three points which we feel are particularly important .
the problem of cover for risks as such , what are known as biometric risks : we support Amendment No 108 , tabled by Mr Herzog ;
the problem of tax competition - as in Amendment No 117 - another example which shows that we are making further and much quicker progress towards integrating the markets without any previous tax harmonisation : we are unable to support this point of view ;
the question of covering risks with capital , which relates to Article 18 of the directive : Amendment No 116 , which was tabled , is , in our view , a reasonable amendment .
Our political assessment of this draft directive is , therefore , that once again it has shifted away from its objectives , which are not just the unity of the market but social cohesion and solidarity as well .
Mr President , the directive drawn up by the Commission contains an obvious bias .
It is concerned with using market valuation to encourage supplementary pensions .
Although the report by Mr Karas corrects this bias in places , it also makes it worse in others .
We are faced with a reference model which is primarily that of the industry of supplementary pensions in place in Great Britain and other countries .
Yet , in some countries , these organisations do not or only occasionally enter the financial market ; in other countries workers are given cast iron guarantees , but the directive obviously does not aim to do this .
In particular , it is not concerned with the coherence of national pension systems based on the principles of solidarity , security and universality .
That is why we tabled amendments on two aspects . The first , on the one hand , relates to guarantees for the people concerned , and the second , on the other hand , to public supervision and prudential actions .
We believe that this text is unacceptable unless it is subject to considerable amendment .
First of all , we must improve the guarantees given to the people .
The directive includes risks of discrimination and lapses in solidarity .
Membership of a supplementary scheme is not compulsory , which explains the considerable inequalities .
There is no provision for inter-sectoral mutualisations .
The quality of benefits will suffer if the population falls .
Continuity of membership cannot be guaranteed if mobile workers change jobs or sector .
The definition of rights does not mandatorily include biometric risks .
The guarantees of actual benefits are not organised .
And we are aware of the risks taken by those who join fixed contribution schemes , pointed out , moreover , by many well-respected macro economists .
We are proposing amendments on all these points , as well as on the second issue giving us cause for concern which is the need to improve social and prudential supervision .
The Commission is offering insurers the choice of opting for occupational pension schemes .
The Karas report strengthens this provision by casting aside government authorisation .
This opens the door to competition and gives rise to two risks : the first is that solidarity work may be abused and that prudential systems that have been imposed on insurers will be weakened .
Mr Karas incorporated our amendment seeking to establish the principle of interactive management , but that will only have any real bearing if the institutions involved are not treated like standard financial investors throughout the directive .
The prudential framework laid down by the Commission is vague and the report imposes the country of origin principle , which we find unacceptable , since the destination Member State must , of course , also retain the possibility of establishing coherence with internal social law .
Lastly , prior tax harmonisation is still not included in these texts , which means we are once again opening the way to fiscal dumping .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are today faced with a key test on the way that the European Parliament perceives its responsibilities in the area of social protection .
Mr President , rather than reinvent the wheel and go back over everything that was said , it is important to look at the reality : our population is getting older , living longer and retiring sooner .
There must be provision for proper pension protection and payments in the future .
The only way to achieve this is by coupling the different systems that are out there with the second and third pillar , as suggested by the rapporteur .
The areas of concern I have about the amendments and some of the proposals put forward relate firstly to tax harmonisation , which I oppose totally , and secondly to increased regulatory supervision over the operation of these funds , because we already have a raft of legislation governing investment vehicles and investment instruments .
I could advise Members of this House , and perhaps Member State governments whose observers are here today , to look at the Irish model , where we have committed ourselves between now and 2025 to putting 1 % of our GDP towards a future pensions fund .
That would mean IEP 700 m per year being put into the protection of pension payments for people from the year 2025 onwards .
If more countries were willing to do this , then we would not have the same sense of urgency or danger that now faces many pensioners in Europe today .
Mr President , our public pensions systems are too expensive and have also ceased to be financeable .
The gap between those actively employed and pensioners is becoming ever greater .
Urgently needed reforms are constantly being postponed .
The cost of these systems within the Union also varies very widely .
For example , Austria devotes 15 % of its GDP to pensions , making it the record holder , as the EU average is 11 % .
The high costs in countries like Austria are partly attributable to the fact that we have virtually introduced a separate insurance system for each professional group .
This leads to all sorts of injustices that are no longer tenable .
However , as others have already said , there is a crisis looming in pension provision not only in Austria but all over Europe .
The public pension system can simply no longer be financed and is also becoming a burden on the younger generation .
A pan-European market for occupational retirement provision is bound to help in this regard .
However , in establishing this system , this second pillar , we should not impose an even greater burden on our small and medium-sized enterprises .
They could not tolerate a further increase in ancillary wage costs .
The consequences would be disastrous and would , above all , have a negative impact on Europe 's employment situation .
The debate is adjourned until 9 p.m.
Support for national strategies for secure and lasting pensions through the open coordination method
The next item is the Commission communication - Support for national strategies for secure and lasting pensions through the open coordination method .
Today the Commission has adopted a communication entitled " Supporting national strategies for safe and sustainable pensions through an integrated approach " .
This communication is a proposal on specific objectives and working methods for cooperation in the field of pension reforms in accordance with the method of open coordination as decided upon in Lisbon .
Over the past two years there has been a significant change in attitudes towards European cooperation , particularly in the social field .
We can see a change in the attitude of those who are in charge of the national protection policies .
They are now agreed in calling for an open method of coordination to be applied to pensions in the long-term future .
Our proposal puts this forward as a " soft " type of policy-making at European level , that is " soft " compared with legislation or with existing policies .
I refer , in particular , to the coordination of economic policies .
It is very clear in this communication that the new open method does not replace the existing methods .
This proposal does not take away the national responsibilities of the national policy-makers .
The ambition of this communication is to promote the development of an integrated approach to the challenges imposed by ageing and societal changes in the pension systems .
What is the content of this communication ?
There are three main axes : the first one concerns the adequacy of pensions .
The second one concerns financial sustainability , and the third one , the modernisation of the pension systems in response to societal change .
I will expand on each of these axes .
Adequacy describes the fundamental social goals of pension systems in order to prevent social exclusion of older people and to give them the opportunity to maintain their living standard in old age .
Second is financial sustainability .
In order to be achieved in a spirit of intergovernmental and intra-generational fairness throughout , this requires a high level of employment , respect for the growth and stability pact and a good regulatory framework for the private systems .
The third axis concerns the modernisation of pension systems .
According to this axis the pension systems have to be more compatible with the need for more flexible workforces .
That means that they have to meet the needs of the new models of working organisation ; they have to meet the needs of less stable families and of greater equality between men and women .
It should also make them more transparent , predictable and adaptable to changing circumstances .
Under the heading of these three axes there are ten concrete objectives .
We - and the Social Protection Committee , which has done excellent work - are going to measure these objectives by means of indicators .
It is because of the Social Protection Committee that we have an analysis of all pension systems and the reforms that have taken place in all Member States .
The Social Protection Committee , then , is working on the economic and social indicators .
Next year we are going to adopt these indicators in order to measure the objectives .
What is the proposed procedure ?
How the Member States meet the particular objectives is up to them and depends on national strategies .
The communication suggests that the Member States should submit these first national strategies by the end of summer 2002 .
There will be a first joint monitoring procedure during the 2003 spring European Council .
This report on the national strategies will be based on an integrated approach , and , politically , this is the most important element of the communication .
It will be necessary to take into account , not only pension reforms in a narrow sense , but also employment policy and the management of public finances .
In order to prepare these strategies , different governmental departments will have to participate and , of course , the social partners .
Why have an integrated approach ?
The need for this is based on an understanding of the interaction between pensions and other policy areas .
Employment strategy is one example .
A successful employment strategy makes it easier to finance pensions , but pension reforms can create employment incentives .
A second example is public finances .
Consolidating public finances today makes it easier to cope with the budgetary impact of ageing tomorrow , but insufficient control of pension expenditure could destabilise public finances .
Of course , there is close cooperation between the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
They are going to present a joint report and their contribution is crucial , but the European Parliament can play an important role in this process .
We wish to have your opinion on this communication and , in particular , the objectives proposed .
As the Commission and the Belgian presidency are keen on making good progress in time for the next European Council , we would be grateful if you could give this opinion before October .
The more informal regular contacts between the European Parliament and the Social Protection Committee will also continue on a regular basis .
Some other modalities of cooperation may also be discussed , and I am open to any suggestions from Parliament .
In conclusion , it is politically very important that the Member States are keen on this cooperation in the field of pension reform .
This is one of the most sensitive and difficult reforms in all Member States and that is why it is of great political importance .
We believe that with this cooperation , between the Commission , the European Parliament and the Member States , we can establish a comprehensive approach . This will be useful to the Member States and help implementation of the reforms .
Thank you , Mrs Diamantopoulou , for what I agree is a very significant statement from the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to begin by paying some compliments on the work that has been done so far .
I think , in fact , that some splendid things were put forward in connection with the Göteborg Summit , and I also think that the work which has now been done on the reports from the individual countries shows that it is only right to broaden the agenda .
We must not just talk about the growing burden of the elderly and the economic consequences , but also about how we obtain a good pension system .
I also think , however , that it is important that this work should not just remain work done behind closed doors between politicians , officials and experts .
Moreover , I should like to ask the Commissioner what plans she has to put some impetus into a broader public debate about this coordination of pensions made to run in parallel .
The open method must be open in the true sense of the word , so that the public is also involved .
What will the Commissioner do ?
Will she give an undertaking that more efforts will be made to increase public ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , they asked me , the representative elected from the lists of the Pensioners ' Party in Italy : " What are you going to Strasbourg for ?
They will never talk about pensions ! "
Well , the words of Commissioner Anna Diamantopoulou just now have been as sweet as honey to my ears .
I welcome this initiative : it is a great day for pensioners all over Europe !
My congratulations to Mrs Diamantopoulou and the whole of the Commission !
The most important thing will now be to monitor the pension funds and appoint as their guardians in the 15 States , not the Beagle Boys but people who care about the future of pensioners .
I hope that the Commissioner will agree with me .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for the statement .
I look forward to reading the communication .
It is one of the most important debates we need to have .
I have a couple of questions .
There is indeed a major demographic shift under way within the Union , and we must try to ensure that we retain older people in the labour market .
However , there is a big problem : those older people will be the people with outdated skills .
Does the Commissioner agree that this will lead to the revolution we have been pressing for , with a shift away from a concentration on initial education and training towards continuing training and lifelong learning ?
This will become essential .
There are some contradictions and difficulties : for example , there is a tendency everywhere in the Union to raise retirement ages , and yet at the same time there are widespread public subsidies for early retirement .
Is there not a danger that the finger of blame will be pointed at the Union , because these difficult issues are being forced upon Member States for decision at this stage ?
Mr President , there are two main issues here .
First , the transparency of the pension systems .
One of the objectives of the third axis in the modernisation of pension systems is to make them transparent .
This means that information must be clear and readily available not only to EU citizens but also to third-country nationals .
There are major problems in this area at present .
In order to achieve the degree of transparency aimed at , we need some kind of indicators .
Clear information should be available on demand .
We cannot impose the reform structure or the structure of pension systems on Member States , but we can measure it with a series of indicators .
Unfortunately , I cannot give you any more details on this at the moment .
Second , the issue of lifelong learning and the problem of early retirement .
There is a clear link between the age limit and the need of active ageing .
The majority of Member States have an age limit of 65 , but this is not the rule , it is the exception .
There are many different early retirement systems in place in all Member States which have caused many problems regarding the financial sustainability of the pension systems .
That is why we propose this combination of policies : on the one hand , we propose the reform of the pension system and a change in the age limit , on the other hand , we propose policies for activating ageing populations , i.e. incentives for retaining older people in the labour market , incentives for training and , in some cases , subsidies for establishing an SME or other undertaking .
So I very much agree with you , we need this integrated approach .
We cannot just decide to increase the age limit , we must implement other policies at the same time .
Mr President , I too should like to thank the Commissioner for this important statement which , in terms of pensions at European level , represents a fresh social challenge with financial implications , as opposed to a financial problem accompanied by a number of social aspects .
In my opinion , the Belgian presidency should be very grateful for your contribution to the debate .
Commissioner , I should like to ask you two questions .
The first one concerns the objectives included in the document .
I note that the ten objectives which we adopted from the original statement have been whittled down to three .
Although there are three key objectives - and that might benefit clarity - in my opinion , a number of crucial elements have fallen by the wayside , such as solidarity between generations and solidarity within one generation .
Another aspect which I miss is the link between the pension pillars .
What are the roles of the first , second and third pillars ?
Those are questions which are no longer addressed here .
How does the Commissioner intend to include problems of this kind in the debate at this stage ?
Secondly , you were right in calling for a global approach .
Göteborg has stated that the agreements must be included in the wider economic guidelines .
That has not been provided for in the plan .
Mr President , I too agree that pension policy involves an enormous challenge .
As far as the young generation of Europe is concerned , this is perhaps the largest challenge we will see in the field of economic and social policy in the decades ahead .
Open coordination is naturally a positive thing and I warmly support it .
It is good that the Commission is now looking for indicators and also seeking to increase public debate on this very important issue .
My real question concerns whether , however , you see any opportunities for slightly stronger measures , in other words in the future could we also highlight questions of pension policy , for example , in slightly more binding documents such as Stability and Growth Agreements and employment policy guidelines , and , for example , issue warnings to those Member States who are not managing their pension policy properly and ensure that , in the future , through reasonable funding , we will be able to pay sustainable , good pensions to the pensioners of Europe .
Mr President , allow me to start by congratulating the Commissioner , although it would appear that I am not alone as the large majority wishes to do likewise .
Even Mr Fatuzzo , the pensioners ' representative , is well pleased .
And indeed , what we have heard is impressive .
Of course , from what I have read in the press , you have taken these initiatives in the teeth of opposition from numerous members of the Commission , who consider them somewhat progressive .
The point is : with Article 140 talking of a high level of protection , what can reform mean if it does not maintain a high level of protection ?
But , mainly , I wanted to raise two questions .
We talk of decent pensions through complementary pillars .
So far so good . But have you checked if this complementarity can be applied to the entire pyramid of workers , and especially to small and medium-sized enterprises and low incomes , or do we need to take a different approach here ?
Secondly , as the objective is not just sustainable pensions , but decent sustainable pensions , should we not look at what margins will be earmarked for pensions from increases in the gross domestic product ?
Mr President , as far as Mrs van Lancker 's questions are concerned , there are ten basic objectives , which I simply split into three categories in order to simplify my presentation ; but there are still ten basic objectives covering adequacy , financial sustainability and modernisation .
Of course , one of these objectives is the one you referred to , i.e. the inter-generational balance .
There will be many more indicators , including indicators on the economic and social dimension .
They will , of course , be the subject of discussion in both the Commission and the Council and , as you know , the Social Protection Committee and Parliament are in constant communication .
As far as the role of the guidelines on employment are concerned , I did not quite understand your question .
If what you meant was that some of these objectives should be included in the guidelines on employment , I should tell you that the first cycle of the employment strategy will end next year during the Spanish presidency , when the five-year period expires .
We shall see how we can take the issue of quality or issues relating to older workers into account at the changeover .
As far as the question of decent pensions and the role of the three pillars is concerned , it is very difficult , in fact I would say it is impossible for the Commission to issue specific guidelines on the role of the three pillars in each country .
But what is clear is that we need to safeguard decent pensions , which is why the role of the first pillar is very important .
And , of course , there is always a link between an increase in the gross national product and support for the first pillar , subject to the principles governing the stability and growth pact .
Mr President , young people are particularly affected by pensions since , after all , they contribute to pensions during their working life and subsequently benefit from those pensions .
Do you have in mind providing information , through schools in particular , about the future shape of pensions systems and about the fact that mobility will , of course , be encouraged if these ideas are actually implemented ?
Commissioner , we are today going to be initiating a process - which will certainly be very beneficial to Europe - of generating great added value for the much-needed modernisation of our social protection systems .
I wish to ask you a question and perhaps make a small suggestion .
The focus of the Commission ' s action will be an annual report assessing the various national strategies .
Do you not think , Commissioner , that it would be useful for the Commission also to work on the basis of other information , to accept what in situ missions and universities can provide and , of course , information or debates that we could provide from Parliament , so that you are not limited to what might merely be the interests of each of our governments , which might be more interested in making propaganda for themselves than in seeing the reform implemented ?
Mr President , I want to concur entirely with my colleagues ' praise of the Commission ' s initiative .
It is splendid , and the Commission is right in what it says .
As you said in your proposal , Commissioner , it is very important that the Member States should be committed to the plans you have now put forward . Unfortunately , I can already foresee aspects of the debate that will take place in my own Member State when the Commission begins discussing pensions .
It would therefore be very interesting , Commissioner , if , today , you could unambiguously confirm the impression I receive when I read your communication , namely that the Commission is not in any way out to undermine existing pensions in the Member States or to harmonise pension arrangements in the Member States .
I assume that you will confirm this , and I believe that doing so will be incredibly important in the forthcoming debate in our respective Member States .
Obviously this problem is a problem faced by young people and in most countries right now there is a risk that future generations will not be able to have the same rights as the present generation .
It is up to the Member States to make the public aware of the problem , given that the extent of the problem varies from one Member State to another .
But I think that the very fact that this discussion has started at European level and that we have agreed to work together on this problem , which now has European dimensions , is important from the point of view of public awareness .
As far as the second question is concerned , first : these reports cannot be annual reports and they will cover longer periods of time .
Secondly , the statistics which the European Commission uses are Eurostat statistics and statistics from the national statistics offices , which receive huge financial support , with the Commission and governments working together to ensure that they all operate to the same standards .
Because I agree with you that not all the national statistics offices are performing as well as they should , there are a lot of lacunae and there are a lot of statistics which are not reliable .
So what we are trying to do is to support the national structures so that they operate to the same standards .
The third question concerns the question of harmonised pensions .
I think that I really need to be categorical and absolute here .
There is no question , no question whatsoever of harmonising pension systems , both for political reasons , because there is no legal basis for such a move , and for technical reasons , given that it is quite impossible for us to homogenise or harmonise systems which have different structures , different funding methods and which often operate in very differently organised economies .
I refer , of course , to the example of Denmark .
But what we do need to highlight is the fact that , although there are different structures , there are common problems which have to do with the demographic problem , with new forms of employment which have to be taken into account , with the question of unemployment and with the question of new family structures .
These are problems common to all countries .
We also have common objectives .
The common objectives are sustainable pensions , the financial sustainability of pensions , both state and private , and the modernisation of pensions , as I set out in my initial intervention .
Common grounds and common objectives bring about a form of collaboration in which everyone keeps their particular structures and quirks but collaborates within an overall framework .
Thank you once again , Commissioner , for making that significant statement here this afternoon and I am sure all colleagues will wish you every success with this difficult dossier .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is ' Question Time ' ( B5- 0329 / 2001 ) . We shall look at questions to the Commission .
Part 1
Question No 27 by ( H-0541 / 01 ) :
Subject : ACP capacity-building Would the Commission clarify why it is that none of the Euro 20 million ACP capacity-building project , which has been designed to prepare the ACP countries for the beginning , by September 2002 , of negotiations on economic partnership agreements with the EU , has yet been disbursed ?
Does the Commission not agree that this delay causes serious difficulties for the ACP , and means that there has been a serious failure to honour a critical commitment ?
The Commission is aware of the importance of this project and the need for early action to ensure that the ACP States will be ready and better prepared to open negotiations with the EU on economic partnership agreements from September 2002 .
So where do we stand today in the implementation of the project ?
As foreseen , the pre-qualification tendering procedure for the programme management unit was launched in June this year and the tenders will be opened on 20 July at the ACP Secretariat General .
The committee evaluating the tenders will consist of three members designated by the ACP Secretariat and three members designated by the Commission .
This committee will decide which companies will participate in the tender for the programme management unit .
I expect that this programme management unit will be in place by December this year at the latest ; with some luck , a couple of weeks before .
This would keep us within the original time schedule foreseen for the implementation of the project .
The project will not be fully operational before the programme management unit is up and running .
However , in view of the importance of some of the activities in the project in particular , the Commission has taken steps to begin on an ad hoc basis to implement some of the actions foreseen in the project , and this is already going on .
It includes seminars on capacity building sessions of the ACP Ministerial Trade Committee for negotiations of new , WTO-compatible , trading arrangements with the EU .
Two sessions of this kind have taken place , one in Johannesburg on 10 and 11 April 2001 and a second one in Brussels on 13 and 14 May .
Secondly , a seminar was organised at the second meeting of the heads of ACP organisations working on regional integration on 3 and 4 May this year in Brussels and further seminars are scheduled to take place in the period July / September this year .
So all these action-oriented seminars are actually in the process of taking place .
We can either be satisfied that the preparation and implementation is on track or be disappointed and frustrated because it is such a slow track , but this has to do with more general problems , which we may not be able to take care of today .
Let me also say that , important and useful as these activities are , they are not , and never were , preconditions for the opening up of trade negotiations in September 2002 in accordance with the Cotonou Agreement .
But I understand well why the question has been put .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner very much .
The fact is , of course , that we are already more than half way through the preparatory period for these negotiations on EPAs , so these delays are rather difficult for the ACP to deal with ; they are delays that affect thousands of livelihoods in the ACP and so there is deep concern .
I understand the Commissioner 's difficulty in explaining why this has happened .
I wanted to ask you specifically : is the Commission prepared to be flexible about the start time , end time and terms of these negotiations ?
The short answer is ' no ' .
The Cotonou Agreement is quite clear and - not that I expected this follow-up question - that is the substance of the problem and the reason I said what I did at the end of my answer .
The dates involved are negotiated dates .
Not adhering to them would create more problems and , in any case , one can always discuss whether one more seminar would change the world , rather than face the need to make difficult decisions that will become part of this entire process for our partners in the ACP group .
As the author is not present , Question No 28 lapses .
Question No 29 by ( H-0539 / 01 ) :
Subject : Kosovar Albanian prisoners in Serbia While the recent partial release of Kosovar Albanian prisoners in Serbia is very welcome , does the Commission agree that this serves to deflect attention from the urgency of releasing all the remaining prisoners , some of whom are very ill ?
In particular does the Commission have any information on Skender Ferizi , Besim Zymberi and Bedri Kukalai , in prison since the Dubrava massacre in Kosova in May 1999 ?
The Commission very much welcomes the recent release of a significant number of Kosovar Albanian prisoners .
This does not , however , diminish the need for a speedy resolution of the remaining 203 cases currently before the Serbian courts and which these courts are reviewing .
The Commission has raised with the ICRC the cases of the three individuals mentioned in the honourable Member 's question .
We are awaiting a reply . We do not have any other information concerning their cases .
The International Committee of the Red Cross is following the condition of individual prisoners as well as maintaining contact with their families .
The Belgrade authorities have informed UNMIK and Mr Haekkerup , most recently during the UN Security Council delegation visit to Belgrade .
The cases of the remaining prisoners currently being reviewed should be finalised soon .
We understand that they are considering a proposal from UNMIK that those deemed criminals should serve their remaining sentences in prisons in Kosovo .
The Commission welcomes all efforts towards a speedy resolution of the remaining cases of detention , as well as the resolution of the fate of the 3 600 individuals still listed as missing from all communities in Kosovo .
I want to thank the Commissioner for his full answer and also to congratulate him on the efforts I know the Commission and , indeed , the Council are making to bring about more humanitarian and satisfactory conditions for democracy in that region .
I draw the Commissioner 's attention to the fact that many of the prisoners who are still suffering in prison without trial have been wounded and are ill , and no information has been made available to their relations .
In fact , relations visiting or trying to visit these prisoners have been subjected to intimidation .
No normal process of law has been put into effect against them .
It is extremely important , because of the financial contribution we have been making in these areas , to make the authorities accountable to the public for the way these prisoners are being treated .
It happens - and this is a new dimension to our relationship with these countries - that the three prisoners I mentioned have relations in Ireland and , because of the interaction between voluntary organisations in Ireland and Kosovo , pressure is being put on me as an MEP to find a solution to this problem .
I congratulate the honourable Member for acting so vigorously on behalf of his constituents .
I very much hope that the prisoners to whom he has referred will be able either to join or see their relations in Ireland as soon as possible .
The honourable Member knows that I have regularly raised the question of the prisoners with President Kostunica and other senior officials in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
We have pressed the authorities there to re-examine all cases , and either release prisoners for lack of evidence , where that is appropriate , or where there is evidence , launch an expedited appeals process .
I hope the Federal Republic will actively consider handing over to UNMIK those who are legitimately convicted to continue their sentences in prisons in Kosovo .
We will continue to press with this issue .
It is very important .
It raises considerable humanitarian concerns in Ireland and other Member States .
Question No 30 by ( H-0546 / 01 ) :
Subject : Police capability Recently there was a first Police Capability conference with a view to the agreed goal of creating a five-thousand-strong police force to be available for the Union ' s civilian peace-keeping operations .
Will the Commission report now to the Parliament concerning what progress was made and what are the next steps ?
Second part
The ESDP annex of the Göteborg European Council conclusions sets out where the European Union has got to as regards the development of a police capability for crisis management operations outside European Union territory .
The honourable Member will recall that at the Faro meeting of the European Council in June last year , Member States signed up to an ambitious target of 5 000 police officers for international missions to be available by 2003 .
Preparatory work has progressed well since then .
The necessary structures are being established in the Council , including a police unit in the Council secretariat .
The ESDP report to Göteborg contains a police action plan , which sets out the next steps in the process .
A ministerial conference will be held by the end of 2001 at which the Faro commitments should be turned into specific pledges .
The Belgian presidency will also continue work with the police experts ' group to look in more detail at the modalities for implementation of the Faro commitments , particularly qualitative aspects , such as training , selection criteria and equipment .
The Commission is being supportive of the efforts of Member States in creating this crisis management capacity , for example with the funding of training projects through the OISIN programme .
The Commission has also become more involved over recent years in local capacity building and police reform in post-conflict situations .
Just to give some examples , the Commission is funding major initiatives for reform in justice and home affairs , including police , in a number of Balkan countries under the CARDS programme .
In that context , the Commission will take over the WEU police mission in Albania .
The Commission is also providing technical assistance and training to the police in Central America , in Guatemala and El Salvador , as part of the implementation of peace agreements in those countries .
Furthermore , the Commission has recently started a programme of support to police training in Algeria .
I wish to thank my friend , the Commissioner , whom I have always found very helpful .
This was an extremely full and helpful reply .
I am sure that Parliament is most appreciative .
One matter surprised me a little , although I will read his reply in detail to study it , and this is the police unit set up within the Council .
Am I right in assuming that command of a police force which is sent by us actually rests in the final analysis with the Council and not with the Commission , even though policing is demonstrably a peacekeeping and not a military operation ?
The honourable Member invites me to dig deep into the soil of competence and its related terrain .
The provision , deployment and management of EU police officers for external crisis management missions is a competence of the Member States and the Council secretariat .
So a police unit has been established in the new politico-military structures in the Council secretariat to carry out the detailed police action plan , which I referred to earlier , in coordination with the Member States and the Committee for Civilian Aspects of Crisis Management .
I would not dare to trespass on what is legitimately the territory of Member States , but there is a role and a responsibility for the Commission .
I described how we have considerable experience in the field of police training .
Indeed , we can make a particularly important contribution by trying to ensure that training in this area , and in others which are related to civilian crisis management , is compatible with that provided by the UN .
The UN and the European Union - the European Commission - now have more experience than others in this area and it is absolutely imperative that we ensure that the training provided - whether for police officers , people running penitentiaries , justices of the peace or magistrates - is compatible and appropriate wherever their services are required .
There is an important role for the Commission , but it is not the role of a sixteenth Member State .
Will the Commissioner advise me whether these policemen will be , or can be , armed and what their terms of engagement might be ?
That will need to be determined case-by-case and situation-by-situation .
Let me explain one of the problems we have in providing the policing capacity which is needed .
What we are looking for is not a conventional community police officer .
What we require is a trained officer - man or woman - who is capable of the traditional policing functions of detection , who is capable of providing community policing , and capable , from time to time , of the sort of paramilitary policing which is needed , for example , in parts of the West Balkans .
In the country I know best there are very few police forces who have that sort of capacity , which includes the regular use of arms .
The police service in Northern Ireland is an example of a service which has that sort of all-round capacity .
That is one reason why it is difficult to provide exactly what is required , but whether or not arms will always be necessary will depend on the circumstances .
I hope that the success of policing will mean that arms , increasingly , are not required .
Questions to Commissioner Lamy
Mr President , the European Union recognises that the lack of affordably priced medicines is a serious problem in many developing countries , particularly for the poorest people in these countries .
We also believe that intellectual property rights are essential for encouraging creativity and innovation .
In our opinion , they also encourage investment in research and the development of new medicines .
The TRIPs agreement , a WTO agreement on intellectual property , should not , therefore , be a barrier it should be part of the solution that you are looking for .
Criticism of this agreement is generally based on the fact that it would limit the political options in developing countries in the area of public health .
Our position focuses , in the main , on one key point .
We believe that the agreement allows WTO members sufficient scope to put in place an intellectual property regime that is able to meet their concerns in terms of public health .
Our belief is that it is up to the WTO members , within the Council for Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ( TRIPs Council ) , to interpret this degree of flexibility , rather than leaving this up to a panel .
That is why the European Union has already been working for some time in order to reach a consensus between the WTO members instead of leaving the way open to legal disputes .
This is also why we supported the request from African countries to bring up the question of access to medicines at the WTO .
This debate took place at the last Council meeting held on 20 June 2001 .
We presented a document , which summed up our views on some of the provisions of the agreement , such as Article 31 , for example , which does not specify the grounds for issuing a compulsory licence .
We believe that these concerns regarding public health can , legitimately , be considered as good grounds for granting a compulsory licence .
Another issue is that of respecting procedural restrictions .
On this point , we think the procedure provides enough flexibility in cases of national emergencies and that the current rate of HIV / AIDS infection in some developing countries constitutes this type of emergency and that intellectual property can also be lifted if a patent is required in cases of public non-commercial use .
Our position on this point is , therefore , constructive .
We are committed to protecting intellectual property , which is an important stimulus , but we also believe that this must and can be achieved within the existing legal framework , as long as it is clarified in order to take account of urgent public health situations .
To refer to the recent debate at the WTO , many developing countries , such as India , Brazil and some countries in Africa , Latin America and Asia , presented a document which welcomed this debate .
Like us , they stressed the need to ensure that this agreement does not compromise the rights of WTO members to draw up and implement health policies designed to safeguard public health .
This group of countries also stressed that the use of compulsory licensing was a crucial instrument for putting in place these public health policies and giving wider access to medicines .
Lastly , they believed it was necessary to look into extending temporary provisions to implement this agreement .
According to the information available to us , none of the WTO members have yet requested a debate on reducing the term of patents .
The patent term is currently set at 20 years and further negotiation of the agreement would be needed in order to change this requirement .
The same is true with regard to the idea of a moratorium on possible trade disputes , which is not permitted under the current agreement .
We therefore maintain the position that we have held in this matter , to the satisfaction , I believe , of most of the parties involved , which is to find an appropriate balance between the interests of the patent holder and public health concerns .
We shall continue to discuss this issue in a constructive manner .
The TRIPs Council will be holding further meetings in July and September .
It is , of course , rather premature to issue an opinion on the content of the decisions that come out of these meetings but , whatever those decisions are , rest assured , Mrs Sandbæk , that the Commission is committed to finding the right balance between these two objectives - namely , to acknowledge inventors ' rights and to provide access to essential medicines - and we will continue to be committed to this over the coming months .
Thank you very much for your answer , Commissioner , but you say that the present provisions allow an interpretation .
This implies that it is the Commission 's interpretation and that the provisions might be interpreted otherwise .
Therefore I should like to ask whether the EU will call explicitly for a mechanism to ensure implementation of an interpretation of the TRIPs which favours public health care for the poor , so that we know what the interpretation will be .
Does the Commission believe that existing transition periods and other provisions give developing countries sufficient flexibility to implement the TRIPs Agreement ?
You said that you do not believe that we should enter into new negotiations .
I can understand that the EU will not go as far as to press for an in-depth review seeking to reducing the length and scope of patents protection on pharmaceuticals for developing countries or exempting them altogether , but I should like you to explain further why you cannot do that , as it would be a nice thing for the EU to do .
The first of these three points relates to the interpretation of the TRIPs agreement .
We have our own interpretation which we have made clear , but we will not leave the matter there .
We shall be discussing this interpretation at a meeting of the TRIPs Council , which we and others have requested .
Like others , we believe that the text has achieved the right balance but that WTO members must hold a debate on its interpretation so that it is they and not the judges who decide .
Therefore , this certainly shows political will .
The second point on transition periods has not , as far as I know , been the subject of any requests .
There have been no disputes on this issue either , since , as I am sure you are aware , Brazil and the United States settled the matter out of court last week and I would like to point out that the European Union was not involved .
The third and final point concerns the length of patents protection .
In this case , we believe that the current length of patents protection again provides an adequate balance between the need to preserve intellectual property and public health requirements .
I believe our position on this point to be effective .
We are among those who draw attention to the issue of access to medicines .
Admittedly , there are other issues including those relating to public health systems and the availability of care .
I believe that , in this matter , we are being true to the position that we hold generally , namely , to bridge the gap , using an acceptable and proactive approach , between the concerns of developing countries and those of some countries in the North , that are concerned about the protection of intellectual property .
Mr President , we all know that in the pharmaceutical world there is a very long time lag between inventing a new product and having it ready for the market , generally 10 to 12 years .
The product then still has to be launched and another 20 years must elapse before third parties can manufacture it .
That is why the question arises as to whether instead of resorting to patent rights and compulsory licences , it would not be better to have a development fund for such cases and to make an effort , at international level , to make a large amount of money available so that by means of bulk purchasing medicines can be made available at correspondingly low prices .
Let us not forget that the selling price is a combination of manufacturing costs and licence fees .
Companies would be able to supply medicines at more favourable prices if volume purchasing applied .
So my question is whether the Commission could take an initiative in this area .
That is a very good question .
There is a tiered pricing option mid-way between the strict protection of intellectual property , the patent system in other words , and exceptions to this system such as compulsory licensing , and this is the option that we have considered in conjunction with the pharmaceutical industry and some of the countries concerned .
Tiered pricing involves a pharmaceutical laboratory reducing the prices that we pay on our markets by around 10 % for countries such as Africa , for example , whilst still owning its patent .
This process is beginning to get off the ground although its scope is , in our view , fairly limited at the present time , and it will be the subject of an international initiative , which has , moreover , already been launched by the Secretary-General of the United Nations .
The idea is for there to be a joint fund , to which several countries have already contributed and which will be used to buy medicines wholesale at low cost , which will therefore solve this part of the problem regarding price-related access , provided that the necessary funds are in place . For the time being , however , the funds are still very limited .
I would reiterate that the price of medicines is just part of a much wider problem which , in the main , relates to the health care system , distribution and the ability of the people concerned , particularly in the case of AIDS , to take their medicine regularly , something which involves extremely complicated medical procedures .
In general , however , to answer your question , yes , the international community is moving in this direction and the European Union will follow suit since some funding has already been earmarked for this purpose .
Question No 32 by ( H-0571 / 01 ) :
Subject : Testing cosmetics on animals and the WTO Under WTO rules , imported products must be treated the same as ' like products ' of domestic origin .
In past cases of dispute , a decision is based on the end product and not the way a product is produced .
It has been argued , therefore , that the introduction of a ban on the marketing of cosmetic products if they are tested on animals will result in a trade war as the process , i.e. not testing on animals , would not be taken into consideration .
In light of the Parliament ' s vote on 3 April 2001 to move towards such a ban , what action would the Commission take to avoid a potential trade war and does the Commission consider that the WTO rules should be interpreted to include the processing of a product when deciding on its ' likeness ' ?
Questions to Commissioner Solbes
I take it from you that it is very unlikely that any agreement could be reached .
Just a month or two ago the American Ambassador to the EU stated that the cosmetics area could be the basis of one of the biggest trade disputes , putting bananas and all the others far into the shade , if it was not resolved .
So I take it that you are telling us we are going down a path that could lead to near disaster .
Have you tried to quantify the potential for retaliation against European industry of other injured parties , and what that could mean in terms of lost jobs in Europe ?
Mr Purvis , it is my job to handle the trade disputes that we are currently involved in .
It is preferable that I avoid disputes altogether .
I believe that my task , therefore , particularly in my dealings with the Council and Parliament , is to be totally honest when a Council or Parliament decision might mean we are in danger of losing a dispute .
I am sure you have a good understanding of the risk .
The proof of this , in fact , is that we are now discussing the implications that all this will have on sanctions .
I cannot say what the current situation is because , in order for sanctions to be taken against the European Union , a panel would have to be set up , we would have to fail before this panel and the amount of sanctions would then have to be assessed .
In general , the amount of sanctions is assessed by considering the volume of trade affected .
In a hypothetical scenario , in other words , a scenario where this proposal ends up becoming a European Union proposal , which is not yet the case , if it is challenged and if we lose , the volume of trade in question must be assessed and , at that point , we would have an idea of the system of sanctions .
I would reiterate , so that you have all the details , that in this case , sanctions do not necessarily and do not generally target the industries which are at the root of the problem .
They target others , since sanctions are chosen by the party who wins the dispute at the WTO .
Mr President , it is very good to hear that the Commissioner is not afraid of a trade war but responds very positively to the idea that these important political aims set by the European Parliament , for example , such as a ban on the marketing of cosmetic products tested on animals , are political decisions , not a question of protectionism , and thus it is important that our representatives defend these issues at international level .
You yourself referred to the possibility of bringing up in the next WTO round the question of whether in the future more attention could be paid to the way the product is produced in these trade issues , in other words not merely the end product .
Has there been any discussion on this ?
Can you shed any more light on this reference of yours ?
Do you believe this is a possibility ?
With regard to the first point of your question , Mrs Kauppi , I am , of course , responsible for applying the policies that the European Union has decided upon , including those taken on external issues .
It is my duty , and I think that I do this openly , to explain that , when a political decision taken by the European Union brings us into conflict with our international commitments , as would be the case here , then the people who are taking this decision must be made aware of the risks they are taking .
If you want to run this risk , do so .
I will handle it .
Incidentally , I believe that there are more intelligent , less risky ways of resolving this issue .
In particular , we could consider a compromise solution between our proposal to ban testing and your position to ban marketing , in other words , that of labelling requirements .
From the point of view of international trade legislation , these requirements present less of a risk than a ban on marketing .
If we could move in this direction , in order to bring together both our points of view , I believe that we would avoid provoking useless disputes .
My second point relates to our desire to have some of the WTO rules clarified , in order to allow the European Union to move in the direction that it wishes , and this concerns production methods , for example .
We hope to move in this direction since we are relatively isolated at the moment .
One of the reasons for this is that we are faced with the belief of some of the developing countries that the use of these production methods may equate to protectionist measures .
We are , therefore , in need of some very strong arguments in order to show that this matter is not about protection , it is a matter of collective preference and that we each have our own ethics .
Within the European Union , animal welfare is part of our ethics , although this is not necessarily the case in other countries - as we can see - and perception varies according to the level of development .
This is our position .
We will do everything that we can so that this issue is placed on the agenda of the next round of negotiations , so that progress can be made .
I make no secret of the fact that , at the moment , our position is hardly shared at all in other parts of the world .
Mr President , I was very pleased to hear just now that Commissioner Lamy believes that it is very likely that during the next round of WTO negotiations production and labelling methods will also have to be considered .
What I would like to ask you , Commissioner , is whether you are willing to accept that imports from third countries are also subject to the same criteria that apply to production at European level , be it in agriculture or elsewhere .
Are you prepared , for the sake of public health , and that is what is at stake here after all , to take such steps to counter this opposition during the next WTO round ?
Of course , Mrs Schierhuber , I am willing to do all of this because , and I reiterate , one aspect of the European Union ' s trade policy is to apply the collective preferential scheme to its external trade in the same way as it is applied to internal trade .
From this perspective , it is quite straightforward .
It is sometimes slightly more complicated , as demonstrated , for example , by the panel on hormone-treated beef , at which we were unsuccessful .
As we imposed a ban on hormone-treated beef within the Union , we banned imports of it as well , but the conditions of this ban meant that it was found to be in breach of international legislation .
In general , the principles which apply are those of non-discrimination and of proportionality and the national treatment principle .
These are the principles that we wish to see taken into account in the agenda on the environment at the negotiations , especially everything which relates to the precautionary principle .
We have some way to go before this can be done .
There are risks in what we are doing within the European Union - in some cases , perhaps - with regard to existing laws which are considered to be excessive .
Therefore , on the one hand , we must adjust our internal approach and , on the other , we must adjust international legislation to our own preferences , which is only possible if other countries are in favour of changing this international legislation which is outside of our control .
Since we do not have any particular unilateralist tendencies , we must , therefore , change the legislation on a number of points or , at the very least , clarify its position on these issues .
This is the situation at the current time .
We are aware of your concerns in this area . We support them , particularly from an ethical standpoint .
I cannot hide the fact that , as things currently stand , some of your plans will pose serious problems from the WTO ' s point of view .
Question No 33 by ( H-0565 / 01 ) :
Subject : Greek stability and development programme As the current economic outlook grows bleaker , the Member States are naturally revising the targets set out in their stability and development programmes .
Has the Greek Government provided details of its current estimates for economic growth and to what extent do those estimates differ from the rather ambitious economic growth targets of 5 % - 5.5 % ?
The IMF , for example , forecasts that inflation in Greece in 2001 will reach 3.4 % , and considers that there is no realistic prospect of the economy growing at the projected rate of 5 % -5.5 % from this year .
Moreover , Commissioner Solbes Mira has stated that a 3 % economic growth rate in the eurozone countries is very high .
In the Commission 's view , what impact could failure to achieve these targets have on employment and the balance of public finances in Greece ?
According to the spring economic forecasts presented by the Commission , Greece ' s GDP will grow by 4.4 % in 2001 and inflation as measured by the decrease in private consumption will slow down slightly to 2.8 % of the annual average , compared to 3 % in 2000 .
Given this context , public administrations ' accounts will balance out in 2001 , the labour market situation will improve and the unemployment rate will fall for the second consecutive year , reaching 10.3 % in 2001 .
With regard to real production growth , the Commission ' s estimate is slightly lower than that given by the Greek authorities at the end of 2000 and is reflected in the stability programme drawn up in spring 2001 .
The Commission forecasts take account of shrinking world demand in the first few months of the year and therefore differ from those given by the Greek authorities .
Nevertheless , contrary to what might appear to be the case , the macroeconomic forecasts of the Commission ' s stability programme are worse than the Greek forecasts .
For the moment , there are no grounds to believe that the medium-term prospects for the stability programme are any less valid .
We , as the Commission , will soon be initiating work on the autumn forecasts and for the moment do not envisage making significant changes in the case of Greece .
According to recent announcements by the Greek authorities , given the new , less favourable , international climate , the national forecasts will be adjusted more towards the Commission ' s spring forecasts .
In any event , in the 2001 update of the stability programme , which is due to be presented by the end of the year , the Greek authorities will undertake the necessary adjustment of their medium-term macroeconomic outlook and an assessment of the impact of this on public finances .
To summarise very briefly , the economic situation is not particularly favourable , but since this assessment still falls within the levels forecast in the stability programme and in its 2001 update , we do not feel that the problems are as serious as some speakers are suggesting .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I should just like to correct your last finding : I do not foresee any deterioration in the situation and , may I say , nor do I wish for one .
I am just a little concerned by what I see .
You say that the programme will be updated at the end of the year .
But Greece 's entire economic policy is already being drawn up on the basis of the assumption that there will be a large budgetary surplus rather than equilibrium , as you said , and that unemployment will fall . At the same time , there are absolutely no data concerning Greece in all the statistics on the Union .
You have no official data .
At least those of us who read the statistics do not .
If you have some other statistics , then maybe things are different .
This was the thrust of my question .
And my question does not refer just to Greece ; it refers to all the countries of the European Union , which is why I should like you to tell me more about public finances and changes in unemployment .
I think this updating exercise should already have begun .
I shall endeavour to reply to this second point .
As I was saying just now - and Greece ' s case applies to the other Member States too - the stability pacts are based on figures provided by the countries themselves .
It is true that the Commission ' s estimates in some cases give higher or lower figures than those given in the stability pact , but leaving aside the figures given in the stability pacts , which are , nevertheless crucial to understanding developments in public finances , we can already state that our estimates for a growth of 2.8 % today represent an excessively optimistic position .
We also feel that our actual growth percentages will be much closer to the Union ' s growth potential , which stands at around 2.5 % .
Nevertheless , even with this growth rate of close to 2.5 % - a little above or a little below - we feel that employment will continue to be created in the Union and , for the time being , we have not yet seen any significant fall in employment growth or an increase in unemployment .
Unemployment continues to fall .
For the moment , therefore , we continue to be relatively optimistic about developments in this field .
With regard to the issue of public finances , it is true that the less favourable economic climate might have some impact .
With this eventuality in mind , the Commission has already stated its position on public finances to the Council , indicating that , in our opinion , we should allow the automatic stabilisers to play their full role in those countries that have achieved a more or less balanced position in terms of public finance and in other countries that have a national debt of around 60 % .
In this situation , the countries in which the automatic stabilisers should not be allowed to play their full role should be the four countries with deficits of more than 1 % and the three that have a debt of close to 100 % .
Italy is included in both groups .
The remaining countries are Germany , France and Portugal where deficit is concerned and Greece and Belgium in the case of national debt .
Question No 34 by ( H-0578 / 01 ) :
Subject : The euro in the former Yugoslavia To what extent is the Commission involved in the introduction of the euro in Bosnia-Herzegovina , Kosovo and Montenegro , where the currency is at present the German mark , and what is its view of this development ?
Mr President , I will try to respond to Mr Posselt with a degree of detail .
Firstly , I would point out to him that the Commission is not responsible for the introduction of notes and coins .
As he knows , notes are the responsibility of the Central Bank and the system of central banks and , in the case of coins , it is the national authorities who are responsible .
However , with regard to the changeover process , we must distinguish between activities within the eurozone and those outside it .
Within the eurozone , it is the central banks and the mints , or the Finance Ministries , who have decided on the changeover plans .
Outside the eurozone , it is considered basically as a commercial activity and it is left to the whim of the market .
That means that the national banks are not , therefore , involved in the logistics and channels for distributing the new coins or recovering the old coins , and they must maintain the systems they have traditionally used for this type of operation .
Nevertheless , it is true that there is concern within the European Central Bank and in some national banks , in particular the German Central Bank , as a result of the enormous number of German Marks in existence outside the eurozone , that action should be taken to support the changeover situation in the countries outside the zone .
In this respect , on 14 December 2000 , the European Central Bank took the decision to allow frontloading or the pre-supply of euros to those financial institutions which are branches or subsidiaries of European banks in the countries outside the eurozone .
Clearly , if the Central Bank is working on the possibility of pre-supply , the first step has been taken for this type of financial body to be able to move ahead with the process following the change of currency .
In the former Yugoslavia there are three different cases : Bosnia-Herzegovina , Kosovo and Montenegro .
In the case of Bosnia-Herzegovina , we are talking about a currency board with a national currency linked to the Mark with an exchange rate of 1 to 1 .
However , it is the case that that currency belongs to Bosnia-Herzegovina and will not undergo any change in itself .
It will no longer have a relationship with the Mark , but a set relationship with the euro and will be approximately half of the euro , which is the same as the Mark-euro relationship .
With regard to Kosovo , there is a significant level of possession of physical currency .
It is an economy where the currency circulation is based on notes which are not normally from the area and which , in particular , are not from the Mark zone .
The Yugoslavian Dinar is still legal tender , but it is also the case that the Mark is in circulation and it was recognised as a currency which can operate and the circulation of the euro will clearly not change that situation .
There is a specific problem of how to change these Marks which are circulating into euro notes and coins .
According to my information , the German Central Bank , which , at the time , became aware of this situation , is thinking about which solution to adopt for this type of situation .
The problem of Montenegro is similar .
In November 1999 , it decided to unilaterally establish a double currency system between the Mark and a parallel currency ; on 1 December , the Government of Montenegro declared the Mark to be the only legal currency in the territory of the republic and , as in Kosovo , the Commission has no powers to act and , in our opinion , it will also fall to the Federal Republic of Germany ' s Central Bank to take the relevant decisions in order to carry out operations other than frontloading operations which , as I said before , will be carried out using branches and subsidiaries of the European banks which work in that area .
Commissioner , thank you very much for your very helpful and detailed reply .
I would just like to ask a supplementary question .
Just today there have been major reports in the German press according to which the accession countries are planning to circumvent the euro criteria by introducing the euro unilaterally , as it were .
On the strength of what you have said , this seems somewhat unlikely to me , but I would nevertheless like to ask you if this is a concern and whether the Commission is dealing with this issue in the accession countries .
Mr President , this issue has been widely debated and the position is clear for both the Central Bank and the Commission and Council : to participate in the euro means to fulfil the conditions of the Treaty of Maastricht .
That basically means maintaining a period of exchange rate stability for two years , approximately , not from any old moment but logically from the moment they are members of the European Union and , in accordance with the interpretation of the Council of Ministers , they must be part of the exchange rate mechanism for a period of two years .
Some countries have raised the difficulties caused by reversing stable exchange rate systems such as they have at the moment ( this is the case with Estonia , with its currency board linked to the Mark ) and that it would mean returning to a system of greater flexibility and of currency flotation in order to retrieve a situation of stable exchange rates .
For that reason , the official interpretation and application is that the situation of the countries which have a currency board , if they are linked to European currencies , is compatible with the exchange rate mechanism , although these decisions are clearly adopted unilaterally by the countries involved .
To put it another way , the responsibility to maintain stability of the exchange rate falls to the national authorities and they will not receive any type of privileged treatment , apart from that resulting from their presence in the exchange rate mechanism .
This is the situation which has been maintained and clearly , sensu contrario , the interpretation must be that neither the Central Bank nor the Council nor , of course , we in the Commission , are in favour of ' euroisation ' processes which in some cases have been suggested and which , in our view , in no event should allow entry to the euro through the back door or allow countries which do not fulfil the conditions set for all Member States of the European Union to benefit from the advantages of being in the euro legally .
Mr Commissioner , you have primarily concentrated on the logistical and technical aspects , and you have only just begun to touch on the monetary risks that could ensue from what you call the gigantic holdings by foreigners of German marks but also presumably of other euro zone currencies .
If these holders begin to get concerned about how they are going to exchange these holdings , or about what the euro is going to be , is there a risk of them moving into the dollar or other currencies and thereby destabilising the euro even more than it has been ?
When there are people who possess significant quantities of notes , above all within the eurozone , and of national currencies outside the eurozone , two types of situation arise : normal saving by these people and the quest for protection in the face of their exchange rate situation .
In both cases it is perfectly justified to possess these holdings .
And there is no problem in changing these holdings into the new euro , via their commercial banks , via the European banks which have branches or subsidiaries in the area .
Certain different cases are raised : the possible existence of European currency on unofficial or black-market networks .
There must clearly not be any favourable treatment for this type of situation .
The same rules must be applied as for exchange in the European Union , that is , in those cases where somebody is identified as the holder of a quantity of a currency , the exchange takes place without any type of risk , even for quantities greater than the minimum amounts laid down in the money laundering directive .
When quantities are exchanged which do not reach the limits of the directive on money laundering , the exchange may take place without requesting identification of the holder of the funds .
However , in my opinion , when the quantities are high and exceed those laid down , identification should be demanded .
You have raised a different problem .
Since this requirement is going to be maintained , is it not possible that some of these holdings will move to the dollar .
Firstly , we do not have that impression , given the figures for the inflow of notes into the different central banks ; secondly , in the countries which have signed up to the obligations of the money laundering convention , the same criteria I have mentioned must be applied for exchanges from European currency to the dollar .
The situation you mention could only arise in certain countries which have more lax legislation , which today allow a European currency to be exchanged for another currency , the dollar or any other , without being subjected to those requirements .
Thank you very much , Mr Solbes , for your answers today .
I imagine that there will still be some Members waiting for you in the corridors to continue asking you to predict the future .
But I thank you for your intervention .
Questions to Mr Monti
Question No 35 by ( H-0535 / 01 ) :
Subject : Competition In 1996 , a complaint was lodged with the Commission 's Competition DG concerning abuse of a dominant position by the port of Helsingborg .
The complainants , two of three shipping companies which use the port , considered that excessive fees were charged because of this dominant position .
Pending a decision , one of the two companies has paid only half the amount of fees for using the port .
The port of Helsingborg , therefore , now has a claim of SEK 240 million ( approximately EUR 26 million ) on the company .
Almost five years since the complaint was lodged , the parties are still awaiting a decision from the Competition DG .
Notification has been promised several times but as yet nothing has been forthcoming .
The consequence of the delay is that two small companies do not know what financial parameters they have to work within .
Is it reasonable for parties to have to wait almost five years for the Commission to take a decision ?
As Mr Stenmarck mentioned , two complaints were indeed lodged in 1997 alleging abuse of a dominant position by the port of Helsingborg .
The complaints have been under active investigation by the Commission since that time .
This case raises many complex factual and legal issues and the markets involved have potentially changed significantly in the light of the opening of the Øresund bridge in July 2000 .
The Commission is fully aware of the situation of the parties .
A series of meetings has been held recently with the main parties concerned , partly to obtain their views on recent market developments and partly to establish whether they see any prospect of reaching a mutually acceptable settlement .
If there is no settlement , the Commission will continue its investigation with a view to completing this as soon as possible .
I first want to thank the Commissioner for his reply .
When , as in this case , the issue is a complaint submitted to the Commission in 1996 , i.e. five years ago , there is really only one acceptable course of action , namely for the Commission immediately to decide on its position .
This has not been promised by the Commission , which is why I cannot say that I am satisfied with the reply .
It is an issue of fundamental significance that excessive fees have been charged by a port which , it has been alleged , has a dominant position .
I would like to emphasise that I have no view on whether this is right or wrong , but all parties are waiting for the Commission ' s decision and all parties are very much dependent on the Commission ' decision .
I think it is unreasonable for it to take over five years for the Commission to make a decision .
I would therefore put the question to the Commission : When is a final decision likely to be forthcoming ?
Yes , it has been a long period . I agree with you about that .
On the other hand , as I am sure you are aware , this case is very complex .
From a factual point of view , the Commission has to take into consideration the evolution of the port 's activity over almost a ten-year period .
The market itself , which is at the core of any competition analysis , is very difficult to determine .
It depends on the type of traffic considered : foot passengers , cars , transportation of goods and so on .
In addition , as I mentioned a moment ago , the situation has changed greatly with the opening of the Øresund bridge last year .
In addition , to make things more complex , there is no direct precedent .
This explains why , as Mr Stenmarck underlines , this decision is eagerly awaited .
The Commission is in the process of analysing , in particular , the consequences of the opening of the bridge on the definition of the markets .
All parties concerned will be asked to contribute all relevant information .
The case is being given top priority and will be resolved as soon as possible .
But I cannot , at this stage , indicate a time or possible outcome .
That will depend on the facts .
I would like to reply to Mr Berenguer by making reference to a recent event .
At the meeting of 20 June 2001 , the Commission decided to set part of the procedure laid down in Article 88 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty in motion , with regard to aid allegedly granted by the public authorities to the theme park ' Tierra Mítica ' .
This decision was the subject of a press release issued on the same day , 20 June .
The text of the decision , without the confidential information , will be published in Spanish in the Official Journal of the European Communities .
Commissioner , the truth is that I composed this question in May and when I learnt that the proceedings had been opened I considered withdrawing it , but , before I had done so , something happened which led me to change my mind .
That was a disproportionate attack against me by the President of the region , Mr Zaplana , for having put this question .
And that is not acceptable , Commissioner .
When , in the face of innocent questions which are simply intended to clear up issues which the government of the Generalitat were hiding , there is a violent reaction , that means that there is more to this than meets the eye and I therefore urge you , Commissioner , to have your services vigorously investigate , removed from the political pressure they are no doubt going to be placed under , what is behind this : tax benefits , the granting of guarantees or , what seems to me more serious , the creation of infrastructures financed with European funds to the exclusive benefit of a private company .
The truth is that the leaders of my Autonomous Community are such peculiar liberals that they propose that hospitals and schools should be private , while the public sector is busy building merry-go-rounds and amusement parks .
Thank you very much , Mr Berenguer .
I do not believe that you have asked a question , but Mr Monti can always reply to your ' non-question ' .
I would like to answer the same question put by Mr Berenguer Fuster and say to him that , as in all instances involving proceedings , we are looking into this issue with a great deal of care and attention .

Perhaps I could now give Mr Berenguer Fuster some additional information , in other words the main issues on which the proceedings are based , which are the funding of infrastructures required for the park to operate , the value of shares , and , in particular , the grounds and the name ' Tierra Mítica ' which has been transferred to the park ' s private management company , the conditions of a shareholder loan of eight billion pesetas , the reduction in city tax by Benidorm city council to benefit the park and , lastly , the possible financial contribution of six billion pesetas by the tourism agency of Valencia - the subject of the written question by Mr Berenguer Fuster dated 11 April 2001 .
I wanted these facts to be seen outside the context of the more political comments that Mr Berenguer Fuster made earlier .

Commissioner , with a view to achieving the greatest transparency and clarity in the opening of these proceedings , I would like you to tell us whether you have opened them simply as a result of these innocent questions - because they really were innocent questions seeking information - or whether there are really sufficient reasons , because it contravenes Community directives for a regional government to subsidise what it must not subsidise and in the least appropriate way .
If that is the case , I would like you to respond because , as Mr Berenguer told you earlier , there is information in the media which seems to give prominence to the person who is simply asking questions and to the genuinely guilty party , i.e. the Valencian government .
I would like to add that this complaint is insignificant compared to the original complaint submitted to the Commission .
In fact , the plaintiff has constantly made further complaints as the project for the theme park has progressed .
The Commission received 18 successive letters from the plaintiff in relation to the project .
This is a complicated issue , which has also given rise to a great deal of correspondence between the Commission and the Spanish authorities , which is one of the reasons for the amount of time which has passed since this matter first came to light .
In answer to Mr Berenguer Fuster , I mentioned why the Commission opened proceedings so as to provide Parliament with a more detailed framework .
Perhaps I should mention the other points , namely those in which the plaintiff alleges that the grounds where the park is built were purchased cheaply , that some of the park ' s costs were met by the regional authorities , that the principle of the private investor was not respected , that loans were granted to benefit the park , that injections of capital have been given to the park and that funding for training and direct regional funding has been provided .
Commissioner , as the rapporteur some years ago of a report on the European Union ' s competition policy , I know that public aid is one of the most complicated issues and that for years it has been distorting the application of competition policy within the Union .
Given the factors which the Commissioner has mentioned in relation to the issue raised by Mr Berenguer , I would like to know - if indeed it is the case that there has been an inappropriate application of public funds , in this case in the region of Valencia - what compensation mechanisms are in place to rebalance competitiveness between similar existing structures in other tourist areas .
In the question submitted by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , there is a slightly more general reference to the rationale of monitoring State funding .
In this case , one might well wonder why the Commission believes that the funding given to a theme park such as Tierra Mítica can affect intra-Community trade .
In fact , the Commission believes that large theme parks like Tierra Mítica are much like other tourist destinations , and this affects - or might potentially affect - tourist numbers .
On the other hand , these theme parks are an added tourist attraction for the area where they are built .
Moreover , the Commission has already adopted several decisions with regard to State funding for theme parks as well as other tourist investment projects such as hotels or marinas .
Lastly , in the present case , even the advertisement for the theme park explains how to find the location from abroad .
Without wanting to pre-empt the outcome of the proceedings that have recently been opened , I would stress , to give a more direct answer to your question , that if the Commission does discover that funding has been granted illegally it will set about recovering the money .
Now is not the time , however , to pre-empt the outcome of the inquiry in any way .
Question No 37 by ( H-0551 / 01 ) :
Subject : Limit on government subsidies for film production in small countries The Swedish press reports that the EU competition authority has proposed a 50 per cent limit on national state aid to the film industry .
This announcement has also been interpreted as the possible introduction of a ceiling as a first step towards reducing the limit to 30 per cent .
These reports have appeared at the same time as the Commission continues to avow its intention to guarantee linguistic and cultural diversity and equality within the EU .
Film production in Europe differs from that in the USA in regard to the large number of languages in the EU .
Against that background , producing films in the small Member States , such as my own country Sweden , without any support at all , is in many cases financially impossible .
A film in a minor language is obviously severely handicapped compared with a film in English , and it is therefore clear that some support is absolutely necessary to ensure that domestic film production can continue in those countries with smaller populations .
Does the Commission not consider that the introduction of an EU ceiling to limit national state aid to the film industry is directly contrary to Article 151 of the Treaties which states that ' The Community shall contribute to the flowering of the cultures of the Member States , while respecting their national and regional diversity ... ' , and is the Commission therefore prepared to take action to prevent the introduction of such a limit ?
Mr President , in the meeting held in Stockholm on 12 June 2001 with delegates from the national film institutes and the cultural departments of all the Member States , the Commission representatives made it clear that the Commission does not intend to take a restrictive approach to aid for film production granted on cultural grounds , as suggested in Mr Sacrédeus ' question .
The 50 % aid intensity limit was fixed by the Commission , in its decision of 1998 on the French scheme of automatic aid to film production , with reference to the French situation .
According to that decision this limit does not apply to difficult and low-budget films .
It is up to each Member State both to define the notion of " difficult " and " low-budget " films and to fix the aid intensity applicable to this category of work according to national criteria .
Furthermore , apart from this derogation for other Member States with a comparatively limited cultural and linguistic influence , the Commission has made it be known that it will study potential further derogations where they prove necessary to ensure the viability of films with great cultural content .
In practice , the 50 % aid intensity criterion constitutes a benchmark that can be exceeded on genuine cultural grounds .
I would like to thank Commissioner Monti for his clarifying reply .
This issue has aroused great interest in cultural circles and among representatives of the film industry in Sweden .
As one man and one woman , people have reacted to the way this could possibly be interpreted with regard to linguistic and cultural diversity in small Member States .
I would like to put a follow-up question to the Commissioner : bearing in mind the answer given , is there any guarantee that film production in countries with languages which are not widespread , i.e. film production in minor Member languages , will regularly be exempted from the 50 per cent rule so that , in principle , all film production in , for example , Swedish , Danish or Portuguese could be counted as not exceeding the 50 per cent rule ?
. I am happy to provide further information in response to Mr Sacrédeus ' question .
First , on cultural diversity - a key point in our Community - the diversity of characteristics in the schemes operated by Member States reflects the cultural diversity in the European Union .
Accordingly , the Commission does not wish to impose any particular model under the review .
The Commission does not want to harmonise the provisions of the different schemes but just to ensure their compliance with the four specific compatibility criteria that were set out in the French decision .
On the issue of whether the 50 % aid intensity threshold applies to smaller Member States with limited cultural markets and could an exception be envisaged for them : Well , the answer is that the 50 % aid intensity threshold applies in principle across the board to all Member States without distinction .
It is to be noted that in the absence of territorialisation , the 50 % aid intensity criterion becomes irrelevant .
The Commission might consider applying exceptions to the 50 % aid criterion if such a limit would make cultural production impossible .
The Commission has already established an exception for difficult low-budget films .
For certain smaller Member States , in the case of territorialisation , the Commission might consider authorising higher aid intensities on a case-by-case basis , if it is established that the 50 % aid intensity level would not ensure cultural production because the cultural area and market diffusion were limited .
Question No 38 by ( H-0557 / 01 ) :
Subject : Sharing third-generation mobile phone networks with rivals The Commission is at the moment contemplating what position to take concerning the idea of sharing infrastructure in third-generation mobile phone networks .
At this stage , the Commission has stated that telecommunications companies might breach EC competition rules if they choose to share infrastructure with their rivals .
The European Investment Bank has also stated that it will take competition concerns over mobile phone networks into account when deciding whether to finance third-generation projects .
When will the Commission state its position on this very important matter ?
Is the Commission aware of the EIB 's plans and does it think that competition concerns should be taken into account when making decisions on EIB funding ?
Thank you , Ms Kauppi , for this extremely interesting and timely question .
It is true that currently , given the prevailing market conditions and , in particular , the decline in the market valuation of most technologies companies , network sharing has been seriously envisaged by certain third generation operators as a means to alleviate their debt burden and lower their network deployment costs .
The Commission has already indicated that , in principle , it considers network infrastructure sharing positively , due to the potential economic gains , always provided that competition rules and other relevant Community laws are respected , in particular those of the licensing directive .
This view has been expressed in the Commission communication on the introduction of third generation mobile communications in the European Union that was adopted on 20 March 2001 .
Certain forms of networking infrastructure sharing , notably site and mast sharing , could greatly contribute to reducing the environmental impact of network deployment .
So far , the Commission has not been formally notified of any agreement between 3G operators , therefore , it is not yet clear how network sharing will take place and how it will be implemented .
Some operators may choose to engage in network infrastructure sharing within a limited geographical area , while others may opt for full geographical coverage .
In the same vein , some operators may choose to share only sites and masts , whereas others may choose also to share antennas and what I would call ' active elements ' of their networks , such as radio network controllers .
From contacts with operators and manufacturers , it appears that the degree of cooperation among 3G license holders will be influenced by the availability of new technology which will enable operators to share even active elements of their networks , without having to exchange or share sensitive information among themselves or otherwise compromise their independence as competitors .
The Commission has already had some preliminary discussions with national regulators on the competition law issues raised by network-sharing .
At this stage , the Commission can only require parties to ensure that when they conclude network-sharing agreements , competition among themselves and with third parties is not restricted or affected .
Any restriction of competition could be tolerated only if it brought benefits to consumers and fulfilled all the other conditions set out in Article 81 ( 3 ) of the Treaty .
In any event , the freedom of contracting parties to disengage from their network-sharing cooperation and deploy their own networks in areas where they previously shared infrastructure should be preserved .
Given that the Commission has not yet been formally notified of , or had occasion to examine , any case of network sharing , it is uncertain at this stage whether the Commission might need to issue , in the future , any kind of specific guidelines on the competition law aspects of network sharing .
Finally , as regards the EIB , the Commission is aware of the Bank 's intention of taking account of competition considerations in assessing projects for loans .
The Commission clearly welcomes this intention as ensuring coherence between the Bank 's objectives in rolling out projects in accordance with its mandate , particularly following the Lisbon European Council and Community policy in a liberalised environment .
Mr President , it is always good to put the final question at question time .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his excellent answer . I was very pleased that the Commission takes a positive view of network sharing .
At the moment the different ways in which this can be achieved are still open .
I also understand your view that the competition rules must , of course , be respected and that these concrete assessments will only be able to be made once you have applications and notifications on this issue in your hands .
You also referred to the Commission possibly providing specific guidelines on this issue , should the need arise .
Furthermore , I would like you to confirm that , in your opinion , at the moment all the possible methods of network sharing - both geographical and the other methods to which you referred - are also open from a competition point of view .
Is this your final opinion ?
As you underlined yourself , Ms Kauppi , the Commission has an open attitude on this issue , provided that the competition rules are respected .
As to the aspect of possible adoption of possible guidelines from the competition angle on network sharing , as I said in my previous response , the Commission has not yet received any notification of a network sharing agreement .
Thus it is still too early to have a clear idea about possible anti-trust issues which may arise from such forms of cooperation among competing network operators and which may require the Commission to publish some sort of guidelines in order to provide further needed clarification for the industry concerned .
What needs to be made clear is that network sharing is subject to the same rules of competition law as other forms of cooperation or collaboration among competitors .
It would be wrong if operators believed that network sharing deserves different treatment under competition law provisions .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 39 to 77 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.20 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Institutions for occupational retirement provision
The next item is the continuation of the report ( A5-0220 / 2001 ) by Mr Karas on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the activities of institutions for occupational retirement provision [ COM ( 2000 ) 507 - C5-0596 / 2000 - 2000 / 0260 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the parties involved , and especially our rapporteur , for the constructive approach he has taken .
Mr Karas has done a remarkable job with this proposal for a directive .
The sustainability of pensions will be one of the biggest challenges which our societies will have to face in the coming decades .
Occupational retirement provisions will play an important role in this connection in many Member States .
The question of whether the coverage of biometric risks should be made mandatory has been one of the biggest issues for Parliament .
I will concentrate on that issue .
I should like to point out a few reasons why the coverage of biometric risks or guarantees should be kept optional .
Firstly , beneficiaries in many Member States already have cover for these risks via separate insurance products . Citizens should not be forced to pay twice for cover they do not need .
Secondly , biometric risk cover is expensive and this expense is passed on to the beneficiaries .
Mandatory biometric risk cover will cost each citizen , at a conservative estimate , around 1-3 % of annual returns per year .
Compounded over a 40-year savings period this could significantly reduce overall scheme returns .
Thirdly , mandatory biometric risk cover will also damage the level playing field by providing an advantage to insurance providers .
The European citizen will benefit if he or she can choose from a wide variety of providers .
Fourthly , I fully agree with some of the previous speakers .
If we want to promote the second pillar we need to get employers excited about the new rules .
If the rules are too restrictive and costly to the company they will probably have no voluntary supplementary scheme at all .
Finally , I say to Mr Kuckelkorn that we cannot secure something which does not exist .
The worst case scenario for beneficiaries is that there are no flourishing second pillar pensions at all .
Security can only come after that .
Mr President , Mr Karas , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank you , Mr Karas , very sincerely for your work , and in particular for essentially making bricks without straw .
In the world of politics , we sometimes find ourselves dealing with " deceptive packaging " .
There is nothing new about that .
In the field of consumer protection , the term " deceptive packaging " is used when the content is not what it says on the label .
The Council - sometimes working in conjunction with the Commission - has recently adopted the image of a product counterfeiter .
I am quite deliberately saying product counterfeiter , rather than refer to a peddler of phoney products , which sounds very harsh .
It is a similar story with the product assessment of occupational retirement provision systems , the second pillar of the pension system .
They are trying to make the public believe that they are talking about a supplementary pension system , without having to meet the necessary quality criteria including the pension requirements that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs regards as necessary , for example , guaranteed payment of retirement provision until the end of the insured person 's life , the payment of benefits to surviving dependants or the covering of risks in the case of disability .
In addition to these quality requirements , financial risk and collective agreements between the social partners , which thus give those insured a voice , at present also have a fairly significant part to play .
An additional factor that still militates against the freedom of movement of employees , and above all against their mobility , is the rather uncoordinated tax policy of the European Union in this context .
Particularly in the case of occupational pension schemes , employees who take advantage of the freedom of movement of persons within the EU and make the European ideal a reality by switching jobs to other Member States can lose out because of differences in taxation , including double taxation .
Unfortunately , the key features of a comprehensive second pillar in the pension system have scarcely been taken into account here .
That is why the proposal for a directive before us should not be labelled " supplementary pension system - second pillar " , but should rather be seen for what it really is , namely a financial services product which only covers one small part of the full range of the second pillar .
I say that because there is one thing we should not overlook in this context .
Of all the measures relating to pension security , benefits and quality for the end consumer are a priority , whether we are talking about traditional state or adjustable contribution systems or about additional or supplementary pensions systems provided via the capital market .
The Council seems to have forgotten about this in this particular context , even if we have to admit that the capital growth resulting from this product is generally to be welcomed .
The fact that despite this there have been qualitative improvements in some areas of the proposal is no doubt something we owe to the rapporteur , who has tackled all the key issues very prudently .
However , there is one thing we should be clear about , and that is that state pension systems can only be supplemented by good occupational pension systems or private pension funds and schemes , otherwise with increasing life expectancy we could sacrifice social symmetry .
It is not difficult to imagine what that could mean .
With these comments , I recommend that if the voting goes as promised earlier you should vote in favour .
Mr President , I , for one , am quite disappointed both with the Commission ' s proposal and Mr Karas ' report , as I believe they concentrate wholly on the needs of the financial markets and ignore those of employees and future pensioners .
I would particularly like to focus on two aspects which I think are missing .
With regard to pensions , it is the issue of security which is crucial to people .
There should at least be a value guarantee whereby the contributed capital can be paid out even if it does not grow or increase .
For example , what happens if these pension funds become insolvent or bankrupt or cannot fulfil their commitments ?
The report does not contain a single word about this .
It is almost even stranger that another important aspect is missing .
When we started discussing supplementary pensions , it was said that this was an important EU issue , as we have a common labour market and expect workers to move between the various European labour markets .
In that case , they will face many problems with regard to pensions .
It is currently very difficult to accrue pension rights earned consecutively in different countries .
How should this be done ?
No answer is given to this question .
In many countries , long qualification periods are applied .
How will this be handled in a mobile labour market ?
Many countries have regulations involving double taxation .
How will this be solved ?
There are a number of such questions .
I therefore think that we need a completely new proposal from the Commission which takes as its starting point the needs of employees and pensioners rather than simply dealing with the needs of the financial market .
Mr President , today , we are , in fact , disregarding the three countries that have already realised their pension systems , to address the Member States with predominantly pay-as-you-go systems .
Out of anxiety about this Directive , France has even , in great haste , included a few small pension funds in the first pillar .
In the corridors , it appears that Member States know very well that their pensions are not sustainable .
But with the elections just around the corner , the P-word has become taboo .
However , their citizens have known for a long time what the score is .
The UK , the Netherlands and Ireland consider the events that are unfolding in countries such as Germany , France and Italy with suspicion .
According to the Treaty , we do not carry each other ' s debts .
A naïve thought .
If three major Member States , due to huge budget shortages , lay claim to the lion ' s share of the capital market , the interest rate will increase accordingly in the three Member States that have provided for old age , simply on the basis of the law of scarcity .
Inflation will rise , our carefully saved pensions will melt away quickly , and in so far as they are welfare- and inflation-proof , they will get us into major difficulty .
Government leaders have put pensions on their agendas .
Member States have followed suit and monitored each other .
That is anything but sufficient .
We must be far more critical of Member States which do not make sufficient provision within their national debts and budgets for dealing with demographic problems .
Those problems will not only affect pensions , but will also dominate labour markets and the health and building sectors .
Commissioner , I should like to ask you how long it will be before the generation of Europeans that work where work exists can have portable pensions ?
It is precisely those people that we need in order to moderate wages in the euro zone and maintain our export position accordingly .
We must not penalise but reward these people for their mobility .
Help has now been given to financial markets . All that remains is to help the people .
What are your plans in that connection ?
Mr President , this morning Mr Karas said that there will be a large majority in favour .
I will not be part of that majority .
I believe that the Commission 's proposal and also the report imply a continuation of the fundamental change in European retirement provision systems and also in social security in general . By that I mean a move away from legal systems based on solidarity and towards private capital-based systems .
My criticisms relate above all to two issues .
The first is this : are occupational pension schemes in the EU to be subject to Community-wide competition ?
I have certainly learnt a great deal over the last ten years about competition and what it can achieve , but no one can convince me that an issue as fundamental as social security provision in old age should be subject to competition .
There are three specific problems here . The first is that there are no binding rules governing the security of contributions paid in .
Secondly , I believe that the supervisory arrangements are inadequate , and , thirdly , there is the fact that in your report , Mr Karas , there is the additional option of an occupational pension being paid out by way of a lump sum .
That implies enormous risks in old age .
The second major problem is this one-sided orientation towards financial markets .
Everything that can be said has already been said about that .
As I see it , this has more to do with the present and future of Europe 's capital markets than it has with the future of pensions .
The scope for maintaining and updating legal pensions systems based on solidarity has not been used to the full in any Member State of the European Union .
However , what we really need is European coordination of occupational pension systems , as is already the case with legal pension insurance systems .
That problem has not been solved here .
Thank you very much , Mr Karas , for your intelligent work , which has a very clear objective : to ensure that this proposal for a directive will see the light as soon as possible .
To this end , and with a view to removing any obstacles which could be raised by the Council , I have presented two amendments to resolve a problem , a Spanish problem , but one which also affects other nationalities .
I will put it in Aristotelian terms .
Major premise : in Spain there are funds without legal personality , established for the payment of retirement benefits .
Minor premise : these funds are administrated by certain entities which do have legal personality .
Conclusion : these entities must be subject to the same conditions and requirements as bodies which play identical roles in other countries and which do have legal personality .
Mr Karas and I have prepared amendments which he will lay out tomorrow orally , which I hope will solve this problem .
The second issue I would like to refer to has been mentioned by some speakers ; it relates to the fiscal problems raised by these funds .
The proposal for a directive does not say a word about it , because that is not its purpose .
There is a Commission communication of 19 April which deals with the problems caused by fiscal obstacles for crossborder pensions .
The most important of these problems , which is in third place chronologically , relates to situations of double taxation or non-taxation when there are differences in the tax systems , as is the case within the European Union .
The solution , according to the communication itself , is the harmonisation of rules on pensions ; nevertheless , this committee desists from this audacious route and prefers to use the current rules , which - in my judgment - will be insufficient .
I know that the Commissioner will ask me to approach the States , but I only have a voice in this Parliament and only he can be my interlocutor .
This report puts forward prejudices that are nothing other than stupid but which , in addition , are used as a justification for reducing pensions and increasing the length of one ' s working life .
To use arguments related to demography and what the report refers to as the ' constantly increasing life expectancy in conjunction with low birth rates ' equates to deceit if the considerable increase in the profitability of work is also concealed .
Given that every worker is increasing their level of productivity , the same number of working people produces more than enough to improve their own standard of living and to guarantee a comfortable pension for three or four times as many pensioners as was possible 25 years ago .
If this increase in production capacity were not entirely channeled into profits for the privileged few , society might be able to ensure that all pensioners were paid a full salary , without having to force them to work longer .
Your economy turns everything into goods , including the pensioners that you wish to hand over to the finance sharks but , in the same way , it is the working class pensioners who are worn out from working that you are turning into goods , and this is appalling .
The inability to ensure that old people live a retirement that is free from material concerns is one of the most striking examples of a self-indulgent society .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive dealt with in this report seeks , as we know , to harmonise conditions for the provision of services by professional pension management institutions and their investment rules but , in a broader sense , seeks to create a single market for supplementary pensions , placing it in the context of actions of financial services towards the greater liberalisation of the movement of capital .
Consequently , we disagree not only with the proposal for a directive but also with the report itself , which seeks to reduce to a minimum the prudential rules liberalising the procedures and the investments of funds in more volatile financial instruments , thereby supporting risk capital , which , in the current climate of financial speculation , is a serious risk for workers ' rights .
This situation is particularly serious for Portugal because it could undermine the Portuguese prudential rules , specifically the mandatory investment of 50 % of professional pension funds in public stocks , as well as putting unacceptable pressure on the capitalisation funds of the public social security system .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I always greatly admire the attention you pay to detail when you are informing Parliament why the Commission cannot accept certain things .
The debate is closed .
The debate will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Solvency margin for insurance undertakings
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports :
A5-0211 / 2001 by Mr Ettl , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 79 / 267 / EEC as regards the solvency margin requirements for life assurance undertakings [ COM ( 2000 ) 617 - C5-0557 / 2000 - 2000 / 0249 ( COD ) ] ;
A5-0212 / 2001 by Mr Ettl , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 73 / 239 / EEC as regards the solvency margin requirements for non-life insurance undertakings [ COM ( 2000 ) 634 - C5-0558 / 2000 - 2000 / 0251 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission has presented two proposals for directives with a view to changing the legislation governing life and non-life insurance companies .
I would like to comment on both proposals at the same time , as the two have a great deal in common .
By means of these two proposals , which are part of the Action Plan for Financial Services adopted in Lisbon and to be implemented by 2005 , the existing legislation on non-life insurance dating from 1973 and on life assurance dating from 1979 are to be strengthened and improved .
The solvency margin is the additional capital reserve that insurance companies have to create as a buffer against unforeseen events .
The general aim of the proposals is to provide improved protection for policyholders by increasing the capital resources of insurance companies and by ensuring more efficient state supervision of insurance companies .
Higher solvency margins or risk buffers not only increase confidence in the performance of insurance companies , they also generally reduce system-related risks on the financial markets .
Efficient , viable insurance companies do much to enable the opportunities of the single market to be perfected and exploited to the full .
These directives establish a basic framework of binding stipulations and checks and allow national legislators to adopt provisions going beyond that degree of regulation .
This approach is understandable , bearing in mind subsidiarity and the considerable cultural differences reflected in the laws governing supervision in the Member States , and from a consumer policy standpoint is to be welcomed .
One point especially worthy of note is that national insurance supervisory authorities will be empowered to intervene as soon as danger looms , even if this is not a classic early warning system . The same preventive supervision is likewise set out in " Basel II " .
This document was put forward by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision of the Bank for International Settlements .
The Commission proposals relating to smaller mutual associations should be endorsed .
Although the upper limit for exemption from these directives , expressed in terms of annual contribution income in the last three years , is to be raised from the present EUR 500 000 to EUR 5 million , the provisions will not result in these associations being forced out of the market .
These mutual associations in many cases operate purely at local or regional level , and they will be able to continue these activities .
However , if these associations require a pan-European concession to become active at international level , it will be sufficient to send a simple communication to the national supervisory authority to the effect that they are willing to subject themselves to the provisions of the solvency directive on a voluntary basis .
This will absolutely guarantee that these associations are able to survive , and it will be for individual associations to extend their area of business or otherwise .
Both proposals for directives are to some extent interim measures chiefly involving changes of a technical nature .
The Commission will be submitting a further " Solvency II " package in which it will revise overall regulation of this sector in the longer term .
Things will no doubt hot up then !
The " Solvency I " package before us today should therefore be endorsed , particularly as this is in the interest of the public and of policyholders .
The sooner we can implement these interim measures the better .
For that reason I have endeavoured as rapporteur to give a high profile to informal explanations of the views of the Council and of the Commission under the fast-track procedure , and to work towards a compromise between the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
The reports before us therefore already reflect the common position so that it would be possible to adopt both directives at first reading .
I hope that will be possible - it depends on your steadfastness and your capacity for raising objections , Commissioner .
Permit me to make one final observation on the procedure itself .
This particularly applies to fast-track codecision procedures .
This procedure requires flexibility , something that has largely been absent , chiefly at Council level . This is not the first time I have had to say that .
Codecision means more than just one side having to be flexible .
This criticism applies not only to the Council , but also to you , Commissioner , although somewhat less so in this case , and somewhat more in the previous one .
This kind of attitude towards codecision in this sector can only impair the deepening of the European Union or integration .
We also need to reflect upon the ability of our decision-making processes to function properly . Certainly we need to do some thinking in the wake of the Irish referendum .
With those concluding remarks , I urge you to vote for both reports .
Mr President , I speak in two capacities , first on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Their rapporteur , Mr Ripoll y Martínez de Bedoya , unfortunately cannot be with us this evening .
The Legal Affairs Committee approved the proposal and had no comment to make on it .
Secondly , speaking on behalf of my Group about Mr Ettl 's report , I would like to congratulate him on the work he has done .
He has done a good job and clearly worked very hard on this .
As Mr Ettl has said , these are largely technical updates , but still important .
We have not had a revision of these directives for nearly 20 years , so we are engaging in a bit of a fine-tuning exercise to modernise and update them .
Like Mr Ettl , I will address the two simultaneously as they raise similar issues .
I welcome these proposals as part of the wider financial services action plan which is so important for the future of the economy of the European Union Member States and could potentially deliver such great benefits to ordinary people across the European Union .
There will be increased competition , increased consumer choice and lower prices in financial products which the financial services action plan can deliver , if we manage to get it right .
Like most of that action plan , and based on ordinary single market principles , these directives too are based on the single passport system to enable insurance companies to sell across Europe , so long as they comply with their own home regulations .
That is a principle which is , and should remain , at the heart of the legislation we adopt in this area .
I welcome this effort to update solvency margin requirements : the rules relating to the capital buffer that insurance companies are required to hold against unforeseen contingencies , particularly high claims and poor investment performance .
What we are doing here is essentially a warm-up for Solvency II .
The more wide-ranging reform in this area will come with Solvency II .
Nonetheless we need to ensure that we get the minor amendments properly sorted out before embarking on the more wide-ranging reform which we will see in the Solvency II regulation .
Particularly welcome are the efforts to match regulatory capital more closely with risk profile .
This is a principle we have also seen operating in the proposals on capital adequacy and solvency margins in relation to bank and investment companies .
The same arguments can equally well apply here in that we are encouraging prudent risk management and rewarding those that manage and reduce risk .
I am pleased to see a reference to the use of external ratings removed - it was initially proposed by the rapporteur .
We do not necessarily want to rule this out forever , but it is premature to introduce it in this context .
It is something we should consider in relation to Solvency II , but it needs more thought and discussion before we can introduce external ratings in this context .
I am pleased also that a sensible compromise was reached on early intervention powers , which could be a useful addition to the armoury of the regulators in securing proper prudential supervision .
The similar compromise on future profits was also very sensible .
We are going to see the use of future profits phased out over an eight- or nine-year period , which will give the industry time to adapt to the new conditions .
It is important overall to make the general point that in these proposals , as well as all others we deal with on industrial and financial services , we should make every effort to ensure that they are not overly bureaucratic and that the framework is as easy as possible for firms , both large and small , to operate in .
That is the only way we will get healthy competition .
Finally , I should like to comment on the timing .
It is clear that there is general agreement that we should get on with these reforms as quickly as possible .
Mr Ettl did a very good job in coordinating with the other two institutions .
Like him , I very much hope that we can sort this out at first reading .
It seems to me that we may have been doing some of the Council 's homework for it , and tidying up some of those aspects which will contribute to a sensible regulatory framework .
I thank Mr Ettl for the work he has done on this .
Mr President , it is a real pleasure for me to respond to Parliament on behalf of the Commission .
I should like to congratulate both the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs on their rapid and thorough analysis of the Commission 's proposals to amend the solvency margin rules for life and non-life insurance undertakings .
The solvency margin is perhaps a somewhat more complicated - a technical , even dry - subject , but it is of very practical and real importance .
It is to protect insurance policy holders by requiring insurance companies to hold extra regulatory capital to act as a buffer against unfortunate circumstances .
The Commission 's proposals are to strengthen and update existing rules which , as has been mentioned tonight , have been in force for almost 25 years .
I am pleased to note that the amendments before Parliament are entirely in line with the thrust of the Commission 's proposals .
While many are of a technical nature , some represent very practical measures which will provide clarity and improve transparency , such as the requirement for competent national authorities to establish guidelines that govern the acceptance of supplementary contributions by the members of a non-life mutual .
The same goes for the requirement for the Commission 's report to examine how national supervisory authorities have made use of their enhanced powers of supervision .
Those amendments are very useful improvements to the original Commission proposal .
In this regard I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ettl , and the shadow rapporteur , Mrs Villiers , for their efforts and contributions to the preparations of the two reports .
I am happy to be able to inform Parliament that all Parliament 's proposed amendments are acceptable to the Commission .
Whilst it is always hazardous to count one 's chickens before they are hatched , I understand that there is a shared political consensus to seek adoption of these proposals within a single reading .
It is my own personal hope that their efforts will be rewarded and that this proposed legislation will indeed be adopted with a single reading .
It is fair to say that this report has been a good example of successful cooperation between our two institutions .
The Commission has an ambitious financial services programme which can bring many real and tangible benefits to our citizens and to industry .
It is my hope that the excellent cooperation which we have enjoyed on this report may be carried forward , not just for the wider Commission review of the overall financial position of an insurance undertaking , called Solvency II , but also for the whole financial services action plan .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Electricity from renewable energy sources
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0227 / 2001 ) by Mrs Rothe , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the promotion of electricity produced from renewable energy sources in the internal electricity market [ 5583 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0133 / 2001 - 2000 / 0116 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the President just explained , this is the second reading of the proposal for a Directive on the promotion of electricity produced from renewable energy sources .
There is a legitimate hope that the first European legislation on renewable energy will soon come into force .
This European legislation will help to increase the share of renewables in the electricity market .
I am firmly convinced of that .
The directive will help us , the EU , to achieve our voluntary target of doubling the share of renewables by 2010 .
It will make an important contribution to innovation in electricity generated from wind , solar , hydro and biomass .
In this way , the EU will demonstrate that it is willing to shoulder its responsibility for climate protection and a sustainable energy supply .
Just a few weeks ago I would not have made these statements in this way , as the Council common position differed from Parliament 's position on some key points and the Council was initially showing little willingness to change its position .
However , tomorrow you will be voting on the result of an intensive and productive negotiating process .
There are 10 compromises worked out with the Council in an informal conciliation process on Amendments Nos 1 to 11 , but without Amendments Nos 2 and 4 .
This demonstrates that the Council and Parliament have really moved closer together in this regard .
At this point I would like to very sincerely thank the shadow rapporteurs of the other groups , in particular Mrs Ayuso González and Claude Turmes .
They have devoted a lot of time and energy to this process and have demonstrated a willingness both to fight and to compromise .
I also owe an equal debt of gratitude to the Swedish presidency , which successfully endeavoured to shift the Council closer to Parliament 's position .
Last but by no means least I would like to thank the responsible Commission officials who played a very important moderating role in the negotiating process .
As is generally the case with compromises , we can perhaps be satisfied , if not exactly enthusiastic , about the outcome achieved .
I regret that we have not been able to set any binding national targets .
Even more importantly , I regard the definition of renewable energy sources before us as quite simply wrong .
In order to make it easier to achieve the targets , some Member States have insisted on including the biodegradable component of household waste in non-separated refuse incineration .
This not only runs counter to Europe 's objectives for waste avoidance and treatment , but it also gives the wrong message and discourages greater use of genuine renewable energy sources .
I nevertheless request that you vote for the compromises reached with the Council .
On the one hand , the directive will , by virtue of the amendments secured by Parliament , lead to a significant increase in the use of renewables .
On the other hand , I am firmly convinced that it would not have been possible to achieve anything further , even in the conciliation process .
Now let me turn to the key positive results .
First of all , the Member States will have to gear their incentive measures to indicative national targets .
If it becomes clear that the overall EU target - doubling the share of renewables - cannot be achieved , then the Commission can make proposals for mandatory targets .
Second , before proposing any harmonised support scheme , the Commission will have to report on the success of the various national systems in achieving an increase in the market share of electricity produced from renewable energy sources .
Third , once any harmonised scheme comes into force , investor confidence regarding investments already made must be guaranteed .
Fourth , access to the grid for electricity from renewable energy sources is guaranteed .
This should not be jeopardised because of feed-in or transmission charges .
Finally , proof of origin of electricity generated from renewables will guarantee transparency for the public .
We have enormous potential for renewable energy sources here in Europe .
We must exploit this potential in order to discharge our responsibility for sustainable development .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , renewable energies are not a panacea for reducing emissions of CO2 nor for resolving the energy dependency of third countries , but they can increasingly contribute to alleviating these problems , as long as they become competitive .
I would therefore firstly like to congratulate the Commission on this report , as well as the Council , in particular the Swedish presidency , and the rapporteur , Mrs Rothe , on the effort they have made to find the necessary common ground so that in the end this directive can see the light and , furthermore , that it may do so in a way which is reasonably satisfactory for the majority , although it is true that not all the ambitious objectives which Parliament intended on first reading have been taken up .
This directive for the promotion of renewable energy is a bet on our future and an investment in the environment .
That is why it is important to offer a legal framework to those who have already taken that gamble and are investing in this respect .
Specifically , it is very important to negotiate sufficient transitional periods for current aid to maintain investor confidence .
It is important to give priority to electricity from renewable energy sources in terms of access to the electricity network and that they are not discriminated against in the imposition of transport or distribution tariffs , especially in the peripheral regions .
In order to justify the need for this directive , we must bear in mind , on the one hand , the differing degree of competitiveness still existing between renewable energy sources and conventional sources and , on the other , the external costs obviated by this type of technology .
I therefore believe that we must welcome them and , like Mrs Rothe , I would also like to ask this House to approve the compromise amendments which have been reached after so much effort .
Mr President , I extend my heartiest congratulations to Mrs Rothe for her exemplary work with colleagues in Parliament as well as with the Council and the Commission .
She and Mrs Ayuso González have both expressed certain disappointment at the result , but I would say to Mrs Rothe that she should feel relief that what looked possible at one time has not come about .
She has made considerable progress .
It is eminently sensible to promote renewable energy because it enables us to fulfil our environmental objectives , creates jobs and ensures security of supply .
The items enumerated by Mrs Rothe are targets , not yet mandatory .
But I am pleased that we have the fall-back position should Member States fail in their duty .
There is a definition which excludes the use of municipal waste , gives permission for successful support mechanisms to continue and thereby boosts investor confidence .
My own country , the United Kingdom - the windiest country in Europe - has some lessons to learn from work in other countries .
We need other measures as well as this directive .
I know the Commissioner would agree on the need for a framework for energy support .
We need research and development in the Sixth Framework Programme .
We need to look at the single market to ensure that it does not contradict the aims of this directive and we need to make sure that renewables take their full place when we consider the Security of Supply Green Paper .
Congratulations again to Mrs Rothe .
I very much look forward to a positive result tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to thank Mrs Rothe for the sterling work she has done and by means of which she has laid the keystone for the first component : legislation in the field of renewable energy sources .
Where should we focus our attention ?
First of all , upon the target figure of 12 % , to be obtained by 2010 .
It is , of course , very tempting to underline that it would have had a greater impact if it had been a binding target percentage , rather than an indicative target figure , as it is now .
I personally am in favour of imposing binding target figures , as long as the prescribed target figures are realistic and obtainable .
Also taking into consideration the many unknown factors in the development of renewable energy , it appears to me particularly sensible to determine indicative target figures on the one hand , but at the same time to give the Commission some scope to submit proposals containing binding target figures to the Council and Parliament if it were to transpire that results were inadequate .
The second area of attention concerns the clear delineation of waste originating from separate waste collection and waste originating from combined waste collection .
Needless to say , I can only consider the incineration of separate waste and , more specifically , the biologically degradable component of industrial and household waste , as a renewable energy source .
Opponents wrongly claim that the incineration of household waste would curb the use of so-called real renewables , such as wind and solar energy , increase CO2 emissions and undermine recycling policy and restrictions on waste production .
It is therefore proof of sound judgment that , in its definition of what are , and are not , to be regarded as renewable energy sources , the common position leaves room for different types of renewable energy sources and , more specifically , for the incineration of separate waste .
I can fully identify with this position .
Mr President , the most important renewable energy source is hydroelectric power .
Without it the part played by renewable energy sources in the energy production of EU Member States would be very low , although the important role played by wind power in Denmark cannot be underestimated .
Other renewable sources of energy are difficult to find .
The view of the Council , according to which the incineration of unsorted waste is considered to be renewable energy , is unsustainable .
Hydroelectric power should be supplemented by forms of energy other than waste incineration .
Parliament is sticking to its target of twelve percent of gross energy consumption being produced by renewable energy by 2010 , but this is not far away , so achieving this target may be wishful thinking .
The lack of funding for the Altener Programme indicates that the EU is not playing a major role in achieving this target .
Achieving this target is thus entirely down to the Member States .
Mr President , this directive is a significant step towards meeting the Kyoto objectives and a milestone on the path towards a sustainable energy sector and sustainable energy policy in the European Union .
I would especially like to thank and congratulate the rapporteur .
However , given the shortages of resources which are becoming apparent and in view of the rise in oil and gas prices and the risks attending nuclear energy , we have no cause to sit back and congratulate ourselves on what we have achieved .
Above all , we have to make it clear to the Member States of the European Union that there are economic and social advantages in achieving the targets laid down .
Of course I would have preferred to have mandatory targets , but we now have to do more work convincing people to give renewable energy sources a chance in the market on a voluntary basis .
Labelling of all energy sources is another long-term objective , because energy consumers have the right to know what primary energy sources their electricity is generated from .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like to offer my congratulations and also to congratulate Mrs Rothe on having called for mandatory targets , because the likelihood that we will get these mandatory targets is in fact very great .
I also believe that it is necessary to have efficient and fair cost sharing within the European Union , so that incentives for renewable energy sources are comparable and that the same yardsticks are applied .
I wish to call on the Commission to actively apply best practice and benchmarking processes , because it is very important for the Member States , and particularly for the accession states , to find out where the best and worst values are to the found .
I also believe that small and secure cycles have a major role to play in Europe 's future and security of supply , and , as we have already seen in the case of water cycles , that they represent the best and cleanest forms of energy production , and so I consider that this affords us many new options .
If the operators of the transmission networks could now also guarantee that there will be no discrimination , and that renewable energy sources will even be given priority , then that is something we could be very satisfied with .
This directive is , of course , an interim stage , but I believe that it is a step in the right direction .
I hope that the Commission will also soon present a general certification model that we can make progress with .
All in all , I believe that with this directive Europe is taking a great step forwards and I would like to sincerely congratulate everyone who has worked on it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as has been stated before , sustainable energy has many advantages .
It reduces the dependence on imports from third countries , it can be generated locally and it offers prospects for regional development .
But more than anything , it is clean energy .
The European Union backed an ambitious wish list during the climate negotiations in November last year .
Europe was prepared to take the lead , for the US could not be counted on then either .
The Sustainable Energy Directive offered a good opportunity to put our money where our mouth was .
At first reading , the European Parliament had opted for binding objectives and for a strict definition , so that not everything could simply fall within its scope .
Unfortunately , this approach fell on deaf ears at the Council , and the European Union , which had called for domestic action for two weeks in The Hague , cried off .
The compromise that is now before us is the best that can be achieved .
My sincere congratulations to the rapporteur .
It is sound work .
This compromise requires a broad base and that is what we desperately need in the times ahead , for Europe cannot take a passive stance and wait to see what is going to happen .
In the foreseeable future , we will once again have plenty of opportunity of showing that we are serious about sustainable energy .
We must now prove that we are prepared to face the challenge .
First of all , a common European research agenda is needed if we are to develop the technology which will speed up the transition to a low CO2 economy and if we are to learn from each other .
The Sixth Framework Programme for research offers the ideal platform for this .
Secondly , large-scale investments are required .
Sustainable energy is often associated with small-scale solutions : a solar panel on every roof and a few windmills in every village .
That is wonderful , but unfortunately not enough .
Sustainable energy also requires large-scale projects , and this is why Government commitment is required .
It is once again time to translate words into action in order to turn this Directive into a success .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mrs Rothe .
I think that she has carried out excellent work and , step by step , has led this process towards an increasingly positive outcome .
I agree with Mr Turmes that the decision which we hopefully will take tomorrow is an historic one .
It means the European Union taking a highly significant step towards a different energy system , a system which gives serious consideration to the climate issue and the need to diversify the energy system and to ensure that an increased proportion of our energy comes from energy sources which do not have an adverse effect on nature or the climate .
A transition to renewable energy sources is an important step .
In parallel , major efforts must be made to ensure that our energy is used more efficiently .
We have established a target in the directive whereby at least 22 percent of electricity is to come from renewable energy sources .
Like Mr Turmes , I am an optimist in this respect .
If demand increases , we know that performance and quality will increase and costs fall .
This is the rule of thumb for all new technology .
Of course , such a development is conditional upon energy policy generally being developed in the right direction .
It is conditional upon subsidies for fossil fuels , particularly coal , being phased out , external costs for various energy sources being internalised in prices and research receiving a considerable boost .
The development we are now seeing is vital for Europe .
It is naturally also vital for the candidate countries and the developing countries .
I hope that , within the framework of this programme and the EU ' s operations as a whole , we shall be able to develop systems which support candidate countries and developing countries alike in moving in this direction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs De Palacio , first of all , may I offer my hearty congratulations to my fellow Member , Mrs Rothe , for the work she has done on this very difficult issue .
Admittedly , the negotiations with the Council and Commission were painstaking , but an outcome was reached .
We were able to come to compromise agreements which will allow improvements to be made to the Council and Commission proposals .
I would also reiterate that the aim of the draft directive is to create a framework to enable a considerable improvement in electricity production from renewable energy sources .
This directive provides a response to several major concerns such as sustainable development , environmental protection and respect for the Kyoto commitments , but also with regard to diversifying our supply sources , reducing the European Union ' s reliance on energy and , lastly , the creation of new jobs .
Having said this , I would like to go back to two difficult points , which were raised at the beginning of our discussions :
on the one hand , the issue of non compulsory national targets .
The issue is whether the national targets should be compulsory .
We must remain realistic .
Setting indicative targets has never provided much motivation for Member States .
The discussions have not enabled us to reach an agreement , however . Fortunately , several proposals plan to make them compulsory in the long term .
on the other hand , the issue of whether or not to include waste incineration in the definition of renewable energy .
The Council insisted on including it but this step did not receive unanimous support .
As I personally see it , this seems to run counter to the Union ' s efforts in the field of waste prevention and recycling .
It is to be feared that this use of waste would essentially justify their production , which does not seem to be a good solution .
To sum up , I would also say that we must support the provisions laying down facilities governing grid access .
In conclusion , Mr President , as a militant and strong supporter of renewable energy sources , I welcome the progress made , but I hope I have pinpointed the difficulties which still need to be overcome in a world where the market and the search for short-term reductions in costs and prices take precedence .
Mr President , I think it is fair to congratulate Mrs Rothe on the excellent work she has done on this report and , above all , on the spirit of creativity and consensus she has demonstrated in producing it , trying to avoid the conciliation procedure , which would have done the sector few favours given the urgent need for a directive in as important a field as renewable energy .
I believe that on all issues relating to energy , we must be aware that we must improve sources or otherwise we will make planet Earth uninhabitable within a few years .
It is essential that we guarantee support for this type of source for a considerable period , thereby allowing our industry to make decisive and long-term investments in this energy alternative .
Therefore , to ensure a stable framework for renewable energy , within the timescale proposed in the report - although a broader timescale would have been desirable - is a proposal which we all can and must support .
With regard to the goals which we have set for ourselves , despite the fact that we should have been more ambitious , I believe that the objective of 12 % of energy coming from renewable sources by 2010 is something which must be broadened but , in principle , it is a good start .
Furthermore , it is essential that , in the future , when this amendment is amended and the sector is more established , we set binding objectives for each Member State and we will thereby demonstrate that the European Union also takes its commitments seriously in the environmental field .
In summary , I consider it essential and urgent that we reach a pact at European level in order to support this type of energy source .
Lastly , although I know it is not easy , we must state that , if we do not act immediately , in a few years time the coming generations are going to be facing a ruined planet .
Therefore , for the sake of solidarity , we must leave behind a much more habitable world , and a future like that urgently requires all these renewable sources of energy .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur and the committee on their excellent work .
This is an important measure which , at last , defines precise targets for increasing the share of electricity produced from renewable energy sources , laying down precise time-frames .
It does not matter if these time-frames span several years ; what is important is that we have precise targets against which to measure our progress .
We must be aware , however , that a lot of work will be required to reach these targets and that it will be necessary to follow this measure with sufficient investment in research .
Finally , I would also like to express my support for the joint text , and I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Rothe , in this regard too for her balanced and competent approach to the disputed issue of the incineration of urban waste .
I too would have preferred the text prepared by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , but I feel that the compromise reached with the Council is adequate and should be supported .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur , but I also wish to make a couple of observations .
It is a matter of concern for us all that mandatory targets have not been agreed upon , but the various UN conventions provide a model here .
I am thinking of Rio , where as a correspondent I was able to follow things in detail and see how from little acorns great oaks can grow .
Much as there is to criticise in the basic structure of Europe 's institutions , by means of this twin-track approach we have given the Commission a chance to take the initiative and subsequently propose mandatory targets .
As she is present , I would like to take the precaution of calling now on the Commissioner to do that .
It is also possible to learn something from successful systems .
Spain , Germany and Austria have arrangements and means of handling renewables that others could also adopt .
This is not to say that the world should simply adopt the German approach , but rather simply save unnecessary additional expenditure which subsequently leads to excuses that it was not possible to reach the targets .
When the rapporteur says that proofs of origin will guarantee transparency , that fits in very well with my repeated demand that the European institutions should set an example by being completely transparent for the benefit of the public .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very happy to congratulate firstly the rapporteur , Mrs Rothe , on the excellent work she has done throughout this year and almost two months , very soon after the Commission approved this directive , as well as all the Members who have participated in the work throughout these months of intense discussion and debate .
I would once again like to express my respect and admiration for the excellent technical quality and knowledge you have demonstrated in your cooperation , your work and your amendments .
I hope that the debate today and the vote tomorrow will conclude the discussions on this directive and that we will therefore be able to adopt a text at second reading without the need for a conciliation procedure .
This is an issue on which - as we have demonstrated - we must work together .
This proposal forms part of the Commission ' s response to two great challenges .
The first great challenge is the problem of how the European Union should take its Kyoto commitments seriously , how to genuinely implement measures - undoubtedly at a certain cost - which demonstrate our will to fulfil the commitments made on an international level .
That is our first objective , but we must not forget another interesting element of this proposal , which is increasing the European energy supply , that is , increasing the security of our supply , not to mention issues which some speakers have mentioned relating to the technological capacities of industrial development and , therefore , employment and our presence in international markets .
The Commission is pleased to be able to say that we can support all the transactional modifications proposed by Mrs Rothe .
Although I am not going to list them , I would like to refer to certain points which have been highlighted during the debate .
Firstly , the issue of biomass .
It is a delicate issue and we will have to see whether we can finally include the production of electricity from the incineration of unseparated municipal waste within the scope of the directive .
That is to say , including that biodegradable waste .
You are aware of the Commission ' s initial position but I believe that , for the sake of achieving an initiative , the concession made in this area is warranted in order to achieve this result .
Strictly speaking , this waste is of a renewable origin , and that is why the Council has defended its inclusion .
Nevertheless , the Commission had not proposed it within the definition of renewable energy , since this goes against a key point , the objective of reusing and recycling waste , a crucial question in the integral treatment of waste proposed by the Commission within its sustainable development strategies .
However , I must stress that the Commission believes that we must reach a compromise , a pragmatic solution in order to prevent a conciliation procedure and a delay .
We therefore accept the proposals put forward by Mrs Rothe ; however , we cannot accept Amendments Nos 12 , 13 and 14 .
Furthermore , we believe that the proposals in Amendments Nos 2 and 4 are not necessary and we agree with and support the proposal in Amendment No 11 .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am optimistic - some of the speakers such as Mr Turmes have said so - that , over the next few years , the increase in the use of renewable energy is going to lead to a reduction in costs and , therefore , it is going to make it easier to incorporate its use into our energy mix in a clearer and easier way .
This is a key pioneering initiative .
Some of you - such as Mrs Ayuso , amongst others - have said that today is an historic day .
In a year and two months - since the Commission approved its proposal - we are going to have an approved directive .
I must stress that the reduction in costs is going to allow for an increase in renewable energy for producing electricity , I stress that this is a truly revolutionary proposal in many respects because , although some have said that the objectives are only indicative , these may become obligatory in relation to certain mechanisms , and this is the first time , in a field such as this , that we have set indicative objectives State by State .
This is an extraordinary political burden and , in this respect - I am sorry , Mr Caudron - I cannot agree with your assessment .
In the next few months , I hope to be able to propose an initiative for the extension , the genuine promotion , of the use of biofuels and the acceleration of its incorporation within the European Union .
I would once again like to congratulate Mrs Rothe on her excellent work , as well as all the Members and the Swedish presidency on your work on this initiative .
I hope that , tomorrow , the vote in this House will allow for the approval of certain consensus amendments which will allow it to be adopted on second reading and prevent any further delay , even to the point of conciliation , in the resolution of this issue .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Implementation of the Internet Top Level Domain " .EU
The next item is the report ( A5-0226 / 2001 ) by Mrs Flesch , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the implementation of the Internet Top Level Domain " .EU " [ COM ( 2000 ) 827 - C5-0715 / 2000 - 2000 / 0328 ( COD ) ] .
. Mr President , the initiative to create the " .EU " Domain name will be a necessary boost to expansion in the e-economy .
We know that the key brake on this expansion is the lack of confidence , particularly amongst consumers .
A European TLD , therefore , should be synonymous with a zone of e-confidence .
In addition it should allow European companies to ensure their visibility and presence on the European stage .
As Mrs Flesch said , we have worked very closely on this report .
We have jointly made some very important recommendations .
They give greater clarity to the text and they spell out in detail the role the registry should perform .
I have concentrated in my committee mainly on the issues of the internal market , intellectual property aspects and the general policy framework .
Let me highlight some of the amendments .
The idea of Amendment No 36 was that the registry should adopt terms and conditions to incorporate an accredited code of conduct for online trading and therefore give businesses the opportunity to join an accredited online extra-judicial dispute resolution scheme .
This will respond to business concerns to see added value to " .EU " Domain names and will again create this zone of e-consumer confidence in line with the Lisbon conclusions .
While registration should generally be on a first-come , first-served principle , we have nonetheless proposed that rightholders , who have prior rights in law and public policy , should have the opportunity to pre-register .
We have tried to address the growing problem of cyber squatting by asking the registry to run a mediation and arbitration service , either free or on a cost-recovery basis to deal with speculative and abusive registration of domain names .
We are proposing the setting up of a policy advisory committee , as is the practice in country domain names , to assist in dealing with what can be registered at top level .
Commissioner , we understand the need to make progress on the establishment of " .EU " and the need to ensure we respect the principles of the Internet world , namely self-regulation and self-management .
But it is important to get the principles right from the outset , to ensure success , and that is why we have spelt this out in detail .
Mrs Flesch and I had excellent cooperation .
We now look forward to similar cooperation with the Council and Commission .
We hope they will seriously consider our recommendations , and that we can come to a speedy decision to enable " .EU " to get off to a running start as soon as possible .
Mr President , on behalf of my Group , I should like to give a very warm welcome to this report and to thank Mrs Flesch for her very comprehensive and detailed work , which shows her experience in the field .
I should also like to pay particular tribute to Mrs McCarthy who I have worked with in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Between our rapporteur and our draftsman , they produced a very sound report .
What is important about this report is that they have resisted the temptation to complicate what was basically a simple text proposed by the Commission .
Essentially , Commissioner Liikanen , the word from Parliament is to go and get on with it .
We do not want to over-complicate it .
We have made some worthwhile improvements , but the fundamentals of what you proposed have been left unaltered .
That is important because , we must remember , the " .EU " domain name is actually a late entrant into a highly competitive and crowded market .
It has to justify its existence .
For it to be successful we want companies and organisations to use it .
Therefore , the registration procedures have to be simple , easy and cost-effective .
We must bear in mind that the policies and procedures adopted by the registry will need to reflect best practice in the field .
Because we are coming into this late , there is no excuse for not getting it right .
So some of the safeguards that both Mrs Flesch and Mrs McCarthy refer to , about protection of trademarks and avoidance of vexatious registration - cyber-squatting - are particularly important .
I want to highlight two particular issues of concern that I raised during the debate and was particularly pleased were reflected in the amendments .
Mrs McCarthy referred to her amendment seeking to enable organisations with a prior title to a name to have a priority period of registration .
That is very important .
We do not want to disadvantage companies which are already active in this field which feel that they must protect themselves and want to take on the " .EU " .
We do not want them to feel that they are going to be held back in any way .
They must have a priority period of registration to avoid this problem of vexatious registration , of people who just want to make a " quick buck " moving into that field and taking hold of that registration .
It will be very important for the new registry - and I direct this particularly to the Commission - that the launch date and the priority registration period are very well publicised throughout the European Union so that people understand those rights .
Secondly , we have to ensure that the " .EU " name does not , in any way , displace existing Member State domain names .
I proposed an amendment , which I am pleased was accepted by my colleagues , that makes sure that the " .EU " registration is not empowered to issue any sub-domain names using Member State identities .
In conclusion , this is a worthwhile enhancement of the European Union 's information society capabilities in a very fast-evolving world .
Mr President , I would like to add my appreciation to that already expressed for Mrs Flesch 's report .
I feel that it is a particularly well-balanced and competent report , and so I can only endorse its approach and contents .
I feel that this report represents a further step along the path embarked upon months ago now by the Commission and Parliament together , towards progress in the information society , to catch up , to eliminate that gap which exists between the information society of the continent of the European Union and the more advanced information societies of other parts of the world , specifically the United States .
This is a further important stage , which may be more significant than others in terms of public opinion , but also or precisely because of this it is important that it is completed quickly .
Well then , without wishing to go over the ground already covered by other Members , I would like to stress just one further point : my satisfaction that the path adopted is continuing to secure self-regulation for operators in the context of the Internet as well .
I feel that we must constantly stress that the Internet is a wonderful experience , and it must be so also when we create a European domain for , apart from anything else , it has been entrusted to self-regulation , to the ability of the operators to manage themselves .
Therefore , we must continue along this path of enhancing European information technology , but we must avoid restricting independence or , in any case , smothering in red tape an experience which has been positive precisely because it has been allowed to develop spontaneously .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Flesch , on the excellent result that she has achieved within the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , in consultation with the Commission and the Council .
Consequently , no further amendments have been tabled for this plenary .
All of this has been achieved within the space of six months , while the Commission has needed three years to draft a proposal .
It is now important for the Council and Parliament to keep the momentum going .
Indeed , the users have been waiting for this with bated breath .
Mr Liikanen , I will then obviously expect from you a quick , practical and simple implementation which befits the Internet culture .
The introduction of the " .EU " Top Level Domain is said to afford the European Union a higher profile on worldwide information networks , and it also represents added value for the Internet naming system in addition to the national domain names .
Two elements are crucial in this connection .
First of all , the organisation that keeps the register must be independent and must carry out its work in a transparent , non-discriminatory manner .
All interested organisations must be represented in the register .
Secondly , the Member States must establish in good time the domain names they want to use exclusively .
Clear criteria are needed in that connection .
That includes the first come , first served principle , as well as clear rules which can prevent abuse of the system .
In the Netherlands , we remember all too well how the city of Amsterdam had to buy back the domain name www.amsterdam.nl for an extortionate sum of money , because that name had already been claimed by a pornography business .
The swift advent of the " .EU " Top Level Domain offers an excellent opportunity to boost public confidence and that of businesses in online trade .
This would encourage economic growth and the competitiveness of European industry , and hence employment .
The legal framework of the internal market also plays an important role in this field .
Mr President , I too would like to join in the congratulations to the rapporteur , and to the draftsman from the Committee on Legal Affairs , with regard to the proposal put before us .
Like previous speakers , I welcome it because it is time that we in the EU had our own domain .
It will allow more business to operate on the new e-economy , and will also get rid of some of the uncertainty and some of the difficulties there are with regard to the different domains that exist at present .
The one area of concern I have is in relation to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers - ICANN .
As this is a body which is regulated under US law , they are already in the process of registering the " .EU " domain and allowing people to buy " .EU " domains as well .
I would like to know if possible from the Commissioner what action he has taken to deal with this possible conflict in the future .
I , along with other Members in the House , have full confidence in the Commission ensuring that there is an innovative and new way of guaranteeing security for this domain in the future .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
I too , like Mr Carraro , would like to talk about the crucial role of self-regulation for the Internet system .
From this point of view , a consultative committee which is too heavy handed with regard to the relationship between the representatives of trade associations , businesses , trade unions and service providers could cause some concern .
We must avoid making the procedure for managing the " .EU " domain too rigid and concern ourselves , instead , with filling this domain with rights of European electronic citizenship .
This is a proposal that I would like to make to the Commission : to consider immediately how , including by means of the ' .EU ' domain , new rights can be guaranteed such as rights of access , and rights of interaction with the European petitions institutions , the Ombudsman , and in participation in competitive examinations and procurement competitions .
Thus , with interaction between the citizens and the institutions of the European Union , we will be able to fill the ' .EU ' domain with material of genuine European telematic citizenship
Mr President , I believe that one of the main reasons for the excellence of this report is the quality of the person who produced it , because it is a real pleasure to work with her .
As is well known , through the Internet , the citizens of the whole world can now discover new realities about countries , companies , associations and , in many cases , ways of life from the opposite ends of the Earth .
The development of this interactive means of communication is exponential and access to it in many developed countries is practically universal and , in others , is just a question of time .
Furthermore , we have all been witnesses to the frequent bad use of the Internet .
I believe that within the Internet top level domain " .EU " we must prevent cases of improper uses of names which may harm the image of the European Union and its Member States , because the top level domain " .EU " is going to be the European Union ' s shop front to the world , it is going to be our logo and is going to be part of our heritage , and as such it must be dealt with , supervised , controlled and protected .
In summary , I believe there are certain facets of economic activity which must be subject to control , if the intention is to achieve a good result , and the top level domain " .EU " must , in my view , be one of them , so that it may be synonymous with quality , reliability of the information hosted by it and the consistency of its contents .
I would like to remind you that the European Union has an excellent image and what we have to do is maintain it and support it .
Mr President , following the fairly technical introduction we have heard , we should not lose sight of what this is all about .
It has repeatedly , and quite rightly , been said that Europe does not have a face .
If you are a publicity-minded entrepreneurial type and want to acquire an e-mail address , it will be " .at " " .com " , " .net " or " .org " .
Europe is now acquiring a face , an address .
It will be valuable in itself if we can bring this off and if the Commission finds the right approach .
We will become " .EU " .
The fact that we are so late in doing this has a lot to do with the fact that we have not in reality grown together to form a single entity as we pretend we have .
It is to be hoped that Europe will gradually develop from being a single market to having its own identity , by means of policy .
We know that a lot has gone awry .
I regard it as progress that a certain element of labelling is associated with the " .EU " domain .
I am relying on the Commission and everyone responsible to make sure that there is no sloppiness if we do get this top-level domain , with incidents like the ones described by the previous speakers occurring .
Just remember the " Amsterdam.nl " case .
However , as part of the enlargement and re-regionalisation of Europe I would also like to see all regions having the opportunity to use appropriate sub-domains .
On this point , I am not in agreement with the report before us .
I also , however , welcome Amendment No 15 , in which the rapporteur refers to the basic principle of transparency , which brings me to my oft-repeated demand that the European institutions should set an example by being completely transparent for the benefit of the public .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to warmly congratulate the rapporteur of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , Mrs Flesch , on her excellent report .
Mrs Flesch , you have really managed to capture the key aspects of the " .EU " issue in your report and thus set the right course for the European Parliament .
With this regulation , we are helping to construct the European home , in this case in a virtual form .
The " .EU " top-level domain will promote Europe 's identity more effectively on the Internet , which has numerous advantages .
E-commerce in the European Union will be promoted .
Through the " .EU " top-level domain , consumers will be able to recognise that a company working via the Internet belongs to the single market and will have greater faith in it .
Up to now , as Mr Martin pointed out , European companies using the " .com " domain have sometimes been taken for American companies rather than European ones .
European companies , organisations and private individuals will get concise new addresses long since bagged by others under the current domains .
For example , there are already well over 10 million " .com " domains in the European Union .
Now that the Council has pronounced itself in favour of introducing the " .EU " top-level domain , just a few days ago in fact , we can help , by adopting the regulation before the summer break , to ensure that registration of the first " .EU " addresses can begin in spring 2002 .
Therefore , particularly at a time when over 90 % of the most frequently visited web sites are in the USA and about 70 % of e-commerce is transacted in the USA , I can only urge you to vote for this proposal .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank the rapporteur for her outstanding cooperation and the excellent way in which she has worded her report .
I should like to home in on a few points .
Firstly , the method of registration of a ' .EU ' domain .
The principle underlying the registration policy is that anyone who wants to register a ' .EU ' domain also has the related trademark rights .
Two interests need to be weighed up in this connection .
On the one hand , countering abuse and , on the other , making registration for SMEs and for citizens as simple as possible .
Two models are possible in this connection .
The first model prescribes extremely strict requirements to be applied in advance of someone obtaining such a ' .EU ' name . This will then lead to a shortage of names because the thresholds are too high .
The second model prescribes subsequent intervention in the unlikely event of improper use or speculation .
That is why I should like to refer to Amendment No 34 , which spells this out clearly .
We prefer the second model because it is much more SME-friendly , results in many more domain names and - in my opinion - in many more domain registrations .
That is the right way forward in my view .
My second point concerns clarity on behalf of citizens and businesses . ' .EU ' offers EU citizens clarity , for it stipulates that registration is only possible for people or businesses lawfully based within the EU .
That is what Amendment No 24 is about .
That translates into more legal certainty , more confidence and an increase in e-commerce within the European Union .
I believe that that is what it is all about .
Finally , my third point .
All of this fits in with the EU policy which we aim to pursue .
We want to assume a favourable position worldwide in the Information Society .
In my opinion , the ' .EU ' Internet Domain sets the right tone for this , for which I am extremely grateful .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in terms of gross national product Europe leads the world , and I think it is a good thing for us to make rather more effort to market Europe in the future .
I welcome the fact that we want to become the most competitive area in the world and I believe that we still need to put in a lot of effort to achieve that .
Our competitors throughout the globe are sleeping ; they have launched good initiatives , which makes it important for us to act as efficiently and quickly as possible in this area .
We have over 18 million companies in Europe , and I believe that it gives them an extremely valuable marketing advantage if they are immediately and easily recognisable throughout the world .
Consumer confidence is fundamental for business and that is why the presence of the European Union on the Internet with a top-level domain is particularly important .
I also consider that an efficient dispute resolution system is needed , and one that is as cost-effective as possible but at the same time neutral and non-discriminatory .
Especially in the case of speculation or misuse of registered names , it should be possible to take drastic action quickly and efficiently , because that is a very significant issue for the parties involved and can create a need for effective action on their part .
It is also very important that the Registry should be put out to tender , as this will guarantee optimum support in Europe . I wish the Commission and , in particular , Mrs Flesch , every success .
I believe that you have taken an important step for the European Union .
The proposal to set up the ' .EU ' top-level domain was first tabled by the Commission last December after public consultation over the whole year .
In Internet terms , it is a lifetime .
European Internet users are becoming increasingly impatient to have a ' .EU ' top-level domain where they can register pan-European names .
It is becoming imperative , therefore , that the EU takes the necessary steps to implement ' .EU ' as soon as possible .
In this respect , I am pleased to note the common orientation agreed last week in the Council , which was a major step forward .
With regard to Parliament , I would particularly like to thank Mrs Flesch and Mrs McCarthy for their contributions as rapporteurs .
Their work has contributed significantly to a situation where we are very close to an agreement between the institutions , which would enable implementation of the ' .EU ' top-level domain soon .
I am extremely happy about the high quality discussion we have here today in this plenary .
As far as the amendments are concerned , the rapporteurs in particular have proposed a number of amendments , which will significantly improve the text of the regulation .
This includes reinforcement of the key principles of Internet management , clarification of conformity with the Community data protection rules , and more precise definitions relating to the role and the functions of the registry .
The Commission also welcomes the support given by the rapporteurs to the Commission 's proposals for an advisory committee .
There are also a number of proposed amendments which the Commission can accept in principle , subject to further clarification .
These include the proposal that the Commission would be authorised to levy a management charge on the registry for services provided .
If the intention is to ensure that the registry remains cost-neutral to the Commission , this is acceptable , although the Commission would welcome a clearer reference to avoid any suggestion that a standing charge of any sort is imposed on the registry .
With respect to the proposals for a policy advisory board to the registry , the Commission agrees that broad consultation with the European Internet community will be a prerequisite for the proper functioning of the registry .
At the same time , it will be important to clarify how such a body would interact with the Commission and the Member States committee .
The ' first-come-first-served ' approach for registrations is supported by the Commission , as it is one of the underlying principles for the registration process proposed by the Commission .
We would , however , point out that this general principle must be subject to the rules and principles adopted as public policies in relation to the registration of the ' .EU ' , just to avoid the problems which have been mentioned by a few speakers tonight .
Similarly , the Commission has no objections to the requirement for registrants to respect a code of conduct , although care needs to be taken to avoid confusion and any suggestion of a priori controls .
Mr Carraro also made comments which I endorse .
The Commission is fully committed to transparency principles and supports the publication of a call for expression of interest in the Official Journal , as was also mentioned by Mr Martin .
However , the procedure of publication of the conditions of implementation of the registry and of the policy framework in the Official Journal may prove a very cumbersome procedure and alternative publication may be more efficient .
Why not this time a website ?
When talking about ' .EU ' ; why not go to the public on the website ?
There are however , some proposed amendments which the Commission cannot agree with .
In relation to the proposed amendments on the preventive measures to be adopted by the Member States on the geographical and geo-political basis , I would like to point out that should the Member States impose individually such measures to the registry , this could lead to conflicting measures or various incompatible approaches .
The issue of geographical and geopolitical names is , however , an important political issue for some Member States and is fully recognised by the Commission .
I am convinced that the compromise which was reached at the Council , introducing a new paragraph for Article 4.1a may offer an alternative which Parliament may wish to consider further .
The proposal to require the registry to ensure that companies registering a name are legally established in the Community is also problematic .
Given the automated nature of the registry process , it is not practical for the registry to carry out a priori checks on registrants .
Apart from questions of technical feasibility , the Commission would view such a requirement to be an excessive burden on the registry and an unnecessary barrier to registrants .
The proposal that the registry should be obliged to supply information to third parties with a " legitimate interest " is also unacceptable as such to the Commission .
It is not clear exactly how such a provision could apply , and we suggest that the registry will , in any case , be subject to existing legal provisions for disclosure .
There also seems to be a linguistic problem surrounding the concepts of " public policy " and " public order " in the French and English versions .
Here the Commission must reiterate its position that the public authorities must only be involved in those areas of registry policy where matters of genuine interest to the public at large are involved and not in the day-to-day operational decisions of the registry .
Mr Crowley raised the question about ' .EU ' and I also received an e-mail at the end of June , talking about the creation of ' www.eu ' and a welcome to use our services .
Of course , it was slightly embarrassing , but we must make it clear that , after verification , we are aware of the existence of so-called alternate routes outside the domain-named system ; top level domains coordinated by ICANN and of the recent introduction of the alternative route www.eu by the organisation called ' The Universal Registry ' .
The future ' .EU ' top-level domain will , however , operate within the ICANN-approved named system , partly because of the need to ensure that most EU users can access addresses under ' .EU ' , but also because the Commission supports the principle of a single authoritative rule for the domain-named system .
Alternate rules operate quite legally within the Internet , but have relatively limited visibility and can be difficult to access , because the majority of browsers , quite naturally , point at names servers related to ICANN-authorised top-level domains .
To Mr Cappato , the Commission has just accepted a communication on e-Commission and that is a big challenge to guarantee that all the activities of the Commission will be online , that we will be able to give access to all citizens , but also in the medium and long-term , to interact with our partners and citizens .
Of the 40 amendments proposed by the rapporteurs the Commission can accept in full Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 16 , 17 , 19 , 21 , 22 , 25 , 26 , 28 , 31 , 35 , 38 , 39 and 40 .
The Commission can accept , in part or in principle Amendments Nos 9 , 13 , 14 , 18 , 20 , 29 , 30 , 32 and 36 .
Mr van Velzen mentioned Amendment No 34 .
There are positive elements here but for particular reasons of revocation the Commission included that in the amendments which the Commission cannot accept , which are Amendments Nos 6 , 15 , 23 , 24 , 27 , 33 , 34 and 37 .
In conclusion , given 40 amendments of which the Commission can accept 32 in full , in part or in principle , these amendments indicate that Parliament and the Commission are clearly pursuing a common objective to ensure that the ' .EU ' Top Level Domain will soon be a successful registry .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Radio spectrum policy
The next item is the report ( A5-0232 / 2001 ) by Mrs Niebler , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on a regulatory framework for radio spectrum policy in the European Community [ COM ( 2000 ) 407 - C5-0449 / 2000 - 2000 / 0187 ( COD ) ] .
, rapporteur . ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank you all very sincerely for supporting my report .
In the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy we had a very intensive and fruitful debate on the subject of radio spectrum policy , and I received some good amendments not only from my fellow Members of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , but also from Members of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport .
I was pleased to incorporate these amendments into my report . In formal terms , these amendments ultimately fitted very well into a compromise that was excepted by the committee with 49 out of 50 votes , with one abstention .
The subject of my report is the Commission 's proposal for a decision on a regulatory framework for radio spectrum policy in the European Community .
It relates to establishing which institutions will , in future , make decisions about radio spectrum policy and via what procedures .
The proposal specifically does not lay down any substantive guidelines about allocating frequencies , that is to say it does not stipulate whether specific frequency bands are to be made available for telecommunications , broadcasting , transport or military purposes .
Instead , the proposal is limited to institutional and procedural issues .
The purpose of the directive is to create a reliable regulatory framework which provides a basis for consistently deciding questions about the harmonisation of the use of the radio spectrum , allocation procedures and conditions of use at EU level , in cases where the implementation of EU policy objectives requires the use of frequencies .
We need to distinguish between two types of issue here . Firstly , strategic policy decisions have to be taken .
On the other hand , policy guidelines also have to be implemented .
We are therefore talking about technical implementation measures here .
We are already familiar with this distinction between political decisions and technical implementation measures from the Lamfalussy report .
The major significance and consequences of the proposal flow from a number of aspects .
The radio spectrum is , because of the ever greater demands being placed on it , increasingly becoming a scarce and valuable economic resource and a decisive factor in employment .
Allocation of sections of the spectrum for uses such as communications , broadcasting , transport , police , military and earth observation purposes is becoming more and more complex .
Strategic decisions have to be taken in order to balance the needs of commercial users and non ­ commercial users .
Just how valuable radio frequencies have now become is demonstrated by the result of the UMTS licence auction , which the Member States held last year for a narrowly defined section of the spectrum .
For Germany , for example , companies were willing to pay EUR 50 billion , and in the United Kingdom it is well known that the auction brought in EUR 38.5 billion .
The allocation of frequencies to the various user groups and users must therefore - and this is already a topical issue - be carried out in the most transparent and democratic way possible , whether at Member State level , at European level within the CEPT , and now at EU level as well , if decisions are to be made about Community activities reliant on frequencies .
Of course it goes without saying that European-level decisions about frequency policy have to be made by the European Parliament and the Council .
In general , it should be for politicians and in particular the elected representatives of the people to make decisions about an issue as important for society and the economy as frequency policy .
The job of putting these decisions into practice , that is to say technical implementation , can be entrusted to the Commission .
In doing this , the Commission should also be able to call on the expertise of the CEPT , by seeking advice on how to solve technical problems from the CEPT .
The amendments which 49 of the 50 Members in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy agreed provide for exactly that to happen .
However , two of the amendments from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , of which the Commission is no doubt aware , undermine this approach .
I am talking about Amendments Nos 22 and 23 , which have been tabled in the plenary .
Ultimately , the aim of these amendments is to prevent Parliament and the Council making joint decisions about frequency policy in future .
Instead , only the Commission and the Council will decide on these matters .
I cannot support that , and I therefore urge you to vote against these amendments .
On the other hand , I can recommend to you the amendments tabled by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party and those of my own group , which have been tabled for legal reasons following a recommendation by the Legal Service .
Mr President , Commissioner Liikanen , I would like to thank the rapporteur Mrs Niebler for her efforts on this important issue .
Due to their increasing use , radio frequencies are becoming an increasingly limited and valuable commodity .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , I would like to emphasise the importance of the transport sector and the equal rights of each means of transport to use radio frequencies for operational purposes , above all to ensure passenger safety . Air and sea traffic , for example , are completely dependent on the use of radio frequencies .
The different needs of different regions also need to be taken into account .
Some of the amendments put forward by our committee were adopted by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy while others were not .
On behalf of our Group I introduced two amendments in plenary which reflect the opinions of our committee .
Amendment No 24 concerns the regional aspect and draws attention to the fact that different circumstances such as population density and distances , industrial structure and traffic conditions must be taken into account in harmonising radio frequencies .
Amendment No 25 concerns transparency .
The publication of information on the use of frequencies is important but publication is only beneficial if the information published includes all the data necessary for the effective use of this information .
Transparency is connected to achieving efficient use of unused areas of the radio spectrum .
The annex to the proposal for a decision is too general and apparently confuses reserving the use of frequencies for different purposes with allocating frequencies to users .
I would like to see support for these two amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Niebler has done a brilliant job with this very difficult subject , which I had to deal with on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport .
No one will deny that , in view of developments in technology , a new regulatory framework on frequency policy is needed .
However , certain basic principles have to be borne in mind here , since although the technology itself is neutral , the way it is used is not .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , whose unanimous opinion I am presenting here , has , amongst other things , considered how it can be guaranteed that adequate transmission capacity is reserved for content addressed to the general public .
In other words , in addition to economic issues , consideration also has to be given to political , cultural and social aspects , and also to the right to privacy and to consumer protection .
This applies first and foremost to broadcast programming content relating to the expression of cultural diversity , freedom of speech and pluralism , which therefore plays a significant part in shaping opinion as part of the democratic process .
This is all the more important given that the proposal quite rightly stresses the fact that radio frequencies are a scarce resource and that this will not change in the longer term .
It would therefore be wrong to place too much emphasis on economic efficiency .
Products geared to the general public should also have a guaranteed place in an open competition-oriented market for electronic communication networks and services .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has not entirely taken on board the views of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport in this respect , as we would have wished , but it does recognise the principle of freedom of speech , and this is a key reason why we are willing to vote for the report as it stands .
It is also emphasised elsewhere that democratic , social and cultural interests connected with frequency use need to be taken into account .
The Member States should also be expected to comply with that requirement , including Italy - please note , Mr Berlusconi .

Mr President , Mrs Niebler carried out sterling work in her capacity as rapporteur .
I should like to congratulate her on the quality of her report .
In this connection , I should like to broach two subjects which are a little controversial .
Subject one is the possibility of stepping up the harmonisation of the military use of the radio spectrum .
We know that a huge proportion of the spectrum is used by the military .
That is , of course , understandable in an historical context , but if we are working towards a common security policy , we will also have to question whether the level of efficiency is proportionate to its use .
I believe that that is not the case .
It resembles one large patchwork at the moment .
In my opinion , the private sector , in particular , needs a larger proportion of the spectrum .
What can we do ?
Normally speaking , we could attempt to harmonise , but that is of course extremely difficult .
That is why I propose a step-by-step plan .
First of all , we must prioritise in terms of military and civil use .
Secondly , Member States must be transparent in terms of the use of the military spectrum .
Thirdly , the Commission , Council and Parliament , and all those involved , must join forces , finally , to open a discussion on this topic and , especially , to look for ways of bringing about harmonisation in the future .
Not easy , but it has to be done .
My second point : a separation of political affairs and technical implementation .
Many of the CEPT actions are technical , but all these technical points have a great many political ramifications .
That is why I believe that it is of great importance for the political aspects to be discussed more among the Commission , Council and European Parliament , and for the technical side to be left to the CEPT to take care of .
But I believe it is crucial for us finally to discuss the political framework in this arena too . That is why I warmly recommend this amendment .
Mr President , I would like to thank all three institutions .
Although Mrs Niebler is not an institution , she has behaved almost like one !
I would like to thank her sincerely for her report .
But I would also like to thank the Commission and the Council .
I would like to thank the Council , because it has changed its position in a way that would have been unthinkable until recently , as I am sure the Commission will agree .
However , thanks are also due to the Commission because it has shown such persistence in pursuing this subject over the years , although we did not expect that it would act so quickly .
Nevertheless , I have to tell the Commission that to some extent it has been unnecessarily tough , not least regarding the amendments put forward by Parliament , and that it has not perhaps shown the institutional flexibility that it might have or that might have been expected from the Commission .
Mrs Niebler has quite rightly pointed out that there is a considerable difference between technical measures and strategic decisions on policy , and that when it comes to strategic decisions the European Parliament really ought to play a greater role than provided for in the report , so that transparency is guaranteed and democratic structures are actually established .
This is even more important if you bear in mind that the Council is by no means in agreement with the Commission that the Senior Official Group should be established .
That only leaves us with the Senior Official Committee , which means that the institutional framework for taking democratic decisions will be distinctly limited .
I personally would therefore support Mrs Niebler 's new proposal in which she suggests establishing a " call-back procedure " in the wake of Lamfalussy .
My Group has , in any case , tabled certain amendments .
I hope that the House will be able to accept these amendments .
They will also be supplemented by an oral amendment which I hope the House will support .
We can take on board the Council 's proposal , in which it proposes that in cases going beyond technical measures the Commission should propose a legal instrument to Parliament and the Council .
I hope that we will have your support for this and I hope that the Commission will be able to live with this amendment .
Mr President , I would like to express my gratitude that the work of the Echelon committee has received such coverage in the Finnish media this evening .
It is one of the major news stories of the day .
I would also like to say to the Commissioner that we appear to have got into the habit of celebrating Tuesday evenings here together- all the usual suspects , as we are on these issues .
It is almost a little absurd .
The rapporteur and the previous speakers have highlighted the significance of efficient use of the latest resource to be in short supply , namely frequencies .
It is important that we have transparency in the use of these .
As Mr Pohjamo said , it is also important to report the terms for the frequencies used .
It should also be possible to reserve frequencies for services useful to society on special terms .
As has been mentioned , it is actually the institutional issues which are difficult .
I personally am a little afraid that we may have worked a bit too quickly and that we are in the process of developing quite a few hierarchies .
We talk about technical implementation provisions .
We also talk about the political level and the mandates given to the CEPT .
In other words , the system is quite complicated .
Our group came up with a proposal for a call back procedure .
However , I hope we agree that what in this context have been called technical implementation measures do not include technical matters .
Otherwise , we would be moving much too far into the CEPT ' s territory .
There are also certain other aspects which may need correcting tomorrow .
There is still a proposal to send observers to the High Level Group .
Parliament ' s proposal refers to both a high level group and a committee .
We simply cannot have both representation in a high level group and also a call-back procedure .
That would be too much .
We must look at how we can correct this before tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what we need is a set of uniform procedures for frequency allocation .
The objective should be to achieve the greatest economic benefit possible .
The UMTS has demonstrated that there is a need for action here .
If a kind of virtual property arises as a result of frequency allocation , would it not make sense to permit licensing in this field in such a way that a new source of income is again available for finance ministers which , combined with equity capital formation for the companies involved , brings a benefit for both sides ?
I think that we need to look for totally new theories for frequency allocation and that we should also have the courage to implement them .
I often get complaints from CB users .
Mr Scheibenbogen writes to me regularly .
This is quite simply because there is still no single market for equipment use in Europe , so that we need to find an approach in the area of hardware too so as to secure a single market .
Article 7 is about publishing information .
I would be interested to hear from the Commissioner in what form this information is to be made available in future .
I would like to see more detail in Article 10 ( 1 ) about the powers of investigation for regulatory authorities , whilst of course observing the principle of proportionality and preserving business secrets .
I believe that these principles are particularly important for the future , and I will be pleased if we can congratulate Mrs Niebler on the adoption of this very important report tomorrow , because she really has done sterling work .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Niebler for her excellent report .
The radio spectrum has become a central means of communication , bringing with it money and power .
With no standardised allocation procedures , we all know the result of the third generation mobile phone deals - one company in the sector is currently going bankrupt every week .
In some Member States there were no charges at all , while others used hybrid systems .
The result of all this is a confused situation , not to mention unemployment .
This was supposed to give us a cutting edge in global competition .
Because radio waves transcend borders , it is clear that we need common European principles to administer them since , to put it bluntly , fifteen different interpretations of the same thing is a barrier to marketing .
The Electronic Europe strategy demands that everyone should be included on equal terms .
This makes things considerably more difficult and conflict must be removed .
At the same time , cultural diversity should be encouraged and in this regard I mean , for example , public radio broadcasting , which must be given the necessary frequencies .
I approve of this kind of political decision making but when deciding on commercial issues we have to have a level playing field with the same procedure , whether this be auction or some other procedure , throughout the whole of Europe so that the system does not end up on the verge of collapse as it is now .
For this reason I support Amendments Nos 22 and 23 and Mrs Mann ' s oral amendment .
I think that this will see us achieve a balance in these sub-areas and gain an understanding of what is important and what is business .
Mr President , the Commission is pleased with the progress on its proposal for a decision on radio spectrum policy .
I too would especially like to thank Angelika Niebler for her report .
This proposal is part of a whole which the Commission would like to see adopted by the end of the year .
The Commission would like to state that the wide-ranging discussions of recent years are now producing results , as the general importance of the radio spectrum and the need for efficient decision making are starting to be recognised .
Today , following discussion in the committee , the issue is having its first reading in the European Parliament .
The timing is ideal , since , after much discussion , the Council , for its part , last week reached consensus on the new text which largely confirms the Commission ' s original aims .
Following its examination of Angelika Niebler ' s report and the new amendments , the Commission can state that it is satisfied that Parliament in principle supports the Commission ' s proposal .
Despite this , the Commission has some detailed observations on various parts of the report .
From the Commission ' s point of view the most problematic aspect of the report is that it does not sufficiently distinguish between , on the one hand , issues which fall under the codecision procedure and , on the other , issues to be decided by the committee procedure .
All the amendments to be approved must comply with the comitology rules agreed for the EU institutions , which guide the use of the committee procedures and according to which the Radio Spectrum Committee will also have to operate .
Some amendments propose that all the decisions should be made by the codecision procedure , in other words that this procedure be adopted in agreeing the Community ' s common policy and also in agreeing such technical implementation measures required in order to comply with the policies agreed .
In the opinion of the Commission , the latter , i.e. technical implementation measures , should be agreed by committee , where they would be determined using the committee procedure .
In addition , the report presents amendments according to which the European Parliament could revoke or amend measures already realised via the committee procedure .
In the view of the Commission , this conflicts with the Comitology Decision .
I would like to remind you of the main principle of the proposal : whenever the European Parliament and the Council , using the codecision procedure or by other means , agree Community policy concerning the radio spectrum , such as the Galileo project or the Single European Sky project , they agree at the same time that radio frequencies are available in order to realise this Community policy in practice .
In this context the committee procedure is needed to enable us to decide on the technical implementation measures which are essential in order to realise the agreed Community policy .
To clarify the matter further it can also be stated that the committee procedure is not used to agree Community policy which may depend on radio frequencies or such harmonisation which go beyond merely technical implementation measures .
In such cases , the codecision procedure is used .
For this reason the Commission cannot accept those amendments from Parliament which conflict with the central approach of our proposal for a decision .
Parliament ' s amendments , according to which , all the decisions made by the committee procedure would be brought before Parliament and where Parliament would have the right to amend or revoke them if they concern issues other than purely technical implementation measures are against the rules set out in the Comitology Decision .
According to the Comitology Decision , the Commission must re-examine draft measures if , according to a resolution by Parliament , they exceed the implementing powers provided for in the instrument on which they are based and inform Parliament of the action it intends to take on Parliament ' s resolution and of its reasons for doing so .
In this context the most important amendments from the Commission ' s point of view are Amendments Nos 10 and 19 , and the Commission also requests that the Members of the European Parliament reconsider their opinion on these amendments as they already have regarding Amendments Nos 21 , 22 and 23 .
However , I would finally like to emphasise that the Commission greatly values Parliament ' s seeking to play an active role in the decision-making process regarding the radio spectrum .
For precisely this reason the Commission referred in its proposal to the existing opportunities for doing so - the codecision procedure and the committee procedure .
As for the other amendments , the Commission can approve Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 17 and 22 - 25 .
We accept Amendments 3 , 7 , 9 , 11 - 13 and 20 in principle .
The Commission is unable to approve any other amendments .
To conclude , I can state that the opinions of the institutions on the aims of the proposed decision have converged .
This should be seen as a guiding principle in further preparation for the entry into force of the decision .
On this basis the Commission is ready to continue open cooperation with the European Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
( The sitting was closed at 11.40 p.m. )
Madam President , as we all know , Parliament will be in recess in August .
Therefore , I would like to recall today that 8 August 2001 is the anniversary of a tragedy : the 45th anniversary of the terrible accident which took place in the Marcinelle mines .
On 8 August 1956 , 262 miners died in the most tragic accident in the workplace ever to take place in Europe : 262 miners from all over our continent .
I am sure , Madam President , that you will want to take suitable measures to mark the anniversary of this tragic event , and I am also sure that the Belgian presidency , which has announced that its programme will include the creation of an equitable social Europe , will make every endeavour to ensure that this proposal establishes the conditions necessary to prevent a tragedy such as that of Marcinelle ever occurring in Europe again .
Thank you , Mr Cossutta .
Madam President , I learned yesterday that the Bureau was to make a statement today about the memorandum being prepared by this House on enlargement .
You have a great sensitivity for language , Madam President , and you are more aware than anyone that the choice we are about to make on language regulation is the key to a great many other decisions that will have to be taken .
Can you assure us that in the future all elected members of this House will continue to have the right to express themselves in their own language , to listen to their fellow-MEPs in their own language and to write in their own language ?
That would be a great help in setting our minds at rest .
Mrs Thyssen , I have noted what you say .
But having said that , I must explain to you that the Bureau will not be adopting the document you mentioned this evening .
It will not be until September , when the groups have been able to study it in depth .
Madam President , I should like to draw your attention to the increasing and continuing problems faced by our drivers .
I was told that this afternoon a lawyer ' s letter was going to be delivered to the prefect of Alsace , to clarify the uncertainty over the problems between the Ministry of Home Affairs and the French Ministry of Transport , since at the moment , the logical consequence of the regulations is that the vehicles used for taxi transport in the other weeks would no longer be available for use this week .
I believe that in the light of the fact that France is very keen on keeping the seat of Parliament here , it is very regrettable that these kinds of formalities should jeopardise our transport .
Yes , I can tell you that the Quaestors will be looking into this issue .
I am looking at the few Quaestors who are present in the House and I can confirm that they will be examining this issue very closely .
Programme of the Belgian presidency
The next item is the Council statement on the programme of the Belgian presidency .
I give the floor to Mr Verhofstadt , President-in-Office of the Council .
Madam President of the European Parliament , Mr President of the European Commission , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour for me to present to you the new presidency ' s work programme .
Incidentally , Madam President , this is not the first time I have addressed the European Parliament , because in 1987 , as Chair of the Budget Council , I presented the budget for 1988 to the European Parliament .
Compared to today , it was prehistory in budgetary terms .
There was no financial perspective and no Berlin ceiling , and the preparation of a European budget was , at the time , an entirely small-scale and often nocturnal activity .
May I first of all express my appreciation of the Swedish presidency .
Sweden had set itself three priorities , as it happens the three e ' s : employment , environment and enlargement , and significant progress has been made in each of those fields ; fresh impetus has been given to the Lisbon process , a common strategy for sustainable development has been established and excellent work has been done for enlarging the Union .
However , there can be no doubt that the greatest step forward has been in the field of the common foreign and security policy .
By way of example I am very pleased to be able to mention the meetings with Presidents Putin and Bush - where the Fifteen spoke with one voice - the prominent part played by Javier Solana in the Balkan conflict , and the joint European Union and United States action in the Middle East .
All evidence , Madam President , that the European Union is also recognised as a partner in its own right at international level : when the European Union speaks with one voice , people listen .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , despite the many bright spots in the past few months , dark clouds gathered on the European horizon .
Following the Danish ' no ' , the Treaty of Nice was rejected in a referendum in Ireland and it yet again became clear , if clarification were needed , that there is a crisis of identity in the European Union .
There is a yawning gap between the individual citizen and the European institutions .
It would be to display a supercilious , indeed arrogant , attitude and would therefore be a great mistake simply to ignore this .
The fears , concerns and complaints of the ordinary citizen must definitely be taken seriously .
His expectations must also be met .
That is why there is in fact only one great challenge for the new presidency , namely to reconcile the individual citizen once more with Europe , with the European Union and with the European institutions .
To reconcile the citizen once more with Europe , to give the peoples of Europe new belief and confidence in the European Union - that is our task .
For the European Union represents the only future for the peoples , states and nations of our old continent .
Only as a Union are we a player on the world stage , a power capable of changing things for the better , whether it is a matter of the conflict in the Middle East , the combating of climate change or the fight against hunger and injustice in the Southern Hemisphere .
Let us be honest : on our own we are not capable of doing this ; as Europeans , we must instead work together in a single Union , act together and also raise our voice together .
In exactly the same way , Europe will only count for anything economically by continuing to work on the internal market and by launching the unified currency on 1 January next year .
In fact , it is for all those reasons that I fail to understand the anti-globalists .
Of course I am not talking about a small number of violent demonstrators whom we saw in action in Gothenburg , because they are just hooligans for whom only violence counts .
No , I am talking about those who protest indignantly against internationalisation and globalisation .
Perhaps not coincidentally a generation born into luxury and prosperity .
Within the European Union , globalisation is not a threat but a benefit .
Joint global action enables the Union to do things that previously could not possibly be achieved in a continent traditionally divided by the Iron Curtain and national borders : a community approach to organised crime , for instance , agreements on the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol , minimum standards to combat poverty and social exclusion .
In short , the Union is not a threat but a boon .
Of course , more than fine rhetoric is required to restore the citizen ' s confidence .
More is needed than a plausible argument to reconcile Europeans with their institutions once more .
There must be action on two fronts : on the one hand , a series of very practical decisions enabling visible solutions to be put forward to real problems with which the citizen is confronted daily ; and , on the other hand , the mapping out of a wide-ranging vision of the future of Europe .
We need a Union that avoids the ills that beset it today , namely lack of efficiency , lack of transparency and , especially , lack of democratic legitimacy .
Let me mention , first of all , the specific dossiers on which we want to work .
Our first dossier will obviously be the introduction of the euro on 1 January and the development of a coherent economic policy to underpin monetary union .
I believe nothing will bring Europe closer to its citizens than the successful introduction of the euro ; that is the presidency ' s task and it will have to act like a good father to ensure that it comes about .
That is why the Heads of State and Government will be examining an evaluation report in October , with the aim of ensuring that the introduction of the euro on 1 January goes smoothly .
The evaluation will be accompanied by an information campaign aimed more specifically at small and medium-sized businesses and the most vulnerable groups of society ; explaining the euro to them is , I believe , the best way of dispelling the fears that always go with an operation of such a scale .
All this , ladies and gentlemen , seems to me much more important than the endless squabbling about the value of the euro .
As if we introduced the euro as an instrument for speculation on the foreign exchange market !
That was not the purpose of the euro .
Let us not forget that the aim - which will be achieved only when the euro is circulating physically both inside and outside the Union - was to create a single market , without currency fluctuations or exchange risks , in order to give a major boost to the Union ' s economic growth .
Let us admit it , what else did we want to achieve with the euro ?
We wanted to give Europe a tangible expression of its existence .
Yet , in order to exploit the advantages of the single market to the full , we must also integrate the financial markets , liberalise gas , electricity , telecommunications , post and transport , reduce state aids and make the fiscal package reality .
The presidency nevertheless believes that , on this last point , progress must be made on every component of that package .
On the economic front I should again like to stress the introduction of the Community patent , the definition of a common position on the Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Development , the implementation of the European Small Business Charter and the conclusion of negotiations on the European company statute .
When I was studying European law at university - that is nearly 30 years ago now - the prospect was held out that the European company would become a reality in a few months ' or at the most a few years ' time .
I believe the time has now come to make it reality ; it is a necessity for European enterprises that want to be able to take on world competition by means of mergers or alliances .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if we want to reconcile the citizen with the European Union , we must set to work quickly on creating a social Europe .
That is the second main thrust of the presidency .
Continuing the development of the European social model , which is precisely what distinguishes us from that other great internal market , the United States , and specifically , we want to define the quantitative and qualitative indicators of employment and to finalise the directive on the information and consultation of workers .
All Member States are today facing the same challenges of an ageing population and escalating health care expenditure .
A first joint report on pensions will be submitted to the European Council by the end of the year .
Our third main objective is the creation of a European area of freedom , security and justice , in other words the implementation of the Tampere conclusions .
This may sound pompous , but they are , in fact , matters that affect the citizen directly : asylum , immigration , the fight against organised crime , trading and trafficking in human beings .
Instead , ladies and gentlemen , of noting the progress , or rather the lack of progress made at the European Council in Laeken , I hope that the justice and home affairs ministers , together with Commissioner Vitorino and the full support of the European Parliament , will together make progress in five specific areas : a directive on asylum that will harmonise procedures for recognising and welcoming refugees , the establishment of Eurojust and the provision of an operational force for Europol -incidentally , after the recent incidents supervision of Europol will have to be radically strengthened - the initiation of a high impact operation to strengthen the Union ' s new external frontiers and thus to combat trafficking in human beings , mutual recognition , or the start of it , for judgments and rulings and lastly , and importantly , we must start work on a European extradition mandate .
( NL ) In the months ahead , a wide-ranging debate on migration must be launched .
The Commission has already published a document on the subject .
However , I must warn against a one-sided and all too facile approach to the problem , particularly the call to introduce a quota system for economic migration in order to offset the shortfalls in so-called problem occupations .
It is clear from the United States that a quota system does not do away with illegal migration .
Should we not also be careful that such a measure does not even widen the gap between north and south because more highly qualified people are lured away ?
I am firmly convinced that the best way of halting migration flows is to create prosperity in the countries of origin , to liberalise world trade and to dismantle protectionism .
In fact , it is very simple .
If people cannot build a good life for themselves in their own country because the fruits of their labour cannot be sold in our markets , they will always try to immigrate .
( Applause )
The fourth line of action of the Presidency is aimed at improving the quality of life .
Following the lead of the Gothenburg Summit , we shall establish precise objectives and concrete indicators for the new strategy to be pursued on sustainable development .
In addition , the Presidency will concentrate its efforts on two specific issues relating to transport and mobility : the establishment of standards relating to pollution and noise generated by civil aviation , and the so-called Erika measures on safety at sea .
Most of the Presidency ' s attention will be focused on Kyoto .
After all , climate change represents the greatest threat to the whole planet and , in Gothenburg , the US President promised to respect the general objectives of Kyoto , although he disagrees fundamentally with us about the means of achieving them .
In any case , he promised more specifically in Gothenburg that he would not block either this process or the forthcoming conference in Bonn .
I believe that our resolute stance is bearing fruit and that we should consistently maintain that resolute stance .
Finally , food safety .
Belgium wishes to complete the setting up of the European Food Authority so that it can become operational by the beginning of 2002 .
After all the crises of the last few years - dioxin , BSE and foot and mouth - that is the only way to restore consumer confidence .
Madam President , the fifth main thrust is the enlargement of the Union .
In this matter , it is the new presidency ' s ambition to achieve results as good as the Swedish presidency ' s .
The route mapped out in Nice has been scrupulously followed and we shall keep up this sustained momentum of talks .
In this matter , the qualitative aspects deserve as much attention as the quantitative aspects and elements .
In saying that , I mean that it is important that the candidate countries transpose the acquis communautaire , but it is not only important that they transpose it into their national legislation , they must also modernise their administrations , develop their judicial capacity and really implement the acquis on the ground .
The Commission has been asked to prepare an evaluation report on the matter for October .
None of this must , of course , be allowed to cast any doubt on my conviction .
The Union must be enlarged as quickly as possible .
We must unite Europe .
What it was never possible to achieve through war and violence is , in fact , now within our reach by democratic means within an enlarged Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , as I said in my introduction , the Swedish presidency took a tremendous step forward in developing a coherent European foreign policy .
We want to continue down that road .
Apart from intensifying relations with both the United States and the Russian Federation , apart , too , from launching a new round of trade talks , the presidency primarily wants to concentrate on European security and defence policy .
I do not believe the public will perceive Europe to be a reality until , in addition to the euro , it sees the development of common defence .
A recent opinion poll showed that in all Member States - and I mean all - the population was in favour of the development of a recognisable independent European intervention force alongside the national armies .
By the end of this year , therefore , we must at least be ready to declare operational the initiative taken in Helsinki .
The second major challenge on the external front concerns three conflicts .
First of all , the Balkans .
Now that democracy has returned to Belgrade and Milosevic has been extradited , we must make every effort to prevent new crisis points appearing elsewhere in the region and Javier Solana will therefore enjoy the presidency ' s full support in all his efforts .
Then , there is the Middle East .
In cooperation with the High Representative and the Commission , the presidency will continue to urge the parties to resolve their differences through dialogue .
Full implementation of the Mitchell Report , to which the European Union contributed , must be the starting point for the process .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to draw your particular attention to another conflict : the conflict in the Great Lakes region in Central Africa .
I have just returned from the Congo , from Kinshasa and Kisangani .
The Balkans and the Middle East may be more important politically .
I am not going to dispute that .
From a humanitarian point of view , however , the tragedy that is unfolding in the Great Lakes region is a thousand times greater .
This region is incubating a war on a continental scale involving no less than seven countries and their armies .
If such a situation were to arise here , with our Eurocentric outlook , we would quite naturally speak of a world war .
In three years , more than three million human beings have been killed , not counting the victims of the ethnic violence in Burundi or the 800 000 or more persons massacred during the Rwanda genocide in 1994 .
I say to you that the Union can no longer stand idly by .
Political , diplomatic and economic action is urgently required and the presidency will present an action plan to that effect .
( Applause ) Madam President , I am counting on the European Parliament ' s full agreement , together with the Council and the Commission , to support and implement this plan .
( NL ) Europe not only has a present , it mainly , of course has a future .
Offering practical solutions to practical problems is one thing , but giving citizens a view of the future of the European Union is just as important .
That is why , in Nice , we were charged with drawing up a Laeken Declaration by the end of the year which can map out the way ahead .
However , the Laeken Declaration must be more than a simple procedure .
It must not restrict itself to what I venture to call a dry summary of agenda points or to simply establishing a method of working .
I believe that our ambition should extend further .
In Laeken , we must provide the impetus for the great reform that is fast approaching and sketch the outlines of the new European Union after enlargement .
An enlargement which , if I may say so , is , in fact , not so much an enlargement as a genuine change and transformation .
Of course , we must not try to anticipate the answers , but it will be necessary to ask the right questions and identify those issues which will determine the future of Europe .
In doing so , absolutely no issue or topic must be taboo .
In the Laeken Declaration , I should like to broach the following crucial questions .
My starting point is that the European Union has a huge problem .
It has lost touch with the individual citizen , and at least a section of public opinion is convinced that the Union intervenes all too often , and sometimes too drastically , in people ' s daily lives .
People find the Union non-transparent , unduly bureaucratic and insufficiently democratic . Quite rightly so , too .
All this must be discussed in the first chapter of the Declaration , for how can you in fact solve problems if you do not dare first to acknowledge them in the Declaration ?
From this , the question naturally arises as to what the European Union ' s values and objectives should be .
What precisely does European identity consist of ?
What does it mean to people ?
This , brings us , of course , to the subject of a constitution for the Union , accompanied by a simplification and revision of the Treaties .
This leads us on to a third , and perhaps the most crucial issue , namely that of the ordering of the Union ' s powers , in other words the division of responsibilities within the Union .
We need clear agreements .
Who does what at what level ?
For their part , people now already know perfectly well what essential tasks they expect the European Union to fulfil .
The recent soundings in Europe constantly indicate the same core tasks for the Union : the socio-economic policy designed to support the Monetary Union , basic standards on social security , a common asylum and migration policy , a joint foreign policy and a collective approach to defence .
At the same time , citizens feel that the Union is too concerned with the over-detailed implementation of policy that could be better implemented at national or regional level .
In short , people feel that the Union should concentrate first and foremost on creating the regulatory framework , on the boundary conditions , on monitoring and on the implementation of policy by regions or Member States .
Consequently , we must not in any way shirk this discussion , which must focus on a division of powers in both directions .
Which additional tasks will be assigned to the Union , and which to the Member States ?
The Laeken Declaration must also initiate reconsideration of another problem , namely the unchecked growth , the proliferation and , I am tempted to say , the inflation of policy instruments .
In a speech I gave recently in Göttweig in Austria , I listed what amount to no less than thirty different policy instruments in the Treaties .
A radical simplification of those instruments is urgently necessary .
Nor must the method of financing the European Union be omitted from the Laeken Declaration .
At the moment , the Union does not have full budgetary powers of its own .
It has no real resources of its own , since it is largely financed on the basis of GNP contributions .
We must at least be bold enough to ask the question of whether this indirect method of financing is the correct one and of whether direct financing would not be more legitimate and more democratic .
( Applause )
In the Laeken Declaration , we shall not of course be able to avoid a discussion of the institutions .
Do we or do we not want a directly elected President of the Commission ?
( Applause )
Would it not be better to generalise the co-decision rights of the European Parliament ?
( Applause )
( NL ) Why not make the Council a second chamber , in which case how would we better distinguish between the legislative and executive powers of the Council ?
( Applause )
Should the implementation of the Union ' s foreign policy not now finally be entrusted to one person ?
( Applause ) I may well receive telephone calls from both parties .
( Laughter )
Finally , we must decide on the method to be followed between the Laeken Declaration and the start of the intergovernmental conference .
As far as the method is concerned , in my view it is not of great importance whether we are talking about a convention or a forum .
What is important are the following two matters . The working method chosen must make it possible to involve all the parties in the debate : the European Parliament , the European Commission , Member States , national parliaments and the applicant countries .
In addition , we must give the convention or forum the opportunity to work out different scenarios and present different options , because if we bind the convention or forum with the consensus rule and charge it to publish a single text , then we are in danger of being confronted with an unambitious document , perhaps the result of the lowest common denominator .
The Belgian Presidency regards the European Parliament as an ally .
We wish to conduct an intensive dialogue during the next six months .
This all the more important because this Parliament is the instrument par excellence for finally obtaining a unitary public opinion in Europe that is more than the sum of fifteen national opinions , as is still too often the case at present ( and also one of the problems of Europe ) .
Well , naturally we have many plans for the next six months .
I say six months , but in fact we have worked out that it amounts to no more than 99 working days , which of course does not mean that our staff will not be working at weekends .
So time is short , but I believe , and I should like to end on this note , that shortage of time must not prevent us from looking to the future of Europe with daring and courage .
Thank you for your attention .
( Loud applause )
Madam President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , it gives me great pleasure to begin the work we will be undertaking with the Belgian presidency .
Prime Minister , this presidency comes at a critical juncture .
We are in the final stages of the preparations for the introduction of euro notes and coins , the most tangible expression of Europe ever achieved .
Belgium knows that it can count on the cooperation of the Commission and the European institutions to make this truly historic event a great success .
Moreover , we are pushing resolutely ahead towards enlarging the Union as , Prime Minister , you said just now .
Accession negotiations have reached a critical stage , with the most difficult chapters now open .
Meanwhile , precisely to prepare the Union for enlargement , the Member States are in the process of ratifying the Treaty of Nice .
However , the referendum which took place in the Republic of Ireland recently has reminded us that ratification is not a foregone conclusion .
I shall return to this subject shortly .
Prime Minister , Madam President , at the Laeken Summit , we shall be reviewing the Union ' s progress in implementing its social agenda .
Steady and solid implementation is essential if we are to succeed , this decade , in making the Union ' s economy truly dynamic and competitive while , at the same time , ensuring that our social model remains anchored in the principles of justice and sustainability .
I agree with the new presidency ' s emphasis not only on the essential drive towards achieving full employment but also on the equally essential need to improve the quality of work .
Modernising our pension and social security systems is also an important part of our social agenda .
This is one of the most important challenges of today ' s society and , yesterday , the Commission adopted a Communication proposing an integrated European strategy for tackling it .
We are also committed to the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
I am therefore pleased to see the Belgian government ' s commitment to action on these issues in its presidency .
In particular , I share the concern that underlies this commitment : the gap between rich and poor in Europe is widening at an alarming rate .
We have a duty to stop this trend .
If we do not change our economic and social policies , we will be in danger of undermining solidarity , the very value on which the European social model is based .
The rapid drift towards an increasingly divided society is happening not only in Europe but also on a much wider scale . An entire continent , Africa - about which you made a highly relevant point in your speech , Prime Minister - has lost contact even with the developing world .
We must do everything in our power to stop this unjust development model and to give voices and rights to those who have neither .
Ladies and gentlemen , Prime Minister , the Laeken Summit and declaration are also vitally important for another reason .
Laeken must determine how we are to structure the second stage of the ' Future of Europe ' debate .
This is a far-reaching debate with huge implications .
I am particularly glad that , in contrast to the situation six months ago , it is now being conducted widely in all the media .
At last , our fellow citizens and their governments are beginning to realise how important these issues are for their future .
Prime Minister , in a recent speech , you stated that ' the Union has turned into an institutional and instrumental imbroglio ' .
It is my unenviable privilege to share your concern .
The diagnosis is clear : what we need now is treatment , proposed and discussed freely and openly .
There must be no more attempts to settle these questions behind closed doors .
In my opinion , the only acceptable way to reform the institutions is for a Convention to be set up at Laeken .
The Heads of State have also talked about a forum - I personally prefer the word Convention - ...
... which will bring together , on an equal footing , representatives of the governments of the Member States and the candidate countries - and I stress , the candidate countries as well - representatives of the national parliaments , the European Parliament and the Commission .
It is in this Convention that we will be able to find the best solutions to Europe ' s most serious problems .
Ladies and gentlemen , not only must the future of Europe be firmly in the hands of its citizens but they must also understand what needs changing .
Whatever else it may imply , the Irish ' no ' to Nice tells us clearly that we have to close the gap between the institutions and the citizens .
The Europeans want a Union that meets their new demands . They want far more than an economically integrated continent , which we have already largely achieved .
They want a Union they can understand - and that means we must simplify our procedures and our Treaties - where the responsibilities of each institution are clearly defined and decisions are taken at the appropriate level .
They want a Union that delivers the quality of life and the type of society they desire .
A Union that is clearly accountable to its citizens for what our policies have achieved and how our resources have been used .
Their calls for greater democratic control over the Union ' s institutions are fully justified .
This too is an issue the Convention must address .
The Laeken Declaration must therefore set an ambitious and comprehensive agenda for this Convention and lay down the methods and timetable it is to follow .
Ladies and gentlemen , the position I recently adopted on the Treaty of Nice and the Irish referendum has raised some concern in this House and elsewhere .
From the very start of my term of office , I have consistently attached great importance to political and institutional relations between the Commission and Parliament .
I firmly believe these relations must be based on a spirit of cooperation and openness .
Therefore , let me conclude with a few more words on the ratification of the Treaty of Nice .
A Union of 25 or more Member States cannot function with its present structures and methods of decision-making .
That is why , for the task that this Commission has set as its absolute priority , the enlargement of the Union , I have always maintained that we need to introduce , at the very least , the institutional changes so painstakingly and laboriously agreed upon at Nice .
We must , indeed , remember that enlargement is not simply an internal matter for Europe : our role as a point of reference for the ideas and politics of a large part of the world depends on the decisions we take on this process .
The candidate countries , for their part , are making a huge , unprecedented effort to qualify for Union membership .
The Union must therefore be ready to welcome the new Member States .
This means revising our institutional system and the decision-making process .
That is why , despite the fact that it did not live up to our expectations , the Treaty of Nice is necessary for enlargement .
Therefore , as I have stressed on a number of occasions before this House , I very much hope that the Treaty will be ratified by the end of next year , in full respect for the democratically expressed opinions of our fellow citizens .
The people of the Irish Republic have recently expressed their opinion of the Treaty .
I do not want to go into the details of the debate that preceded , accompanied and followed the referendum .
I just want to say that I am convinced , particularly after my visit to Ireland , that the Union does not pose a threat to national identities .
Quite the opposite : our real strength lies in ' unity in diversity ' .
After visiting Ireland , I can , in any case , affirm without a doubt that the Irish people did not vote against enlargement .
However , we must not underestimate the importance of this ' no ' . It raises a crucial question that we cannot ignore : what happens if , in spite of our best efforts , Nice is not ratified ?
Some people have not been able to resist the temptation to reply simply that this question is not on the agenda .
However , it would not be responsible for me , as President of the Commission , to give that answer .
Enlargement must not be compromised .
It is , and will remain , our number one political objective .
It is an historic project and I have made it an integral part of my task as Commission President . It has the unanimous backing of the Gothenburg Council .
It is therefore my duty , as President of the Commission , to anticipate the potential repercussions of the Irish ' no ' on the enlargement process .
Ladies and gentlemen , in your opinion , is it wise to pretend that the problem does not exist ?
No , it is not .
Over the past few days , I have therefore taken up this duty . I chose to be frank and made a carefully-considered , informed decision .
We have all said that Nice is necessary for enlargement .
Well then , we must not give the impression that the process can succeed without the reforms we all wanted at Nice .
I do not wish to dwell further on the views of the legal experts who assure us that we could go ahead with enlargement simply by making small changes to the Treaties . That is not the political point .
The point is that we have to enlarge the Union while , at the same time , deepening it in the ways that Nice itself stated were essential .
Ladies and gentlemen , a ' no ' to Nice would inevitably delay the enlargement process .
We want to avoid that if at all possible but , were it to happen , we would have to bring forward the date of the next Intergovernmental Conference . This would allow us to fulfil our solemn commitments with the strong support of this House expressed completely within its mandate .
As you can see , the Treaty of Nice is already an integral part of the debate on the ' Future of Europe ' .
Our ' yes ' to ratification is not , therefore , about tactics : it is about the need to ensure the political coherence of the Union .
Prime Minister , what you have said confirms that your presidency fully agrees with this analysis and endorses the strategy we must therefore adopt .
( Applause )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , you have presented an ambitious programme Mr President-in-Office .
Our Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats can support this programme because - you did not state this explicitly but the overall tenor of your speech made it plain - you represent a Community-based Europe and not a Europe of intergovernmental cooperation .
That is why we stand by your side , because you defend European law , democracy and Community procedure .
You are thus following in the footsteps of your Christian-Democratic predecessors , Wilfried Martens and Leo Tindemans , who also made an outstanding contribution to the work of the European Parliament .
On 1 January 2002 , we will have the single currency .
The introduction of the euro is a peaceful revolution and we want to look forward to the advent of the single European currency .
We have to be proactive in defending it .
If the younger generation of today are able to pay in one currency throughout their lives , in the future , throughout Europe , in all the countries of the European Union and in some cases even further afield , then this is also an act of peace .
Let us not talk down the single currency , but let us together be proactive in defending it .
This also requires us - and here I have a request to make of you - to pursue a policy of stability , to fight inflation , to cut the public debt and , above all , to create the conditions to make investment in Europe worthwhile .
That is why it is not enough for us to ease the tax burden on large companies ; we need to ease the tax burden on small and medium-sized companies so that they are willing to invest and increase productivity and so that Europe receives a real signal in favour of economic growth .
You said in the Council of Heads of State and Government that the European Union ought to be the most competitive continent in the world , but this statement is only truly meaningful if we encourage investment in Europe .
I would ask you to name those Member States which do not comply with these principles because we need success across the board for Europe ' s economy to be attractive .
( Applause )
You mentioned Laeken .
The European Parliament will be represented in the convention .
You are fighting - and we very much welcome this - for the involvement of the Commission and the national governments .
It would give a boost to the spluttering French-German engine if both countries were to push for governments also being represented at high level in this convention , for example by ministers for Europe who are responsible for this portfolio in their national parliaments , render account to the national parliaments and thus also reach their respective public .
We call on the national governments not only to send civil servants - whom we esteem highly - to this convention , but also politicians who have mandates from their governments .
( Applause )
My third point is transparency .
We were particularly pleased to hear you say that when the Council of Ministers is actively legislating it should become a real second chamber .
We firmly support this .
But we can already take steps towards achieving this now , during your presidency , before Laeken .
If , for example , we know that civil servants but not the ministers are sitting on a conciliation committee between Parliament and the Council , and there are internal instructions that the majority of the people represented there ought to be ministers , then we would ask you also to ensure , through the Council General Secretariat , that there are politicians present , ministers who are equal in rank to the European Parliament representatives and who will legislate at European level alongside them .
( Applause )
You mentioned the work of the High Representative .
Our group has a high opinion of Mr Solana .
We share your view , however , that , in the next reform , we need to ensure that the responsibilities of the High Representative are identical to those fulfilled by his counterpart in the Commission and that this position is based in the Commission .
We must also ensure - we will be discussing this in the conference of presidents - that obviously the High Representative also comes here before the European Parliament at regular intervals to report on the European Union ' s common foreign and security policy .
( Applause )
In conclusion , because I will keep to my allotted time , allow me to say the following . We acknowledge the fact that , precisely because of its historic responsibility for Africa , the Belgian presidency will be making this a particular priority .
We support this .
But at the same time we say that of course , where external relations are concerned , we need to focus our efforts - and this should not be to the detriment of Africa - on the developments in the Balkans and in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , so that we contribute to creating peace there .
Given that ultimately it might be necessary for the Europeans to take joint action by deploying their security forces there , we are revealing weaknesses in our policy if the North Atlantic Alliance is telling us today that some Member States are not in any position at all to do this .
We should not only talk about defence ; we need to get beyond the rhetoric and give our armed forces the hardware they need to make a real contribution to maintaining peace in Europe .
We wish you every success in your work , Mr President-in-Office .
You are a founding member of the European Union .
Belgium has already successfully completed eleven presidencies .
We wish Belgium all the best for its twelfth presidency .
We are at your side !
( Applause )
Thank you , Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you are appearing here today with a great political ambition , with a coherent programme which is a significant commitment , and you are offering an alliance with Parliament .
On behalf of the Socialist Group , I can tell you that , in the terms that you have presented the issue - as Prime Minister of a Belgian rainbow government , which has demonstrated that democratic alternation also works in Belgium - of course you can count on our support and our cooperation .
Firstly , with regard to the future of the Union and its challenges , you have insisted that unity creates strength and that there must be cooperation with Parliament .
We agree on the diagnosis of the specific problems .
The question is now to know whether the way we are going to deal with them will be effective .
I believe we have two possible fundamental points of departure , which you have mentioned : on the one hand , the development of European citizenship and , on the other , the introduction of the euro .
It seems to me that over the last twenty years , since the draft Spinelli Treaty , the Adonino report , our work in preparing the Treaty of Maastricht , our drafts of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , Parliament has always been an ally and an accomplice in European progress .
Specifically , at the moment , we believe that it is extremely significant that , faced with the Laeken Declaration , there is an agreement on what you call the ' constitutionalisation ' of the Treaties , which demands a public debate .
You have the responsibility to provide it , on the one hand , with a method and , on the other , with content .
That is a fundamental issue : we believe that the convention must be the forum which , with the participation of parliamentarians , governments and the Commission , prepares the work for a decisive Intergovernmental Conference .
You began by talking about your appearance as Minister of Budgets in 1988 .
I was the rapporteur who presented the financial perspectives which have allowed us to make progress , but , as you know very well , anyone who ignores the budget is making a big mistake .
I believe it is absolutely essential that you argue that funding must be a public , democratic and fundamental element of our future .
Another basic element is the economic and social agenda .
You have asked for a coherent economic policy .
We need one .
We are in a period of far-reaching conversion and restructuring .
We need to defend our competitive capacity , but we must also respond to the thousands and thousands of workers who are affected by this very broad and decisive process .
It is therefore absolutely essential that we have an ambitious social dimension , that we insist on the quality of employment , and deal with pensions and the demographic future of Europe , and all these things are in your programme .
Finally , Madam President , our international dimension .
The European Union is the first experience of civilised globalisation in history .
We must defend that and take it to the next Millennium Round of the WTO .
But there are also some important challenges in relation to our personality in the world .
You have correctly pointed out that you can receive two telephone calls .
Two is better than none , which is what happened before .
We must consolidate what already exists .
I believe that , in this respect - think , for example of the number of calls received by the President of the United States - what we need is a clear approach , that must maintain a presence in the Balkans , in the Middle East , and I thank you for mentioning Africa .
At the Council of the Socialist International last weekend in Lisbon , we spoke about Africa as a fundamental priority .
That is one of our moral commitments .
I would add something more : for the first time there is a minister in Ecofin who proposes a debate on the viability of an international tax on speculation .
That must also contribute to making globalisation more civilised , and we welcome the fact that the Belgian presidency has taken that initiative .
Lastly , Mr President , and I will end here , I believe that 99 working days is very little ; surely you are going to end up without any holidays .
However , if you are able to implement this ambitious project , you can count on our support , our cooperation and our understanding .
Madam President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , it has already been said more than once that the Belgian Presidency comes at a crucial moment . There are ample reasons for this .
To begin with , the indispensable and broadly based debate on the future of Europe which you must initiate .
The Laeken Declaration must be an initial outline of a Union which , although enlarged , can nevertheless work efficiently and with which citizens can identify .
Precisely because of people ' s declining interest in Europe , you rightly said that the European Union must pay more attention to the concrete complaints of its citizens .
Another crucial point is the place of the Union in the world .
It is correct that the European Union should exercise more influence on world developments in the monetary , economic , social , ecological and commercial spheres , but also and especially in the field of international policy .
On that point , you are right to point to Africa , where there is a humanitarian problem .
But the EU could also play a more active role in relations with , for example , the United States , Russia and Asia and , particularly , in relation to the peace process in the Middle East .
Be that as it may , the merits of this Belgian Presidency will be largely judged by its internal achievements .
The Belgian programme appears many-faceted and ambitious , involving the European social model , concern for the quality of life and work , better cooperation in the fields of migration and asylum , the transition to the euro , the follow-up to enlargement and many other points .
Prime Minister , an onerous task awaits you .
The European Parliament and European citizens are waiting for a powerful signal .
In Belgium , you have proved yourself able to breathe new life into politics .
Let us hope that you can transfer this to Europe too .
You are said to be a keen and energetic cyclist . It is true that you frequently enjoy cycling , and in a variety of conditions : without wind , with the wind behind you and with a headwind .
You will now learn that , in Europe , you will often be cycling into the wind .
However , we know that you are undaunted and we wish you the success you deserve .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , Prime Minister , during your presidency we will be travelling down a long and winding road , which began with Nice and will end with Laeken .
As we saw at Gothenburg there have also been obstacles along that road .
Along the way there was also Dublin , where the people said they did not want to go any further along this road unless there were radical changes made to the plans .
I would now like to ask whether we must therefore return to Nice in order , finally , to get to Laeken .
My own view is that at Nice some big mistakes were made , which must at all costs be put right .
Future Member States were treated unfairly there . For example , they did not all receive their rightful share of seats in the European Parliament .
Secondly , we were by no means able there to confirm and clarify decision-making conventions in the European Union .
You yourself gave an example of this : there are more than thirty instruments at our disposal , which means it cannot really be clear how the European Union functions .
I think that the European Union can continue its expansion , even if the Treaty of Nice should not be ratified in its present form , and you , Prime Minister , have an excellent opportunity in this respect .
At Laeken a consultative committee must certainly be set up , to commence drafting a constitution for the European Union and to deliberate on fundamental issues .
It is most important that this is the path we should take and that future Member States can also be involved in this work , this convention , which must be established at Laeken .
You mentioned globalisation .
I was pleased to note that during your presidential term the Tobin tax is to be discussed , which civil society is speaking so much about .
I think you have a perfect opportunity to show you understand what President Prodi was talking about : that globalisation also causes problems , dividing European societies into two and , furthermore , adding to the two-way split in societies in the global context .
Show you understand this concern , so that globalisation may then finally serve to benefit the development of the European social model , which you have named as one of your goals .
I would also like to mention the forthcoming talks on climate , which are to start in Bonn in two weeks ' time .
You must use all your diplomatic skills to bring the United States , Japan and Australia back to the negotiating table .
My group will lend you all the support it can in your efforts to continue the work Sweden began in the name of sustainable development .
I would also like to note that we now have a president of the Council and a president of the Commission , who are both cyclists !
I believe that you understand the need to give sufficient weight to environmental problems relating to traffic and mobility in particular , which are contained in the programme of the Belgian presidency .
In this connection I might say that the President-in-Office of the Council in the Transport Council represents my political group and is doing some creditable work .
Finally , as we approach Laeken , first the king ' s mighty castle appears on the horizon .
But do not , however , make this European Council meeting a royal event of bygone days , where decisions are reached over the people ' s heads . Remember that democracy and transparency are what are needed more than anything else , and do not in any event build more castles in Brussels for future European summits !
This would not be giving the right signal to the public .
I nevertheless hope that your presidency will come to be even half as popular as a certain well-known royal princess - Mathilde - is in your country .
If you manage as much , your presidential term will have been a job well done .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I appreciated the fact , Mr Verhofstadt , that you frankly acknowledged what you rightly called an ' identity crisis ' in Europe between the citizens and the European Union , and that you stressed the need to take their aspirations seriously so that , as you said , we can bring the citizens closer to Europe .
It makes a change from the all too frequent speeches designed to mollify , which people can no longer listen to because of all the contradictions that are glossed over .
It is only natural that new issues will arise from experience , which call for changes , innovations , and sometimes a questioning of matters that were believed to be done and dusted .
No subject should be taboo - we must acknowledge the problems , as you stressed .
In this spirit , I would like to mention a few issues that surface increasingly often in the debate provoked by the changes that are now affecting the European Union .
I believe that these issues should be raised as part of the exchange of ideas that you are hoping to promote during your presidency .
We have been repeatedly told , for example , that the eurozone was shielded from the major repercussions of the economic slowdown in the US .
We must now admit that , unfortunately , this has not been the case .
This is quite a serious misdiagnosis .
What sort of analysis is being carried out ?
What sort of lessons in economic and monetary policy must we learn from this , so as to avoid the European economy becoming entangled in the American financial bubble that is now about to burst over us ?
I would reiterate that , over six years , there has been a nine-fold increase in the amount of European capital flowing to the United States which , last year , reached over USD 220 billion .
There is another example that Mr Duisenberg himself sometimes uses - in contrast to the US Federal Reserve , which is required under its mandate to promote employment and growth , the European Central Bank is not required to deal with these problems , which are indeed at the heart of all of our concerns .
Do the European citizens know this ?
And what do they really think of this , when in fact unemployment is on the increase and growth is in decline ?
Should we not give some thought to this subject ?
I have another example - the Stability Pact requires Member States to rationalise their public and social spending .
If we merely follow this policy over the coming months , will it not lead to an economic slowdown , at a time when we actually need to stimulate growth ?
In what way can we revise the usual criteria or the way in which they are implemented in order to overcome this contradiction ?
Generally speaking , the fundamental question that the new , and rapidly deteriorating , economic circumstances raise and indeed force us to consider is , in my view , the following : what sort of political creativity can we come up with in order to avoid serious tension arising in all our societies even between some of the Member States , and , more importantly , with the candidate countries ?
This question cannot be answered by some sort of project to elect the President of the Commission by universal suffrage .
I think that we will have to attack the hard core of the neo-liberal model , which pervades European integration to an excessive degree . I also think that we are going to have to listen as well as involve the social actors and citizens in this necessary change .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to know how courageous and daring the Belgian presidency , which you have launched today , is prepared to be in this area ?
Madam President , firstly I should to thank the Belgian government for outlining in its legislative agenda the priorities it intends to pursue during its six month presidency of the Union .
It has already made it clear that it intends to promote wider cooperation between law enforcement agencies throughout the Union .
Within the Union a new institutional framework to fight against organised crime is being put in place , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The European Council has since launched two action plans to combat organised crime , aimed at overcoming disparities in national procedures and encouraging more efficient judicial cooperation .
The creation of Europol represented a major step forward in this context .
It is important that all EU institutions work together to ensure the development of a coherent European strategy against organised crime .
We must , at the same time , overcome difficulties to ensure that crossborder crime is tackled without curtailing the freedoms and legal rights of individuals and economic operators .
We should all recall that the primary motive of organised crime is financial gain .
I support a European-wide political agreement concerning the identification and confiscation of the proceeds of crime in all its forms .
We are all aware of the success the Irish Criminal Assets Bureau has had over the last five years in confiscating the proceeds of crime .
In Europe much has already been done to fight cyber crime .
The Council of Europe is in the process of completing preparations for the world ' s first international convention on cyber crime .
The Commission has already presented a legislative proposal on child pornography on the Internet , in line with the provisions of the Council of Europe ' s cyber crime convention .
I support the Commission ' s framework programme to combat trafficking in human beings ; the aim is to develop effective judicial cooperation across the European Union .
Over the next six months the Belgian presidency will have a coordinating role as we put in place the finishing touches to the launch of the euro notes and coins on 1 January next .
It is important that the information campaigns , which are to be intensified later this summer , are successfully managed .
In recent weeks the Israeli foreign minister and the Palestinian leader have visited Parliament .
It is now evident that the European Union has come to assume a pivotal role in pursuing peace within the Middle East .
I very much hope that the Belgian presidency will use this important time to help end the spiral of violence in the Middle East and seek the recommencement of dialogue between all parties in the region .
We are all aware that the EU leaders will be meeting in Laeken later this year to agree the format of a structured debate on Europe ' s future .
It is very important that we avoid contributing to the creation of a two-tier Europe .
I certainly do not want to build a European Union that is controlled by the larger Member States to the detriment of the smaller Member States .
Smaller Member States must be strongly represented within the overall EU institutional structure .
Finally , I would urge the Belgian presidency to ensure that the difficult chapters of negotiation with the applicant countries are opened as soon as possible .
Solutions must be found to the chapters of discussion which to date have remained closed concerning the future accession of countries from central and eastern Europe .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I have heard the Presidency being very quick to talk of a Laeken Declaration , but feel obliged to remind them that the Treaty of Nice no longer exists , since it was rejected by an impeccably democratic referendum in Ireland .
The way in which this established fact is being ignored by European officialdom is very characteristic of the undemocratic , dangerously totalitarian turn that the European Union is taking .
For that matter , in other European Member States , even holding referenda is considered too risky .
No referendum on European expansion plans , no referendum on the introduction of the euro and no referendum on Europe ' s ever-tightening grip on strictly national powers over , for example , culture or social security .
Gentlemen with the word democracy forever on their lips refuse to let the people decide for themselves .
Last week in the leading Flemish weekly Trends , Frans Crols put it as follows : ' On 1 July , Belgium will become head of the Brussels mafia .
An amalgam of unelected apparatchiks in Brussels who are trying to build an ersatz-superpower in consultation with European politicians who outdo each other in vagueness ' .
In that sense , it is very symbolic that the Belgian Presidency should be represented in Parliament by Prime Minister Verhofstadt and by Foreign Minister Michel .
Mr Michel is the man who led the hate campaigns against Austria and against Italy , since the people of those countries paid no attention in democratic elections to the paternalistic voting advice of a self-satisfied Belgian diplomatic machine .
Mr Verhofstadt is an undisputed champion , not only in cycling , but also in lying and breaking his word .
He is the man who came to power in Belgium , and remains in power , by denying his own civil manifestos and election promises and through a policy of systematic horsetrading and lying to the detriment of his own people .
Mr Verhofstadt is the man who cannot defeat the opposition Flemish Block party at the polls and who therefore is trying , at the taxpayers ' expense , to have my party banned by the courts with methods that would not have been out of place behind the Iron Curtain or in Nazi Germany .
What the French lawyer Isorni once said about Michel Debré applies equally to Mr Verhofstadt : Qu ' il marche à plat ventre sous le poids lourd de ses reniements , he crawls flat on his belly , weighed down by the weight of his denials .
Mr President , what we have just heard is unprecedented in the history of the European Parliament , of which I have been a Member since the first direct elections in 1979 .
The Belgian Prime Minister and President-in-Office of the Council does not belong to my party .
Nevertheless , I would say to you , Mr Vanhecke , that the comments which you made just now make you and those who share your views deserving of our most critical judgement .
It is intolerable that you should pick a fight like this here in the European Parliament .
Do it in your own country , but not in the European Parliament !
The President-in-Office has our full support where the defence of democracy and the rule of law in Europe are concerned .
( Applause )
Mr President , Prime Minister and Mr President of the Commission , the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities and the cross-party intergroup , SOS Democracy also wish to welcome Mr Verhofstadt as President-in-Office of the Council and pledge our critical and constructive opposition , at the same time as reminding the prime minister of his promise of a meeting with SOS Democracy .
Your speeches in Austria and here today would have been much better if you had also talked with the democratic EU opposition .
We can perhaps help you to understand why people have voted no in the last three referenda on the EU in Denmark , Switzerland and Ireland .
When we discussed the Irish ' no ' vote in the conciliation committee , there was not a member who dared to say that the Treaty of Nice could be adopted in a referendum in their country .
Those who expressed an opinion thought it would fail to be adopted .
One person said that it was fortunate that no referendum was to take place , for in that case it would also fail to be adopted in his own country , Portugal .
It is easier to replace a treaty than a country ' s people .
Respect the ground rules that have been adopted unanimously .
Respect the Irish ' no ' vote .
The Treaty of Nice has failed to be adopted .
Instead , support grassroots discussions concerning a treaty which people will be able to vote in favour of in all the countries , because it does not restrict , but rather extends democracy .
Acquire a more comprehensive circle of advisers .
With all due respect , your new think-tank consists mainly of elderly people who have all contributed to shifting power from voters and elected representatives to officials and ministers .
There are no young people and no women and not a single person who shares the views of the democratic majority which votes ' no ' in EU referenda .
Mr Delors , Mr Dehaene , Mr Amato , Mr Geremek and Mr Milliband are hardly in a position to write a treaty which can attract majority votes in referenda .
SOS Democracy has sketched out a thirteen-point alternative which we should like to discuss with you .
It can be read at EU.observer.com , and its demands could presumably be adopted in a referendum because the heading refers not to a more intrusive European Union characterised by secrecy , bureaucracy and remoteness from the people but to a considerably slimmed-down EU , characterised by transparency , democracy and proximity to the people .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , although the Belgian Presidency has only just got into gear , many people have the impression , President-in-Office of the Council , that your tour of Europe began earlier with the rather premature launch of the sixteen priorities programme , or even in the wings at Nice , where your well-oiled communications machine managed to project the notion of Laeken even before it was fully appreciated that Nice , in several respects at least , would prove a failure .
The road ahead of you is not an easy one .
On the one hand , you yourself have chosen it through your ambitious announcements but , on the other hand , you will not have escaped the tricolour rucksack given you as head of government of a country that is traditionally known to be able to reconcile the irreconcilable and , at difficult moments , to have launched visionary proposals that help the European community to progress .
On behalf of the Belgian members of the largest group in this Chamber , I wish you the same success as Jean-Luc Dehaene in 1993 .
He was virtually buried under the weight of praise .
We are not part of the coalition headed by you , but we have no intention of putting a spoke in the wheels of your Presidency or of reducing this Chamber to an arena for internal Belgian use .
What our predecessors constructed in Europe is too precious to us for that .
We are even prepared to give you a helpful push , at least when the race official is not watching , but only if your Presidency sets a course that really improves people ' s lot , both here and elsewhere in the world .
Mr President , there is insufficient time to dwell on the matters on the agenda , but the list is not really that important .
What does matter is the quality of the solutions and the vision that they project .
Whether we are talking about the conversion to the euro , enlargement , the Laeken Declaration on the future or the legislative matters , one thing is clear : the people are no longer behind us , they have lost their way , the peloton no longer really knows where the European course is leading it .
Prime Minister , work to ensure that people feel at home again in Europe .
There are no miracle cures , but there are key words : information , democratic involvement and transparency .
In December , you have the king ' s permission to use his palace .
I hope that you will also be given the use of the royal greenhouses .
Their symbolic value is great .
Naturally , you will also be expected to ensure that the palace at the summit of Laeken is not demolished .
There will be no shortage of demonstrators and troublemakers in Brussels either , unless you ensure that there is real involvement .
Why do you not conduct a Europe-wide NGO consultation exercise ?
Not at the same time as Laeken , but about four weeks beforehand .
You would be offering genuine demonstrators the opportunity to make themselves heard in a positive way while it were still of benefit to do so , and if the mass of genuine demonstrators were subsequently absent , the attraction for the anarchist hooligans would be immediately removed .
I look forward to your reaction to this suggestion .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I think , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that the applause from my group just now on the presentation of the programme of the Belgian Presidency has shown you that you can count on the full support of my group and , for that matter , I should also particularly like to emphasise the complete support of the Belgian Socialists in this group .
I was especially glad that you began with Europe ' s crisis of identity , because it is definitely not just in Ireland but everywhere in the European Union , even in Belgium , that there is a sense of there being a gulf between ourselves and ordinary citizens .
It will therefore not be ' business as usual ' for the Belgian Presidency , certainly not with a historic task such as enlargement in prospect .
In that context , I should therefore like to bring to your attention three points that strike us as being especially important .
Firstly : it is clear that the future of Europe can no longer be worked out in exclusive groups either of diplomats or of technicians .
Europe must again become a political project , and that means , for example , that the debate on the future must really become a large-scale , albeit difficult , exercise in European democracy .
It must therefore be carried out in dialogue with civil society and be more than a virtual debate on a website being instead a kind of parliamentary assembly of civil society .
The second point concerns your Laeken Declaration .
As you yourself quite rightly say , the discussion must centre on where we are heading with the enlarged Union and cover how we are to proceed , with what institutions and with what finance .
I should like to ask you , please , to remember to include a healthy environment and the quality of life in this vision of the future of Europe .
I believe it is a wise decision that you wish to prepare for this debate with the help of the advisors of the Laeken group .
But allow me , with the greatest respect for the mainly grey-haired wise men , to say that it will surely not be prepared for without the presence of a single woman .
I truly hope that you will correct this blemish , because the future of Europe concerns the future of men and women alike .
A final point .
I am convinced that people ' s confidence in European institutions can also grow through the practical issues .
And I believe that your programme guarantees a social , sustainable and politically stronger Europe .
I should like to come back to one specific matter , namely that concerning the taxation of speculative capital flows .
This may seem a detail in your list of priorities , a symbolic matter , but for everyone , MEPs and NGOs , throughout Europe who are convinced that globalisation has produced distortions , this is a very important issue .
The Belgian Presidency could show , in connection with this matter , that there really is a difference between the thousands of peaceful demonstrators who stood in the street of Gothenburg and have a political message and those who know only the language of violence .
I wish you every success with the Presidency , and you can rely on our support .
Mr Verhofstadt , first of all , if I may , I would like to praise what I shall call the Belgian presidency ' s clear analysis .
I think that there really is a democratic deficit and that we must resist a hard core .
I would like , however , if I may , to clarify that I am not thinking of the hard core that Mr Wurtz referred to , but the hard core of excessive bureaucracy , red tape and administrative hassle , which have prevented the public from being able to see clearly what Europe is doing .
Stay focused , therefore , on what you have presented .
What we must destroy is this Europe which lives by means of paper , by means of an image which does not correspond to what the citizens effectively want .
I would like to wish you good luck , because we know full well how demanding your political task is .
I shall now come back to three points .
The Laeken Declaration must , without question , give more weight , credibility and depth to our diplomatic approach .
It is clearly important to transform the current mechanism for international relations in order to gain the means to enable us to intervene , as you have said , in Africa and in other countries , as well as in Maghreb and in events that currently unfolding , particularly in Algeria .
We need a stronger diplomatic mechanism .

Secondly , as regards the power issue within the European Union itself , do what you have said you would ; set a challenge for the debate to clarify the responsibilities of each of the institutions and , possibly , to extend the co-decision procedure in Parliament .
My third and final point is that , with reference to the lack of clarity for citizens , I believe that it will be essential to dare to bring up the problem of the European constitution .
The people of Europe have to know who wants and who does not want this European constitution , and , finally , after Laeken , the process must be more definite .
I wish you good luck and I hope that at the end of the presidency , you will have been able to make progress on most of the points that you highlighted in the presentation on this presidency .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you can obviously count on this Parliament being predisposed in your favour .
That of course has to do with your high ambitions , which correspond with our own and also with the great disappointments that we as parliamentarians were forced to endure at Nice and during various presidencies .
But , as you know , the higher you climb , the further you have to fall .
It will count more heavily against you in this Parliament if you fail , than against those of whom less was expected .
There is already a first : regional ministers will also operate during your Presidency of the Council .
And I am speaking here as chair of the European Free Alliance to tell you that the regions are counting on you to ensure that , during this Presidency , their request to be directly involved in the discussions on the future of Europe will be granted .
Our wish is that the role of the European constitutional regions should be strengthened in the Union .
At the same time , we want a federal Europe that is better equipped for its core tasks , such as foreign and security policy .
Is it not appalling that , so close to enlargement of the Union to include five hundred million people and over twenty Member States , we do not yet even have a coherent European migration and asylum policy although , every day , traffickers in human beings dump desperate people on our coasts and allow them to drown ?
A safe and just area , able to remove people ' s fear of enlargement , is one of your priorities .
The battle against illegal trading in arms , drugs and human beings must be vigorously engaged in , as must the battle against fraud .
Of course , I have a number of other wishes , but I shall be able to make them known to you on other occasions .
I wish you every success .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to give my sincere and heartfelt thanks to Mr Verhofstadt for presenting the work programme of the Belgian presidency .
Unlike Mrs Thyssen , I believe that Mr Verhofstadt is showing us the way .
He has made some revolutionary proposals , and I am slightly saddened , Mr Poettering , that you and many others have not picked up on this .
Mr Verhofstadt is proposing nothing less than saving the Commission , because the election of President of the Commission by universal suffrage is the only way to save the Commission , since we know that the European Union will perish without it .
Therefore , I would say to the dead souls of bureaucracy , who would prefer to choose a president using fundamentally obscure parliamentary manoeuvres , that those who are not on this wavelength must strongly support Mr Verhofstadt ' s idea and proposals .
I hope that we too will be allies of the Belgian presidency and the Belgian presidency not just an ally of the European Parliament .
There is , of course , no doubt about the main message of Mr Verhofstadt ' s statement , of which we were also aware in advance : the integration process is to be consolidated , where that fine up-beat word ' integration ' means more power to the EU institutions and a corresponding weakening of the national democracies .
This is something of which the President-in-Office of the Council and , for that matter , the combined EU machine is very well aware , and they betray the fact when they talk about the distance between the EU and its people .
This is described as a democratic deficit , and it is said that people must reconcile themselves with the EU ' s institutions .
What , then , is to be done about something that is undeniably , of course , a fundamental democratic problem ?
What is to be done when , time after time , the people vote against integration on those notably exceptional occasions when they are asked ?
Is the voice of the people being listened to ?
No , it is not .
Instead , a complaint is voiced , most recently to the effect that the Irish people had voted wrongly , and it is also pointed out that there were not a great many people who voted and that those who did must have thought they were voting on something else .
What is more , the vote was about the same as at the elections to the European Parliament .
And so the integration and ratification process in connection with the Treaty of Nice is continued with as if nothing had happened .
However , rhetoric is not enough , as the President-in-Office of the Council so commendably said .
Ignoring a people ' s clear statement about the integration process is not democracy , but autocracy .
Autocracy must have a democratic façade , however , and the very telling words of the President-in-Office of the Council are designed to reconcile the people to the EU ' s institutions .
The Benelux Declaration of 21 June is a frightening example of this process .
It is a so-called structured debate .
Whether it be called a forum , a convention or whatever , what essentially it is about is excluding one side : the crucial side of the agenda .
The historical model to return to in this case is the Supreme Soviet ' s democracy arrangements .
It is a parody of democracy : government by the people , but without the people .
You say that more than rhetoric is needed here , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
I agree , and that ' more ' is to ask the question , ' Is integration the solution or the problem ? '
Mr President , whether the presidency ' s chosen epitheton ornans is achieved - and it is an ambitious aim - is something which we will only be able to assess at the end of the year .
In any case , the programme which has been presented today indicates as much .
I am particularly pleased that the issues surrounding the future of Europe play an important role in this programme .
Allow me , in this connection , to make two comments .
Firstly , I think that we cannot simply ignore the Irish referendum and proceed with our agenda without harming the European Idea .
Secondly , I am convinced that if the intergovernmental conference were brought forward to 2003 , as the European Parliament has proposed , this would be seen as an attempt to escape the people ' s vote .
The result would be a further fall in turnout at the elections .
I particularly welcome the fact therefore that the report on priorities will still be produced in 2004 , hopefully after the elections .
I should like to recall one further point : it should come as no surprise to the Belgian presidency , of all presidencies , if it is forced to realise when implementing its ambitious programme that , because the sanctions are still ringing in their ear of solidarity , the Austrian people have become rather hard of hearing .
I would like to focus on one of the central ideas of the Belgian presidency , according to what has been said this morning .
I believe we can all agree on the following consideration : the free movement of people , goods and capital which we enjoy in the European Union has also given rise to the free movement of criminals within our borders but , nevertheless , since there is no free movement of police or judicial decisions , we are running the risk of creating an area of impunity within Europe .
Furthermore , we must recognise that the progress made since Tampere in the development of the third pillar has not responded to the ambitions drawn up there .
In Laeken , within the planned assessment of the degree of compliance with the European Commission ' s scoreboard for the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice , the Heads of Government are being offered an excellent opportunity to provide a political impulse for this process .
I would therefore ask Mr Verhofstadt to decide to favour a political declaration of this nature , which would inject new dynamism into the process started at Tampere .
This means creating more efficient instruments for combating terrorism , such as the European arrest order .
The European Union , Mr President , is an area with harmonisable judicial systems in the field of judicial guarantees and respect for human rights , and we must therefore ' communitise ' the fight against organised crime .
Mr President , I very much welcome the programme and priorities of the Belgian presidency in the employment and social field .
It is a programme essentially about the modernisation , but also about the renewal and reinforcement of the European social model , and as such it obviously strikes a positive cord with the Socialist Group in this house .
One key element of that programme will be the work you will do to set out clearly the social goals we need to achieve in the reform of our pension systems .
That , rather than a concentration on the concerns of the financial institutions , should be our proper starting point .
Your work should also fit well with the communication announced in Parliament by Commissioner Diamantopoulou yesterday .
In that broader field , you will be putting in place the most important building blocks for an open coordination for social protection , and we wish you well , although I was disappointed not to hear specific reference to social exclusion in that context .
Three specific points in the employment and labour market area : first , in relation to quality of work , it would be very useful if you could work with us in Parliament to incorporate amendments on quality indicators into the employment guidelines for 2002 to jump-start the Commission ' s communication on that subject .
Second , also in relation to quality , I hope you will apply some pressure to the Commission to speed up its preparation and launching of a new strategy on health and safety .
The delay is unacceptable .
Finally , I know that you will work with us to adopt , as quickly as possible , the general framework on information and consultation and the company statute .
But I also hope again that you will apply pressure to the Commission to speed up its work on the revision of the European Works ' Council Directive .
That too is a very important ingredient and there is no good reason for its delay until the end of this year or the beginning of next .
Ladies and gentlemen , Prime Minister , after what you have said I am satisfied that the great , but also difficult , debate on the future of the Union is in good hands with you .
So , open that door as wide as possible in Laeken so that we can have a thorough debate .
And , as a Fleming , I should like to ask you to ensure that , in this debate , the regions are finally able to play a role in the Union .
As you quite rightly said , a radical intervention is necessary to make it clear to people how important the Union can be for them .
But more is required than that .
The Union must also work through , and carry to a conclusion , the decisions that it has taken and is still taking .
And you have already mentioned a number of things . As a Liberal , I should like to stress a few more : the Tampere Summit , the rights and duties of the citizen and security .
I am glad that you have said that it is high time that some impact was felt . That Tampere Summit is almost two years old .
The Lisbon Summit was about achieving the most competitive and efficient economy in the world . It was a very liberal declaration , but the fire has gone out of it .
I am glad that there are a few important liberalising issues on the table and that you have said that , during this Presidency , a few must be solved .
The Gothenburg Summit of a few weeks ago was about sustainability , including the decision to comply with Kyoto .
Therefore , the Commission must table a proposal as soon as possible on the trading of emission rights and , under your Presidency , something must be done as soon as possible with that proposal so that we can apply Kyoto in an economically feasible manner .
That is of huge importance to the European economy , and certainly to the Flemish economy .
The Feira Summit is my last example .
At that summit , already over a year ago , a charter for small and medium-sized businesses was approved .
The Union has had a policy on small and medium-sized businesses for such a long time , but the benefits of the Union sometimes seem very far off , especially for small businesses .
People find it all too complicated , so give concrete form to a few of those provisions of the charter for small and medium-sized businesses .
And if you implement a number of decisions where security , competition policy , small and medium-sized business policy and the environment are concerned , , you will increase the impact of Europe on people and we shall be able to say at the end of the year , as in the TV commercial : " a little pride can do no harm " .
Mr President , we are aware of your interest in businesses , and particularly the role they play in society in each of our Member States .
A genuine policy of cooperation for businesses is even more essential due to the fact that economic growth is slowing down , the number of people out of work in our societies is still too high and because of regional planning , especially in our rural areas .
What became of all our good intentions and the objectives that were laid down in Lisbon in March 2000 to make Europe the most competitive and dynamic area in the world - or those set at Feira last year , where the Council adopted the European Charter for Small Enterprises ?
This charter has gone unheeded .
No appropriations have been set aside and no practical measures have been planned .
Mr President , what decisions are you going to take in order to draw up a work programme for the practical implementation of the ten policy guidelines laid down in this charter ?
Furthermore , the Sixth Framework Programme on Research and Development , which will be voted on during your presidency , is in the process of being drafted .
What place will you grant to businesses ?
What are your proposals to enable every business to gain access to the consumer society , regardless of its size and business sector ?
I am thinking in particular of all small enterprises and traditional businesses .
Mr President , thank you for the warm reception .
Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Belgian presidency comes at a time when the European Union is at a crucial crossroads .
Rarely , in my opinion , has a presidency taken office in such a difficult situation , where there are nevertheless so many opportunities on offer .
This is the presidency which must shape the future face of Europe : it must steer the post-Nice process , which will have to be concluded in Laeken , and at the same time it must also set the necessary preparations for the enlargement of the European Union in train .
A link must also be established between the two .
This means that an important point is being made to President Prodi , namely that following the Irish referendum we need to keep a further option open and consider how enlargement can be achieved without Nice , and without enlargement being delayed as a result .
This must remain an option so that we do not put the accession countries into a state of uncertainty .
I am delighted , Mr President-in-Office , with your proposal for a convention , or whatever you would like to call it , because this paves the way - and I am sure that you will make this a reality in Laeken - for the European Union to find a new method of working which will take us away from the routine of intergovernmental conferences hitherto .
This convention will move the preparations for the intergovernmental conference onto a political level , and this will allow us to seek solutions and a means of having a treaty which the public understand , a treaty in which the division of responsibilities is clear to the public , so that the drawbacks and rewards which it has to offer can be articulated by the public and so that , above all , we have a Union of 27 Member States which is capable of making decisions .
I am also particularly pleased that you mentioned the Council in this context , which will have to be active as a legislator , as a second chamber , and - crucially - in public , so that in this way we really can foster public involvement in the decision-making process .
At the same time , in the light of what is happening in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , it is important for this presidency that , where foreign , security and defence policy is concerned , we move away from the ' too little , too late ' and finally make the necessary decisions to ensure that we do not have to face military conflicts of this kind again .
Mr President , I feel I can say that the Parliamentary Committee on Constitutional Affairs firmly supports the statement which launched the Belgian presidency ' s term of office this morning , particularly one of the points you made , Mr Verhofstadt , to the effect that it is not enough to provide the citizens with tangible solutions to the tangible problems which affect them most .
Of course , the new developments in the Union ' s policies such as those you outlined will enable us to win back the citizens ' confidence in the European project , but the citizens also feel a strong need to be able to take part in the development stage of the Union ' s guidelines and decisions .
The democratic legitimacy of the Union is not an abstract question , of interest only to institutional affairs enthusiasts and experts ; moreover , enlargement on a large scale imposes the urgent need and provides the opportunity for a genuine renewal , both symbolic and institutional , of the European Union .
We therefore appreciate your clear , unequivocal commitment to producing a European Constitution .
In this regard , I would like to point out that , only yesterday , in Milan , the Italian President of the Republic , Mr Ciampi , made a speech along precisely those lines .
As regards the Convention , Mr Verhofstadt , as you know , the dispute over the name is not meaningless .
Those who insist on the term ' forum ' have something different in mind from what you said .
We support the line you have taken and we are confident that Laeken will opt for the Convention .
Mr President , the Belgian presidency ' s ambitious programme for this presidency gives us hope that it is possible to combine tangible , solid steps on the way to an even more successful future for Europe with vision .
You see , I actually believe that the public not only expect practical solutions , but also want to know where we are heading in the European Union .
This will also become apparent in the case of economic policy .
Here too , Mr President-in-Office , we need more democracy and transparency , and I would be pleased if the Belgian presidency were also to take on board the proposals which the European Parliament has already developed .
It is in economic policy in particular that we see that , on the basis of the Lisbon and Stockholm conclusions , further progress needs to be made so that we can also actually bring about growth based on effective employment .
At a time when one negative prognosis about the development of the European Union follows hot on the heels of another , it is important for the Belgian presidency to try , with a steady hand , to set priorities so that we can actually successfully achieve our ambitious goal of bundling and coordinating policies in the fields of the economy , employment and social affairs .
There is still a lot of catching up to do here , and coordination must not only be a word ; it must also be reflected in the bundling of policies and in the creation of greater transparency so that steps of this kind are also taken in tandem across the Member States .
The same applies to fiscal policy , Mr President , because here we have unfair competition within the European Union .
I am counting on the Belgian presidency here .
In conclusion , I should like to make one further point : yours is a twofold presidency and you also have the task of leading the eurozone in the run-up to 1 January 2002 .
We all know that there is still a lack of information and a lack of acceptance .
I call on the Belgian presidency , together with its colleagues , to make the introduction of the euro really a top-level issue so that we not only have brochures being distributed but also confidence-building measures being initiated by your side , so that as the euro moves from being a virtual currency union to being a reality it is accompanied by confidence and credibility .
Mr President , the Belgian presidency ' s ambitions coincide with the ambitions of Parliament .
There is continuity in foreign and defence policy , in the implementation of the single currency and in sustainable development , but there is also insistence on the relationship between European integration , economic competitiveness and the social agenda .
We need to modernise the European social model , which is characterised by solidarity .
Nevertheless , the key issue concerns the relationship between enlargement and reform of the European institutions .
Enlargement must be a success for Europe .
The Laeken Summit must remove the intergovernmental uncertainties of Nice .
It is now a question of method and of political substance as well .
The response can only be provided by a Convention which in which , first and foremost , the national parliaments and the European Parliament participate as democratic representatives of the citizens .
In order to restore the citizens ' confidence in Europe , we must make the institutions of this Convention more transparent , more efficient and more democratic .
This is the point - it has even been said today - on which Council , Commission and Parliament all agree .
This is a challenge which is highlighted by globalisation , a challenge that we must tackle together as we work towards a European Constitution .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Belgium is Europe in miniature with all its advantages and disadvantages .
This experience is partly the key to the success of the Belgian presidency .
The Belgian work programme is ambitious , and it is also set against an extraordinary context in order to regain the trust of the citizens , in other words , with the introduction of the euro , a debate on the future of Europe and also a debate on enlargement .
If we wish to gain the trust of the citizen , however , I believe that , above all , it is essential to make Europe credible and to make our policies credible .
( DE ) Mr President , in this context I should like to highlight a specific problem , namely the typically European behaviour which we have observed in recent years and which consists of fighting for one ' s own country and for one ' s own region , even if this is at the expense of Europe ' s development , and then being astounded that the public have lost faith in Europe .
However , this analysis goes even further .
The end product of this - and this brings me to what the President of the Commission said - is a denial of solidarity , and we are only too aware of this .
Just as it is in Belgium , it is also an easy but very dangerous policy at European level to convince the rich to refuse to show solidarity with the poor .
I believe that today we need more courage to show solidarity , but the forthcoming enlargement means that we need even more courage .
Making Europe credible therefore also means answering the very simple questions posed by the public , which are part of your programme .
Why do we talk about a Europe without borders when in health , fiscal and social policy we still have borders , which even create competition ?
Why do we not simply say : we want enlargement towards the east , but no country is prepared to pay even one additional euro towards the cost of this .
There are numerous questions and I would say to the Belgian Prime Minister : in the language of figure skating , your compulsory programme is outstanding , but you will be judged on your free programme , and in these efforts to win over the public Parliament will be at your side .
( Applause )
Mr President , ambition is a practical joke played by the gods on mankind .
They give us ambitions so we believe we can climb the heights of Olympus and then they ensure that we never reach the top .
The programme of the Belgian presidency is ambitious .
It would be ambitious for a two-year presidency , but for one of 99 days , as the President-in-Office has pointed out , I fear that it is too ambitious .
I welcome , of course , his intention that the Union should listen to the people .
" We have to resolve the Irish question . "
How often have those words been uttered down the centuries ?
But Mr Verhofstadt has to lead the Council towards a resolution of the problem , posed by the failure of Nice and by the Irish referendum .
The democratic decision of the Irish people cannot be ignored or ridden roughshod over .
Democracy may be inconvenient , but it is all we have between freedom and tyranny .
Moreover , the Irish referendum and the concerns exposed in the demonstrations - even though they were hijacked by extremists - should be telling us something .
As the President-in-Office has said : they are telling us that Europe is not being listened to .
People all over the Union , and indeed in the global market all over the world , have lost their faith in the institutions of governance .
They are looking to us , their elected representatives , not for initiatives , but for reassurance .
Not for change piled upon change , but for stability .
Not for ambition , but , for that rarest of all human virtues - common sense .
If I may paraphrase the ancient Greek proverb for the President-in-Office : " Those whom the Gods wish to destroy , they first raise high . "
Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I appreciated Prime Minister Verhofstadt ' s call in his speech to make Europe not just a Europe of red tape but , first and foremost , a Europe of citizens .
However , it is not enough , ladies and gentlemen , to tell the Europeans that they are European citizens .
We need to make them feel like European citizens .
The euro is certainly an important step - and I agree with the line taken by President Prodi - but it is not enough .
Without substantial political support , the euro is likely to encounter difficulties , as it has in recent months , in relation to the dollar and other currencies .
This is why we cannot disregard the outcome of the Irish vote but must give it our utmost attention .
This is why we must involve the European citizens in a convincing rediscovery of our common cultural , historical and political identity through an incisive policy linked to the principle of subsidiarity . Therefore , what can be decided at a lower level - and here I agree with Prime Minister Verhofstadt - must be .
The European Union must not concern itself with too many things but must lay down the guidelines , the policy lines for genuine involvement of the people and parliaments in the process of unification and enlargement .
The Convention preparing the forthcoming IGC must therefore directly involve the representatives of the people , that is the representatives of this and the national parliaments .
Involving the people too in the reform of the institutions will give this European Union an increasingly significant political - and I stress , political as well as economic - role .
These , I feel , are the bases for achieving an enlargement which we strongly believe to be an irreversible , necessary step for the European Union : an enlargement in which my political grouping believes and which the government , which my political grouping supports in Italy , stressed both in its meeting with President Prodi and at the last Gothenburg meeting .
However , if we really want to achieve permanent enlargement , it is vital that we involve the citizens and their representatives more and more .
Mr President , the Belgian Presidency is an important link in the preparation for enlargement because , during this Presidency , the first steps will be taken towards the next IGC .
That will be the conference that represents the last chance before enlargement to modify the European institutions and decision making process .
Despite this , the wider context is difficult .
The Germany-France axis will be partly blocked by elections next year in both countries .
Public alarm in the face of enlargement is real .
When it comes to Europe , the courage of the present Member States is not very great , and time is short .
Against this background , Belgium must succeed in having a declaration approved at Laeken which must , at any rate , contain an improvement in the decision-making process and must increase democratic legitimacy .
I am consciously not talking here about much larger projects that are being launched and that are aimed at bringing about a real revolution in all the institutions .
I have my doubts about the political feasibility of these .
As far as the improvement of the decision-making process is concerned , two things are essential .
Firstly , the unanimity rule must be abolished , except for matters related to the institutions themselves and to the transfer of powers .
With twenty-seven or thirty Member States , you cannot continue to work with the unanimity rule .
In conjunction with this change , the co-decision procedure with Parliament must be expanded .
The one must be linked to the other .
Secondly , there is an absolute need to make Europe less complex .
The Treaty of Nice is scarcely comprehensible , let alone explainable .
A host of decisions , directives , regulations , orders , guidelines and recommendations cannot be understood without a dictionary or accompanying notes , and even then they pose problems .
The decisions from Gothenburg are still puzzling even after three readings and four translations .
This is true not only for ordinary people but also for extraordinary ones .
European seems to be becoming a twelfth language , with terms that , if they are not incomprehensible , have at least taken on a life of their own .
You must also already have been ' benchmarked ' , ' mainstreamed ' , etc .
The language of Europe has not become the language of Europeans .
On the contrary . In order to channel the involvement of the population productively , I believe that the Belgian Presidency should make a real project out of such involvement .
You should include this project among your priorities .
Euronews is financed by Europe .
If we want to know something about Europe , we follow CNN , not Euronews .
And you can say the same about many things that Europe does to inform the population .
Make it a project , Prime Minister !
Add this to your priorities and try to agree a relevant course of action with the countries of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you have announced an ambitious programme , Mr President-in-Office , and the ambition of your proposals is commensurate with the challenges which lie ahead .
That is why , at the end of this debate , I should like to express the wish that you will be equal to your own ambition and that you will enjoy success .
On behalf of the CDU / CSU Group in this Parliament , may you be an effective President-in-Office of the Council .
You will need our support and you will also have it .
You rightly said at the beginning that you want to reconcile the public with Europe .
This has been expressed in various different ways .
The reasons for the loss of confidence in Europe , which before was hidden beneath the surface but which , since the referendum in Ireland , is now there for all to see , are many and diverse ; they have been mentioned .
In passing , however , it should be stated that a further factor in this was the way in which the powerful members of the Council for example dealt with a country like Austria .
Perhaps your foreign minister will have the opportunity to repair some of the damage which has been done to Austria ' s faith in Europe .
The method adopted hitherto in intergovernmental conferences has had its day because decisions of consequence - such as those made when treaties are amended - must no longer be made in Council back rooms in the dead of night ; instead beforehand we need a phase of public consultation .
That is why we are calling for an assembly , similar to a convention , to be set up which will organise a public dialogue in Europe before decisions are made in the Council .
To achieve this we need , above all , your support .
Mr President-in-Office , it would be a first and very specific step forward - and would also send out a signal to the Irish - if the intergovernmental conference were to be opened up and made more transparent .
In taking a step of this kind , we would also be justified in going before the Irish for a second time and tabling the treaty for a vote .
This is what you will be judged on , and we wish you every success for your work in the interests of Europe .
Mr President , first and foremost I should like to thank the various speakers and especially the group chairmen .
I should also like to thank the President of the Commission , Romano Prodi , for his words .
I should like to make a total of four marginal comments on the various declarations .
First and foremost , I should like to comment on the outcome of the Irish referendum and on the suggestions that the Irish referendum be seized upon to argue that , in fact , we need less of a European input .
That should , apparently , be the result of this Irish referendum , at least if we were to take it into account .
Well , I find that a reductionist view .
There is certainly a democratic deficit in Europe , but you do not solve that deficit by having less of a European input , but by creating more democracy in Europe .
I believe that such an attitude is certainly not an arrogant one .
I have always , including at the meeting of the Council in Gothenburg , argued that we must not adopt an arrogant attitude to Irish voters by saying ' there is no problem , we shall not bother about the referendum and will simply continue as if there is nothing wrong ' .
No , we must take that ' no ' vote seriously and take it on board in our reflections .
The problem must be tackled .
However , it is an unacceptable solution to draw the conclusion from the Irish ' no ' vote that we must simply again take the European Union into reverse .
My second marginal comment concerns the convention .
I agree with the various speakers that the governments must also be represented there at a high level , because it would be a mistake to exclude the governments and only to have them represented at a low level , resulting in a possible incompatibility between the outcome of the convention and that of the intergovernmental conference which , in the normal course of things , will be organised in 2004 .
In addition , I believe that we must ensure that the constitutional regions are involved in the whole process .
( FR ) The third comment that I would like to make , Mr President , concerns the European constitution .
I believe that we should also emphasise the positive aspects during this debate .
Some years ago , when we were discussing a European constitution , this was an idea that seemed impossible to achieve .
Today , I notice that , in speeches that have been made in the last two years , every European policy leader has taken up a position in favour of a European constitution .
I believe therefore that , as expressed in the Laeken Declaration , this is an idea that is possible to achieve .
( NL ) Fourthly , I should like to make a comment on the Treaty of Nice .
Like the President of the Commission , I feel that it is absolutely vital that this Treaty is ratified .
No one need explain the weak points of the Treaty of Nice to me .
For four days we discussed and debated them constantly until four in the morning .
However , I believe that the advantages outweigh the disadvantages .
The advantage is that enlargement of the Union can finally take place , an enlargement that is more than just an enlargement .
It is a change that will finally bring about European unity .
It is therefore vital to ratify this Treaty quickly .
Finally , not one but several speakers wondered if all this were not too ambitious , warning that it is mainly deeds that matter .
Let me make it clear at the outset that I have no intention of playing Icarus , since that is one of the allusions that have just been made .
I believe that it is time that significant plans for reform were put on the table .
Anyone predicting ten years ago that we would have a single European currency , was in fact called an idealist .
The same applied to the introduction of the internal market , when the idea was floated twenty years ago .
I have no desire to play Icarus , but my motto is that of the first President of the European Commission , Mr Hallstein , who said , " Anyone who does not believe in miracles in European matters is not a realist " .
That strikes me as better advice .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Verhofstadt .
I wish the presidency and Belgium every success .
The debate is closed .
Situation in FYROM
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since its inception , the European Union has followed developments in the crisis in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia with a great deal of attention and concern .
The EU has also played a very active role in finding a peaceful solution to this conflict .
Since April , Javier Solana , the High Representative for the CFSP , has visited Macedonia on several occasions and has met the political authorities and representatives of the country ' s main ethnic groups in Skopje and other areas , in order to gain some understanding of the situation and to encourage a peaceful solution to the crisis .

In April , a European Union ministerial troika , made up of Mrs Lindh , Mr Patten and Mrs Neyts also visited Skopje and , on 10 April 2001 , the European Union and FYROM signed a stabilisation and association agreement in Luxembourg , which is the first agreement of this kind between the European Union and one of the Balkan nations .
The conclusion of this agreement helps to give the Union a vital and indispensable role in seeking an outcome to the crisis .
Furthermore , it has also given us an instrument with which we can put pressure on the parties in FYROM .
Since the first outbreaks of violence , the European Union has strongly condemned the violent acts committed by ethnic-Albanian extremists and urged them to bring an immediate end to this action , to lay down their arms and to retreat .
On the other hand , the Union made a firm request to the authorities in Skopje to adopt a measured military response to the rebel provocation and highlighted the need to pursue interethnic dialogue with a view to achieving the reforms that are urgent and necessary to resolving this conflict , particularly reforms relating to the law and to the protection of minorities .
This should also help to isolate the extremist groups , by providing the people involved with a clear prospect for hope .
In this spirit , the European Union and Mr Solana , the High Representative , welcomed the agreement of 11 May to form a broad coalition government , which includes the democratically elected leaders of the major Slav and Albanian political parties .
The EU urged them to step up their efforts to swiftly bring about practical and substantial results on the main issues currently under discussion .
At the Gothenburg European Council , the Heads of State and Government of the European Union reasserted the need to find a peaceful solution to the crisis .
In terms , this involves launching a genuine political dialogue within the coalition of governments on all the questions under discussion , including constitutional reforms .
The European Council urged the local political forces to come up with results as quickly as possible .
Their deadline was the meeting of the General Affairs Council on 27 June 2001 .
With regard to the security situation , the European Council has very strongly condemned the extremists and the use of violence .
The Council stressed the importance of establishing a lasting cease-fire agreed by the parties , which might require some direct or indirect contact between them .
The European Union and NATO may have a role to play in this as an intermediary or facilitator .
The disarmament plan proposed by President Trajkovski is the other pillar of the security situation .
The plan gives a central role in this process to NATO , since the parties consider that the presence on the ground of NATO and of European Union observers is essential to providing the necessary element of trust .
NATO has already adopted the necessary measures to enable it to act .
This intervention with a view to disarming the ethnic-Albanian rebels is , however , subject to specific security conditions which the parties concerned have not yet fulfilled .
The essential elements of this are concluding a lasting cease-fire on the basis of a political agreement which seeks to bring about a negotiated solution to the crisis .
We must point out that , since the beginning of the crisis , the European Union has closely coordinated its actions with NATO on this matter , by holding joint , regular and frequent meetings between the Atlantic Council and the Political and Security Committee , by regular liaison between various Secretariats , and by direct contact between Mr Solana and the NATO Secretary-General , Lord Robertson .
Both Mr Solana and Lord Robertson have also made joint visits to FYROM , during which a consistent and unequivocal message was conveyed to both parties on behalf of the international community .
In order to ensure that the European Union has permanent political representation in Skopje , the Gothenburg European Council agreed to appoint a special EU representative to work to FYROM , and , on 25 June , the General Affairs Council appointed François Léotard , the former French Minister for Defence , to this position . Mr Léotard has been in Skopje since Thursday 28 June .
Mr Léotard ' s mandate is , first of all , to establish and maintain contacts with the government of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the parties involved in the political process .
His mandate also requires Mr Léotard to offer advice and support from the European Union for the current dialogue , to closely liaise with the representative of the presidency and the Commission in Macedonia , with the heads of the Member States ' missions and also with European observers .
Mr Léotard must also establish and maintain contact with the other relevant international and regional players , including NATO , the OSCE and the United Nations , in order , of course , to ensure the necessary cooperation .
Lastly , Mr Léotard must assist , if necessary , in implementing possible agreements and to closely monitor all developments and initiatives concerning the security situation , in conjunction with the appropriate bodies .
The path that the Belgian presidency should follow has , therefore , been clearly mapped out by the decisions and the approach taken by the European Union over recent months , by the use of the instruments I have mentioned , by Mr Solana ' s considerable commitment , and by Mr Léotard ' s work on the ground .
The European Union is demonstrating its active commitment to resolving this crisis .
We are also working together with other actors , particularly the US envoy , Mr Pardew , and with the international organisations in Macedonia , in order to help to make rapid and tangible progress .
At this stage , the new presidency has to be consistent and be determined in pursuing and encouraging political dialogue in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
We must welcome the agreement that was reached last night , under the auspices of President Trajkovski , to resume political dialogue between the political parties of FYROM .
As a result of this agreement , intensive meetings will be held over the coming days .
Particular emphasis will be placed on constitutional matters , as a follow-up to Mr Badinter ' s recent visit to Macedonia .
At the same time , and in close cooperation with NATO , the dialogue on the security situation will be pursued with equal determination , since these two aspects of the crisis are intrinsically linked and progress on both points should be made in parallel .
Mr President , the situation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia remains , as the minister has just said , a matter of intense concern to all of us .
In the three months since I last discussed this matter with honourable Members , there has been a steady deterioration in the security situation , a growing polarisation of political opinion and an exponential rise in the number of refugees and internally displaced persons .
The violence in front of the Parliament in Skopje just over a week ago , without exaggeration , brought matters to the very brink of the abyss .
It is welcome that in the last week there has not been a further serious deterioration in the security situation , and it is welcome , as Minister Michel has just said , that the political dialogue pioneered by President Trajkovski has been resumed .
I want to pay tribute to the President ' s efforts , I want to pay tribute to the President ' s calm decency in the face of this crisis .
As honourable Members will know , the European Union has been intensively involved , from the outset , in efforts to contain and extinguish this conflict .
All of us who have some responsibility for this region are acutely conscious of the danger that a descent into civil war in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia would pose , not just for the community there , that would be bad enough , but for the region as a whole .
Working with NATO , working with the OSCE , working with the United States , we will leave no stone unturned in the search for an end to this conflict and an agreed way forward based on dialogue and political settlement .
One feature of this crisis , has been the very close cooperation between the relevant international organisations and bodies involved , not drawn from any manual or textbook , but because we know how vital it is that we tackle this problem in a united and coherent fashion .
We have not yet succeeded in bringing the conflict to an end , but we are absolutely clear that it is only by working together and working with the democratically elected government in Skopje that we will succeed in doing so .
The leading role on behalf of the European has , of course , rightly been taken by my friend and colleague , High Representative Javier Solana .
He has been to Skopje on countless occasions and I have accompanied him on a number of those visits as well as making visits on my own .
He has worked , and is working , tirelessly for a peaceful solution , ably supported on the ground in Skopje by the outgoing presidency ambassador , Mark Dickinson , and by the head of the commission delegation , José Pinto Texeira .
I want to pay a particularly warm tribute to him for his courage and steadfastness and wise advice .
A week ago , as the minister has said , the General Affairs Council appointed Mr Léotard as the European Union ' s resident envoy , in Skopje , under the authority of Mr Solana .

I met Mr Léotard last week and promised him the full support of the European Commission in his work .
We stand ready to do all we can , anywhere and at any time .
Mr Léotard is initially locating himself in the Commission ' s delegation office in Skopje .
As honourable Members know , in April the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia signed a stabilisation and association agreement with the European Union .
That agreement includes important commitments by the government in Skopje about respect for human rights , including the rights of minorities .
It is essential that those commitments should be honoured , and we all want to see early results in the inter-ethnic dialogue .
That is the only route to a lasting political solution .
The European Commission is providing very substantial support , EUR 42 million under CARDS in 2001 .
Much of it will specifically help with the implementation of projects which will assist the Albanian as well as the Macedonian Slav community .
For example , the EUR 5 million we have delivered for the South-East Europe Albanian language university at Tetovo , funds for the census and funds for local government reform and the implementation of small-scale local infrastructure projects , which make a visible difference to people ' s lives and communities .
We have made it very clear , and I want to repeat this point today , that we will be ready to come forward with substantial assistance for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia as soon as a political agreement is reached between the parties .
I hope that all involved will regard that as a serious incentive to work intensively and constructively with Mr Léotard and Mr Pardew , the United States representative , in the coming days .
Let it also be an incentive to extend the cease-fire and to halt the military activities on both sides which are costing so much politically , financially and in human lives .
I just want to underline this point .
This Parliament would not take kindly to proposals from the Commission , or from anyone , to spend more money supporting reconstruction and development , supporting the budget in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , if at the same time money was being spent , which frankly no one really has , on more bombs and more rockets , and if there was not a clear prospect of a political settlement and continuing cease-fire .
When the foreign minister of FYROM reports to the Political and Security Committee of the Council in Brussels on Friday , she will be in a position to speak about substantial progress , because the alternative is frankly too awful to contemplate .
It is not too late to avoid catastrophe , but it requires the courage of every citizen of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to pull back from the brink .
It requires those with influence in Kosovo over the rebels to pull them back from the brink and it requires the continued stand for moderation exemplified by the government in Tirana to whom I pay unreserved tribute for their contribution .
There cannot be a solely military solution .
There has to be a political settlement and it cannot come soon enough .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , we welcome Mr Léotard ' s appointment and also Mr Badinter ' s intervention in the situation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
I believe that , in them , we have two representatives of the European Community who are in a position to do good there .
Like Commissioner Patten , however , I should not like it to be forgotten that the EU Delegation on the spot has already been doing beneficial work for years and has constantly intervened .
We need a permanent presence on the ground , not because we want a protectorate of some kind but because we want to demonstrate our interest in preserving the state of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
They need a mediator and I think that we have now identified him .
However , I do not believe that we can disregard the fact that it might also be good for NATO to be seen to have a presence in Macedonia as a preventive measure .
Neither does the fact that we now make our financial assistance conditional on there being a clear desire for peace on the ground mean that we are interfering in domestic matters , as this is described in the region .
After all , we cannot indefinitely spend our taxpayers ' money in a country in which the desire for peace is not underpinned by joint initiatives to create that peace .
We cannot , for example , build roads and infrastructure while government troops and rebels are buying weapons .
I underline the fact that it was the KLA that brought conflict into the country ; there is no doubt about that .
Nevertheless , the government must not now give in to the KLA ' s demands so as to avoid civil war ; instead it must take account of the long-standing demands of the elected Albanians in Macedonia and seek solutions with them .
In my opinion , however , the solution cannot be to divide the country along ethnic lines .
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia belongs to all of its citizens and this must also be enshrined in the constitution .
A right of veto , however well-meant , cannot be awarded to any section of the population ; this causes division .
The president of the country is the president of all the people of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , and an Albanian vice-president with a right of veto would therefore be an unreasonable demand from the Albanian side .
It must be possible for all citizens to use their mother tongue .
The long-standing plan to decentralise power and strengthen the cities and local authorities must finally be executed .
But decentralisation of the army and the police , which the Albanians are now calling for , cannot reinforce the country ' s cohesion , quite the opposite .
The desire for peace must be underpinned by moderate and justified demands .
The European Union must foster reform and reconciliation in its vicinity , which means that we cannot stand idly by and watch while a civil war looms in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
The KLA rebels were taken from Skopje to northern Macedonia with their weapons on air-conditioned buses .
Can you imagine what kind of an image this gave of our involvement in the country ?
It did us serious damage and it falsely portrayed us as supporters of the Albanians .
Macedonia makes it all too obvious to us that we finally need to force ourselves to develop an overall policy for the Balkans , because it is only as part of a joint strategy with Kosovo that it will be possible to resolve this problem .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , our Group abides by its clear position .
The constitution and also the reality of societal relations in Macedonia or FYROM must be brought into line with the needs of a modern multi-ethnic society .
In this process , citizens ' individual rights should be to the fore and collective , ethnic rights should only be enshrined to the extent that it is absolutely necessary ; this is also why there should be no right of veto for an Albanian vice-president , for example .
Above all , these matters must be addressed in a democratic context and by democratic means .
In the case of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , a democratic state , violence is not necessary ; it is unjustifiable , even damaging , above all to the reputation of the Albanian people themselves whose rights we represent with great conviction .
If this is clear and obvious to the Council and the Commission , then admittedly this raises a number of questions .
Mr President-in-Office , this Parliament has a right to be given answers to several questions .
Firstly , how was it possible for a representative of the EU , François Léotard , to be appointed , who , in his very first statements , has already contradicted these principles and has put the terrorists on the same footing as the government ?
Was Mr Léotard not informed of the Council ' s agreed position ?
Secondly , the KLA was allegedly disarmed in Kosovo .
Where are the weapons coming from now then ?
After all , we are not just talking about a few Kalashnikovs which can be bought on the market anywhere .
Does America or do certain groups of Americans have an interest in supplying arms ?
Thirdly , the terrorists were able to withdraw from Macedonia with their weapons .
Should someone not have noticed where these weapons came from ?
Fourthly , how is the proposed disarmament process supposed to work if the weapons have already been taken out of Macedonia ?
Is it intended that it should be just as successful as it was in Kosovo ?
These are a few questions , and I have to make the critical comment that the reality of the situation is being addressed here , whether consciously or not , with some naivety ; I am talking about the reality of a small extremist group , which to all appearances is being financed by the Albanian diaspora , which was not prepared to fund the university in Tetovo but which has paid for arms in association with other organisations , some of which are criminal .
The Albanian population and their representatives must have the greatest interest in these small extremist groups no longer being able to go about their business .
The Council and the Commission must do their bit to achieve this .
Making changes within the states by force and changing the borders by force is something which we reject out of hand .
It is the elected representatives of the governments and , in the parliament , the representatives of the Albanian and Slav-Macedonian sides which need our support , our advice and our ideas .
We must make it absolutely clear to the violent groups that we reject them .
If the Commissioner thought that we did not want to spend any money on arms , then he was right .
But we certainly do not want to spend money on weapons which extremist groups use to plunge democracies into a state of unrest .
Mr President , we in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party are clearly working on a joint position which we will vote on at noon , in order to condemn violence and support dialogue , but also so that the short-term efforts , such as the appointment of a mediator and the support for the Traikovski plan , should be immediate measures .
It is also important that the medium-term efforts and the Union ' s responsibility in this area - the association agreement is clearly an important factor - make positive progress .
I would like to devote my speech to two additional aspects of what is happening in the FYROM and which clearly affect the European Union .
The first is that there have rarely been such difficult tests of the European Union ' s external image as the successive crises in the Balkans , and that is still the case .
Although there has been a substantial improvement since the appointment of the High Representative , Mr Solana , due to his management and his cooperation with Commissioner Patten and the Council , it is clear that all our will and our effort must be aimed at making our action more effective and saving our political prestige , since , for the image of the Union - and this has been made clear today by President Verhofstadt and Mr Patten and Mr Michel - a lot is at stake .


Another important effect for the European Union - which has not been mentioned and is indirect , but very important - is its repercussions for the enlargement process .
Although by chance , it happens that the countries directly neighbouring the FYROM - Bulgaria and Rumania - are the countries which have the greatest difficulty in achieving the sufficient economic development with a view to enlargement and the negotiation .
I believe that this proximity has a negative effect on the conflict in many respects - not only economic - and a very direct effect on the process of direct investment in these countries .
I believe that our intervention , or that of our countries , should take good account of this , because countries such as Bulgaria , for example , have made a very positive contribution to stability in the area .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , let me begin by praising the efforts of the European Union , the Council and the Commission up to now .
We have spoken with one voice , unlike on other occasions when we debated the Balkans , and a powerful moderating influence was quite rightly exercised upon the use of violence , with the emphasis placed on finding a political solution .
Nevertheless , I have two concerns .
One of them relates to the link between EU aid and the parties ' playing a constructive role .
This is a very tricky business .
Of course , aid is not automatic .
But - and this is a question to the Commission - do we withdraw our aid to the Albanian Language University in Tetovo if we do not like the attitude of the Albanian parties in the government , or do we halt the construction of small-scale infrastructure if we do not like the compromises of the Macedonian parties ?
I would be very careful about this .
I am in favour of exercising pressure , I am in favour of the involvement of the EU , but I am against vague threats .
My concrete question to the Commission is therefore about whether that link applies to the new aid , as seems to be implied in the words of the Commissioner , or whether it also applies to existing aid .
In other words , will there be a moment at which the European Commission says to the parties , ' we do not like your attitude , and so we are discontinuing all aid or part of the aid ' ?
My second concern relates to the reaching of an agreement .
It has been said that military involvement will only come when there is an agreement within the government and an agreement with the rebels , and it is with this last point that , in my view , the problem lies .
That is because the special representative , Mr Léotard , whom Mr Swoboda has already said , even before he was on the scene , that it would be necessary to negotiate with the rebels .
The world was too small .
Mr Léotard was almost not allowed into Macedonia .
But if the government refuses to negotiate with the rebels , who will negotiate with them ?
Is the Commission involved behind the scenes , or has it been party to negotiations ?
Is the Council involved ?
Someone will have to make the link between the governmental agreement and the rebels .
I have no sympathy at all for the rebels and believe they should put an end to their violence but , whether we like it or not , an agreement which does not include an agreement with the rebels is not worthy of the name .
The governmental agreement therefore needs to be linked to an agreement with the rebels .
My question to the Council and the Commission is : who is prepared to make that link ?
Mr President , I should like to assure you that our group is overwhelmingly in favour of the unity and democratisation of the FYROM and , more importantly , in favour of safeguarding rights for everyone living there , for all its citizens .
We have said as much on previous occasions , but they appear not to trust us .
And I wonder why the people living in this area do not trust the European Union .
My fellow members have cited several examples : KLA weapons , extremists being transported by air-conditioned bus under NATO escort so that they can continue to wage war in other areas , the declaration made by Mr Leotard - was that a faux pas or a calculated declaration ?
And now we hear you , Mr President-in-Office , calling for a minimum of contact - that is what I heard - with the extremists so as to find a political solution .
Are these not the people whom Mr Robertson was calling criminals just a few days ago ?
How come we have lost Mr Robertson ?
We have heard you quoting Mr Badinter .
What are Mr Badinter ' s views ?
If I remember correctly from what I have read in the papers , Mr Badinter said no to a state of two separate ethnic groups .
Do you support that ?
We have heard Mr Patten say no to more money unless there is a political settlement .
In other words , we are depending on the political will of the extremists .
There is no symmetry between the two sides .
More is the pity .
For reasons which they know best , they do not want the European Union or NATO to get involved in supporting the legitimate government and they are telling them : " sort it out amongst yourselves " .
There is no symmetry .
I was in Skopje and I had discussions not with the extremists but with the official Albanian parties there and they told me they do not want majority voting on major issues .
Whether or not this veto will be exercised by a vice-president or whether the constitution will make provision for some other procedure for this is irrelevant .
If we move in this direction , we are moving towards the dissolution of the state .
We therefore need more stable , more serious , more reliable support from the European Union for the unity and democratisation - and they go hand in hand - of this country . Otherwise we shall fail yet again in our policy in the Balkans .
It will not be the first time !
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner Patten , I should firstly like to express my satisfaction and also congratulate the High Representative of the CFSP and Commissioner Patten , because I think that in our attempts to resolve this conflict we are actually revealing the form which our CFSP will take .
Commissioner Patten spoke of the responsibility which we have in the region .
Commissioner , I should like to go a step further and say what mistakes have been made .
In this specific case there are two things which , in my view , have not happened and which are nevertheless contained in Resolution 1244 : firstly to disarm the KLA in Kosovo and secondly to disband the KLA in Kosovo .
Neither have been done .
Quite the opposite !
The KLA has been given organisational structures which it did not have before .
The sin also bears a name , because it was the Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General - Bernard Kouchner is his name - who failed to do this .
We need to state this openly here .
That is why it is not enough to offer our good services for conflict resolution ; we also have a duty to put right the mistakes which we have made .
I welcome the fact that NATO is on standby .
The disarmament of the KLA terrorists allows me to recognise them for what they are : terrorists and criminals and not rebels !
These KLA terrorists must be disarmed and NATO is offering to do this .
I wonder why we should now send an additional 3 000 soldiers there , under the conditions with which we are all familiar , when we could have disarmed these criminals and disbanded their organisations back in Kosovo .
Under no circumstances - and here I fully agree with Mrs Pack and the other speakers - must a long-term NATO presence engender the division of the country along ethnic lines and under no circumstances must NATO entrench that split by its presence and its willingness to help .
NATO must be deployed in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia with a very specific mission , namely disarmament .
Mr President , I think we should remember how the multiethnic Macedonian population coped with the conflict in Kosovo .
They received around a quarter of a million refugees , which is a very large number , considering how small a population we are talking about .
That is something we must not forget now that things are going so badly in Macedonia .
I also think that we must take note of the fact that the Albanian population in Albania is not participating in this conflict , presumably because they see a possibility that peace may give them a future .
They can see economic and democratic development .
There is a need for that development throughout this area .
I cannot refrain from reminding you how easy it was for the NATO countries and many EU Member States to find money at the time when the former Yugoslavia was to be bombed .
Where is the same will to find money now that there is a need for reconstruction and for economic and social development in the area ?
This is the core of the whole peace process .
It is about finding the means , for that is how the way is also found .
Mr President , it is particularly worrying to see armed conflict persisting in a country which borders my own country at a time when intensive negotiations are under way for the sole purpose of settling once and for all the differences which gave rise to the conflict in the first place .
Ethnic segregation , penning nations in after a war or uprising behind fortified borders which no-one considers definitive and which in turn become a new source of conflict is , unfortunately , the pattern which has been repeated throughout the history of this region in the Balkans .
And for centuries , ethnic cleansing has been the method used to impose these solutions .
What we see in our neighbouring country is a repetition of the time-honoured pattern . This time the main perpetrators are organised armed Albanian extremists taking advantage of what is often justified ethnic discontent on the part of their many , unarmed , fellow countrymen , as is always the case , in order to incite them to wage war on other ethnic groups .
The European Union was , historically speaking , the last factor to appear in the area , advocating certain principles which , if they really could have been imposed , would have released the area from the nightmare of its history .
But if modern European solutions are to apply , nations with different ethnic groups need to be persuaded to abandon segregation behind closed borders and agree to cohabit under one state roof .
This enlightened solution is currently being tested in two countries in the wider area : the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Cyprus .
The benefits to the people of a European type solution would be incalculable , but they presuppose abandoning armed violence as a method of forcing historical development and , on this point , the European Union has not excelled either in the case of Cyprus or in the case of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
It has not acted forcefully towards those engaged in violence or it has only done so unilaterally .
Violence will not be abandoned as the result of conferences , talks and visits , especially when international obligations are breached in the process , nor will it be abandoned by giving into the temptation of the old colonising forces and granting armed forces from any one ethnic group favoured status .
One gets the impression that ÍÁÔÏ is reacting as if the armed Albanians were going to turn into the region ' s Ghurkhas .
It was the responsibility of the forces which intervened in Kosovo to disarm the KLA . They failed to do so .
It was their responsibility to impose a security zone around Kosovo . They failed to do so or they did so unilaterally , against the Serbs , while allowing the KLA to come and go as it pleased .
It is a well-known fact that the KLA is backed by drug dealing and by contributions which originate in our countries .
According to one newspaper article , the US administration has frozen Albanian accounts which were funding the KLA .
Europe has done no such thing .
How can we expect armed violence to end , to lose its reputation in people ' s eyes , if we grant favoured status to armed forces such as those in Yugoslavia or 30-year occupying armies as in Cyprus ?
As long as we fail to act decisively where decisive action is required , it is hypocritical to say to nations clashing on the ground that they are responsible for the tragedies which befall them .
They are responsible , but we too are jointly responsible , Commissioner , for the recurring nightmare which is the history of the Balkans .
I understand that because of time , the President-in-Office is not answering .
For many groups there was serious concern about armaments in the Balkans and the non-disarmament there .
I hope that , even if the President-in-Office of the Council cannot answer now , he will take the concerns of all the groups very seriously and bring them before the Council of Ministers .
This is a permanent and not just a local problem .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall very quickly answer all the questions that have been raised .
First of all , the presidency will try to ensure that the European Union steps up its presence in the area .
In this respect , the Federal Republic of Macedonia gives us the chance to apply our overall objective to make the European Union ' s external action more visible and more effective .
Like you , we deplore the ethnic tension , which is affecting everyone including the government .
As for disarmament , this is currently taking place on a voluntary basis under NATO supervision .
However , as Mr Patten mentioned , priority should be given to trying to resume the political dialogue .
With regard to the effects of the crisis on enlargement , I would like to remind you of the process that has been launched in Zagreb to bring the Balkans round to the European way of thinking , in order to arrive at a negotiated agreement .
Mrs Lagendijk asked me the question to find out if contacts had been established and how they have been arranged .
I would say just this - in order to arrive at a negotiated agreement , all sorts of contacts are needed , as well as opportunities to establish contacts with rebel forces , and , Mrs Lagendijk , they are a matter for the judgment of those who are at the head of the negotiations .
Thank you for the answers you have given , Mr Michel .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the votes .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a suitable occasion to raise a topical point : we all have groups of visitors and we are glad to see large numbers of the general public in the EU coming to see us and , as is the case here , attending part-sessions .
We also know , however , that it is difficult to find a hotel for fifty visitors .
That is why the visitors have to make do with hotels which are not in Strasbourg but in the surrounding area .
Obviously we want to bring Europe closer to the people and foster personal discussions between the people in the Union and Members of Parliament .
This is achieved on the one hand through their visit to the European Parliament and , on the other hand , by the Member going to see the visitors in their hotel and talking to them there .
As Members we travel to Chile , to South Africa ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
I would like to consider this as a point of order , but , at this stage in the agenda , you only have one minute of speaking time .
VOTE
Madam President , in these circumstances , I must put to you a personal question .
But if you voted on this then I will not put the question .
Did you vote on this matter ?
No , Mr McMillan-Scott , I did not vote .
My actions were however in line with those of all the presidents before me , who always used the sensible rule of only voting in extremely exceptional circumstances , and not on problems that have divided Parliament to this extent .
Mr McMillan-Scott , you may well believe that I have not acted in the proper manner .
I gave this matter a great deal of thought beforehand .
I did not rule out the possibility that I would be in this situation .
I acted as my conscience dictated .
I may well have done the wrong thing , but that is how things are .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , all presidents are at liberty to vote or not .
It is their decision .
This result is absolutely clear .
There is no majority in favour of the report and we should not call this result into question .
To do so would be to challenge the effectiveness of decision-making in this Parliament .
I would , however , point out to Mr McMillan-Scott that he is pre-empting the way I would have voted .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Fontaine , I am particularly addressing you personally .
As you know , I am not one of those Members who usually contributes terribly much in this House to making your time here a happy one , but today I should like to thank you explicitly because I believe that you have done two things .
Firstly , you have given Mr McMillan-Scott the right answer .
I congratulate you on this .
Secondly , you had the case checked in the Rules of Procedure .
You quoted the relevant passage in the Rules of Procedure , thus dispelling any doubts , and you then noted the conclusion of the vote by stating , " rejected " .
In so doing you have done exactly what a conscientious president must do .
I should like to thank you for this .
( Applause )
Madam President , I apologise to you and to colleagues if by rising I test their patience , but since you have indulged some others , I should like to express a very brief view .
I fully respect your personal choice .
On the matter of the vote , you have given the correct interpretation .
I entirely regret this result , but one must live as a democrat with due process .
On behalf of the Liberal Democrat Group , I would like to the European Commission .
It is clear that , in the form presented , the mergers and acquisitions ( takeovers ) directive , has now fallen .
It is such a fundamental and important issue that I hope we do not abandon the attempt because of this difficulty .
We must learn from the difficulty and I invite the Commission at the earliest date to redouble its efforts to submit a new proposal , so that we can drive the Lisbon reform forward .
We cannot give a signal from this house that we are not concerned with fundamental economic dynamics in the European Union .
The Council and the Commission can help us in that regard .
The Commission has listened to you very carefully , Mr Cox .
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0227 / 2001 ) , by Mrs Rothe , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the promotion of electricity produced from renewable energy sources in the internal electricity market [ 5583 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0133 / 2001 - 2000 / 0116 ( COD ) ]
Before the vote
Madam President , I asked for the floor before other Members and I wanted firstly to say that , with regard to your statement , it is not your personal position , as other Presidents have taken the same approach on previous occasions , both Mr Hänsch and I. It seems to me absolutely disgraceful that there should be a sort of police vigilance of how Members vote .
That is an individual and personal right .
With regard to this directive , I would like to address not only the Commission , but also the Council .
It is a technically complex directive ; Parliament cannot be called irresponsible for exercising its rights .
We have worked on it - you yourself as rapporteur , in the past - and the lesson which the Commission and the Council must learn today is that if there is a double parliamentary reading and a conciliation , then notice must also be taken of Parliament on issues on which , although we have offered many opportunities for transaction , we have come up against a brick wall from the Council and the Commission .
I shall now give the floor to Mrs Rothe , who wishes to make a short statement on a point of order .
Madam President , thank you very much for giving me the floor briefly .
To avoid there being any confusion , I should like to clarify just very briefly that - with the exception of Amendments Nos 2 and 4 - Amendments Nos 1 to 11 already represent compromises which were struck with the Council even before the second reading , within a kind of informal conciliation procedure .
I should really like to urge you to vote in favour of these amendments because I believe that we have succeeded in improving the common position considerably .
Thank you , Mrs Rothe .
Regarding Amendment No 11
Madam President , I should briefly like to call your attention to a necessary language correction .
In the final clause of Amendment 11 , the Dutch translation should be amended .
At present it reads : " if the hierarchy were undermined by this " .
A correct translation of the English should read : " if this hierarchy were to be undermined " .
Madam President , I have a similar problem .
I would like it to be recorded in the minutes that there is an error in the Finnish translation of the common position regarding Mrs Rothe ' s report .
Article 2 ( b ) regarding definitions should read as follows : " ' Biomass ' shall mean the biodegradable fraction of products , waste and residues from agriculture ( including vegetal and animal substances ) , forestry and related industries , as well as the biodegradable fraction of industrial and municipal waste . "
The word ' products ' has been left out of the Finnish version .
I have not noticed any such omission in the other language versions .
Very well .
Thank you very much for pointing this out to us .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Report ( A5-0220 / 2001 ) by Mr Karas , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the activities of institutions for occupational retirement provision [ COM ( 2000 ) 507 - C5-0596 / 2000 - 2000 / 0260 ( COD ) ]
Before the vote on Amendment No 118
Madam President , thank you for giving me the floor .
Firstly , I should like to say that Amendment No 118 does not replace Amendment No 46 ; in fact both need to be put to the vote .
Secondly , with your permission , I have an oral amendment to propose to Amendment No 118 .
If the change were to be adopted I would be able to vote in favour of Amendment No 118 .
The change is as follows : instead of the word ' exemption ' the words ' this restriction ' should be added , and after ' after legal personality ' we add , ' only apply to the institutions responsible for the administration and management of such IORPs , if this restriction cannot be enforced under relevant national law against IORPs without legal personality . '
If this oral amendment is accepted - and I have agreed it with the Member who tabled the amendment - then I would be able to support a vote in favour .
( Parliament agreed to take into consideration the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0211 / 2001 ) by Mr Ettl , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 79 / 267 / EEC as regards the solvency margin requirements for life assurance undertakings ( COM ( 2000 ) 617 final - C5-0557 / 2000 - 2000 / 0249 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0212 / 2001 ) by Mr Ettl , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 73 / 239 / EEC as regards the solvency margin requirements for non-life insurance undertakings ( COM ( 2000 ) 634 final - C5-0558 / 2000 - 2000 / 0251 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0226 / 2001 ) by Mrs Flesch , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the implementation of the Internet Top Level Domain " .EU " ( COM ( 2000 ) 827 - C5-0715 / 2000 - 2000 / 0328 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the European Council meeting of 15 - 16 June 2001 in Gothenburg
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0225 / 2001 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the 2000 Annual Report of the European Central Bank ( C5-0187 / 2001 - 2001 / 2090 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0222 / 2001 ) by Mr Maaten , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on means to assist economic actors in switching to the euro ( 2000 / 2278 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Lehne report ( A5-0237 / 2001 )
Madam President , this is the first time I have delivered an explanation of vote and it concerns the decision of the Conciliation Committee to adopt the directive on takeover bids , which had been rejected by a tied vote by Parliament .
In one respect , I am sorry because I would have preferred the directive to have been adopted .
However , my prevailing sentiment is one of deep satisfaction , and that is because , with our votes and the votes of the other members of the Conciliation Committee delegation - 8 to 6 - we made it possible for the decision to be taken by this House .
We knew that there was disagreement between and within the 15 governments , that the trade unions and economic organisations were divided and that practically all the Parliamentary groups were divided in their opinions .
Therefore , why should the decision be 7 to 7 at 2 in the morning in Luxembourg ?
It was the right decision and I believe that even our friends who would have preferred to conclude the matter in Luxembourg should be grateful to us .
It was a remarkable day , an emotional vote , one of those days which make you even more enthusiastic about that amazing victory of human history which is democracy .
Madam President , the EPLP delegation voted in favour of the mergers and takeover conciliation text .
While we realise that the prime objective of this directive was to protect minority shareholders ' and investors ' interests against unscrupulous directors and inefficient company boards in a takeover or merger , in conciliation we achieved the incorporation of amendments tabled by the Socialist Group , which meant that this directive would have recognised the legitimate interests of employees in a takeover bid .
Some believe that this directive did not go far enough in this direction and that there is no real genuine consultation of the workforce .
Let us be clear : this was a choice between no information and providing information to the workforce in the process of a takeover or merger .
As a senior British trade union general secretary said , it is a significant step forward and offers a chance to build a substantial foundation .
It would be wrong to oppose the directive because it does not give sufficient rights of information and consultation .
This directive would have had no effect on the acquis communautaire of employment rights in the EU , or in the national Member States .
It was a minimum requirement .
I think you agree , Madam President , that Parliament has not covered itself in glory with its tied result today .
We will have no directive on mergers and takeovers and we will have no information and consultation with rights for workers , even though mergers and takeovers will continue to happen across the European Union .
Madam President , I welcome Mr Imbeni ' s entry into the ranks of expounders of explanations of vote .
I have to say that this is not my first !
Madam President , I was very uncertain as to which way to vote - for or against the motion - not least because this is a financial , economic issue of which I do not have much experience .
Therefore , I was happy to follow the recommendations made by Mrs Kauppi - in her speech , not in my dreams , I am afraid , Madam President . Mrs Kauppi is sitting here behind me .
It is true that she is young , but she cares about the interests of all pensioners , including Italian pensioners , to whom she has spoken on a number of occasions .
She said that if this directive had been adopted in conciliation it would have benefited pensioners .
I believe her and so I voted for the motion .
Madam President , I think it is highly regrettable that the compromise achieved in the conciliation procedure is being rejected today by the smallest possible margin .
This takeovers directive was and is an important part of the final implementation of the European single market .
Preparations for this had been going on for a very long time - twelve years - and I hope that the work will not have all been in vain in the wake of this very close vote . In other words , I hope that the work to formulate harmonised rules on company takeovers in the European Community will carry on , and perhaps one day we will find a compromise in this matter that would achieve majority support in this House .
I would just like to raise the question of how this will affect flows of capital in Europe .
In my opinion , it is very worrying that at Lisbon last year we made some ambitious plans , which now seem to have turned out to be mere empty words .
The rejection of this directive shows that we lack the political will to take the decisions of Lisbon forward .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today ' s decision against the joint text for an EU directive on company law concerning takeover bids is regrettable .
As a result of this House ' s decision to reject the directive , the European capital markets will continue to be fragmented in a key area , namely the trading of companies .
Future-oriented opportunities to increase prosperity can only be achieved through open markets and free trade .
Sadly , Parliament has deviated from this position .
It would have been infinitely preferable , in my view , if we had called for management boards to be required to remain neutral , as the interests of owners do not always coincide with those of senior executives .
The implication that Germany , for example , requires greater protection from hostile takeovers because golden shares and majority voting shares exist in other countries reflects protectionist attitudes .
One cannot pursue a protectionist course simply because other countries are doing so .
In the wake of this vote , the European national states will now protect their slices of industry and financial trade ; in sum , this is a bad day for the internal market , and a bad day for Europe as a location for industry .
- ( FR ) The rejection of the proposed directive on takeover bids will spell the end of any serious attempts to harmonise financial services in the European Union for a long time to come .
Parliament ' s decision reflects a number of profoundly different expectations .
For example , it reflects the legitimate frustration of the supporters of genuine legislative harmonisation , who felt less and less at home with a text that became more and more minimalist , technically unsound and politically imbalanced , and who wanted to punish arrogant governments for refusing to make any concessions towards Parliament .
The rejection inflicted on the EP delegation in the conciliation committee can be explained , however , by the growing strength of a quite different sense of nervousness that led to a retreat into protectionism , which shattered the fragile agreement that had been reached in conciliation .
The German MEPs found that many Netherlands , Spanish and Italian colleagues gradually came to support their strategy of rejection .
As for France , its Socialist government taught rather paradoxical lessons in liberalism , while at the same time allowing a hyper-protected national company to launch a spectacular , all-out takeover bid and rouse the demons of protectionism from their hopelessly light sleep in many parts of Europe .
Many people still regarded the directive as too much of a threat even when it had been watered down and emasculated and even though it did not have to be implemented for another five years .
No-one will mourn the final shipwreck of a text that went from concession to surrender , ending up as little more than the shadow of a common policy .
At the same time , no-one can be unaware that this bad text was largely rejected for the wrong reasons .
After the Irish referendum , the rejection of a directive concerning a vital economic issue is yet another sign that Europe is going through a very serious political and moral crisis today .
. ( NL ) It is a good thing that the European Parliament has just consigned the result of the mediation on the thirteenth directive ( hostile takeovers ) to the wastepaper basket .
It means that this rickety proposal for a directive is now no longer on the table and the European Commission can quickly get down to work and work out new proposals .
If the Commission takes account of the feelings of the great majority in Parliament a new proposed directive can be tabled very quickly .
Conditions for rapid adoption by Parliament will be that the decision on a hostile bid should rest not with the shareholders but with the Board of Management , that the Board of Management should decide in the light of all interests , i.e. also those of the employees , that the new proposal creates a true " level playing field " in Europe , which means , for example , that government intervention , in the form of " golden shares " or anything else , to combat takeovers , should be banned , and that companies in the EU are allowed to maintain at any rate the same protection constructions as in the US .
Only in this way can a balanced proposal for legislation be tabled that accords with the socio-economic tradition in most European countries and puts a decisive stop to the market fundamentalism that underlies the proposal just rejected .
. ( SV ) The issue is about the institutional regulations of European big business regarding the acquisition and takeover of major companies .
On the one hand , there is the Anglo-Saxon tradition , characterised by laissez-faire and open market principles .
On the other hand , there is a corporate and protectionist continental tradition .
It is no coincidence that one proposal was put forward by a German fellow member and that the counter-proposal in yesterday ' s debate was advocated mostly by British fellow members .
Although Mr Lehne ' s report contains certain corporate-patriarchal consideration for the staff of major companies , we do not believe that any of the alternatives serve the interests of employees .
We reject them both and instead require the Commission to return with a proposal on this issue which deals with ways of protecting the interests and needs of employees and consumers in conjunction with the acquisition and takeover of major companies .
. ( PT ) The controversy surrounding the conciliation process for this proposal for a directive , clearly visible in the outcome of Parliament ' s vote - it was rejected , since the vote was tied - demonstrated that two ideas with various practical differences were involved in the process of harmonising legislation on takeover bids .
Although some slight progress was made during the conciliation process on protecting shareholders who do not have control of the company and on adopting some regulations on making the information of workers mandatory , the situation still fails to safeguard all aspects of workers ' and minority shareholders ' ability to take action .
Lastly , although the position arising from conciliation might be of benefit to Portugal , given that Portuguese companies are a potential target and an easy one for cross-border takeovers , there are other , more appropriate ways of protecting national interests .
Hence our abstention from voting .
. It was with some regret that I voted against this outcome of a conciliation procedure .
I am aware that great efforts were made to give the workforce greater access to information and to protect the rights of small shareholders .
However , I feel that Member States were not sufficiently committed to the extension of worker consultation and indeed , in some Member States , the results will be regressive .
I do not believe we should extend the rights of some workers at the expense of others , nor should we vote for fewer consultation rights than we wish to see in the forthcoming Directive .
Our approach must be coherent .
We now have to push our national governments to raise their standards to those of the best , and not hide behind an international compromise .
For small shareholders , it will take more than the proposals in this document to protect their rights against those of large shareholders whose legal position can require them to seek maximum return within a short-term perspective .
We should not be encouraging this approach .
- ( NL ) The amended version of the original text has incorporated Parliament ' s position , and the delegation of the People ' s Party for Freedom and Democracy can go along with this text .
There is a greater information duty for the benefit of workers , and openness must be offered with a view to future employment .
Furthermore , the Commission has pledged to instruct a committee of experts , by March 2002 to report on a number of alleged ambiguities and apparent imbalances which could lead to distortion of the internal market principles .
If the investigation confirms the said suspicions , the Commission will take measures accordingly .
Opponents want to reject this directive and would prefer to wait for a fresh proposal in the short term .
However , we have witnessed how national interests can substantially frustrate and delay a fresh proposal .
The time for navel-gazing is over and we cannot overlook the globalisation of our economies .
European companies must be able to compete with the rest of the world . That also applies to our investors .
We realise that this directive will not win any prizes , but rejection brings us back to square one , and that is not in the interests of Europe .
In the final analysis , to stand still is to regress , and fear is a bad advisor .
We have therefore voted in favour .
. ( DE ) The joint text for a European Parliament and Council directive on company law concerning takeover bids is rejected by my group .
The compromise approved by the Conciliation Committee is unacceptable to us .
As the proverb says , ' Time brings everything to those who wait ' , and after 12 years of discussion , we could have expected that a perfect directive would be produced .
Yet the opposite is the case .
What are the problems ?
1 .
There are protected companies in the Member States , either through voting restrictions , ' golden shares ' , or multiple voting rights , etc .
The directive entrenches a situation in which protected companies can take over unprotected ones , yet unprotected companies cannot take over protected ones .
This means that there is no equal treatment ( ' level playing field ' ) .
2 .
The directive fails to include principles governing the definition of the ' equitable price ' to be offered in the case of a mandatory bid ; it also contains no provisions on ' squeeze-out ' ( the right of the majority shareholder in a company to acquire the shares of minority shareholders ) .
3 .
European companies would be exposed to pressure from the major financial corporations in Europe , with wealth creation henceforth giving way to the sole aim of maximising profits .
This in turn increases the danger that this type of takeover will result in large-scale job shedding .
4 .
The co-determination rights of workforce representatives are not sufficiently articulated .
The requirement that appropriate information should be given to the representatives of the company ' s employees offers no guarantee that they will be able to exert any influence on the takeover process .
The Commission itself is quite aware of these problems as well , for it proposes that a group of company law experts be requested to examine the further harmonisation of company law and define a clear position on Article 9 of this directive by March 2002 .
What kind of logic is that ?
I think it would have been more sensible to convene a group of experts to present its conclusions and then produce a directive , rather than first producing a directive and then asking a group of experts to discuss the unresolved problems .
Moreover , in conjunction with the directive on company law concerning takeover bids , a directive on the requirement for neutrality is urgently required .
This has been available in draft form since 1972 and has still not been adopted .
It is time for Mr Bolkestein and the Council to do their homework .
To give them the chance to do so , we have rejected the text before us .
The Parliament and Council Directive on the subject of company law concerning takeover bids is designed to harmonise Member State legislation in cases where companies governed by the law of one Member State are subject to a takeover bid , with their assets , i.e. property and shares , admitted to trading on a regulated market .
The main purpose of the directive is to protect the interests of minority shareholders , and , by means of harmonisation , to protect these interests when the takeover bid is of a cross-border nature .
By defining a principle for the equal treatment of all shareholders , the directive therefore seeks to establish minimum conditions for all shareholders to state their views and to study the terms of any bid made . At the same time , it seeks to ensure , by means of regulations on making the bid and time limits on the acceptance period , that the company remains operational during this period .
I therefore give my full support to the agreement that has been reached and , consequently , to the joint project , adopted by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council directive on takeover bids , which thereby seeks to create a set of harmonised rules that will add rigour to the process and ensure equal protection for all shareholders .
. ( NL ) Most companies used to be small-scale and linked to a town or an area .
Their ownership was not anonymous and their staff worked there all their lives .
For a long time , governments supported the efforts of companies to remain in regional or national hands , and the setting up of companies on a non-commercial basis , so that they could better serve the interests of employees and consumers .
In a society where everything is subordinated to a free market and worldwide competition , companies have now become a commodity .
If it suits the purchasers and the old shareholders , they are closed because their profit margin lags behind the rest of the group , because their brand name can be stuck on other products or their production can be transferred to a country with low wages and inadequate environmental regulation .
The consequences for employment , social cohesion in an area around the company , consumers and the scope for a democratically determined government policy is extremely negative .
That is why manageable , checkable and small-scale companies are far preferable to global giants , that are constantly surprising others and laying down the law to them .
Mergers that provide no right of veto for trade unions and government lead to accidents .
I reject this trade in companies and am voting against the proposal .
. ( NL ) Unfortunately , as regards the Takeover Directive , I was forced to vote against the findings of the Conciliation Committee .
I consider it a great shame that partly because of my " no " vote so many years of work have been lost .
But ultimately the quality of the end product must be our guide .
The end product is not good , partly because it makes the position of European companies facing American takeover bids too weak and specifically weaker than that of an American company targeted by a European bidder .
Moreover , everything is concentrated on only one aspect , namely increased capitalisation , while other defensive techniques or instruments are not coordinated .
Anyone who believes that as a result of this proposal European companies will be dealt with on an equal footing , is proved wrong .
I regret , in all sincerity , that for these reasons I was bound to vote against .
Recommendation for second reading Rothe ( A5-0227 / 2001 )
Madam President , recently , I visited the beautiful island of Capri which has sun , sea and blue sky , and I remembered another beautiful island , this one in Sweden : the island of Gotland .
That island is also beautiful , with sea , sky , sun and ... windmills ! Madam President , these islands are very windy and there were devices which convert wind energy into electricity .
There you are : this is the sort of Europe I like , and I believe the European citizens would like it too .
Therefore , I voted in favour of greater commitment to renewable energies .
Madam President , we have voted today , in a second reading , on the promotion of electricity produced from renewable energy sources in the internal electricity market .
The Commission ' s White Paper has set us an indicative target , namely that 12 % of gross energy consumption should be covered from renewable sources by 2010 .
In order to achieve this goal , we must promote the generation of electricity from renewable sources by means of various incentives , as we are still a long way from achieving this target .
New technologies need unbureaucratic , simple and effective promotion mechanisms .
I would like to take this opportunity to underline , above all , the importance of renewable energies for the rural regions .
The production of energy and the cultivation of energy crops offer an alternative income-generation opportunity for our farmers in Europe , which must be exploited .
The multifunctionality of the rural regions can thus be strengthened and increased .
I see this as a major opportunity for agriculture and dynamic rural development in a united Europe .
Madam President , we have just voted on the definition of renewable energy sources , and we also defined the concept of biomass more precisely .
It was said that biomass shall mean the biodegradable fraction of products from agriculture , forestry and related industries .
Although Parliament has unfortunately not reproduced the definition we agreed on last time , according to which peat should count among the renewables , inasmuch as it regenerates each year , I would like to state that peat should be implicitly included in the version now agreed .
Every gardener knows that peat is a biodegradable product .
It breaks down entirely - obviously , as it is generated biologically .
Bacteria and microbes cause it to decompose if it is taken away from its oxygen-free state .
It also decomposes on the surface of marshland .
This is what the theory of peat growth is based upon : marshland grows where there is more peat growing than decomposing .
As these are the facts , and they are not going to change , I hope that Parliament , the Commission and the Council will make the implicit explicit and make clear mention of peat in the future .
This I hope for in the name of environmental protection .
In my own amendment , adopted by Parliament in November , restrictions were imposed on the use of peat : the capital would not be touched , but just the interest would be used .
Environmental organisations , which based their views on outdated knowledge regarding the carbon cycle of marshlands , paradoxically opposed my design to prevent the exploitation of marshes , and this is the result : greed leads to a sorry end , and so , probably , does environmental greed too .
I hope the debate will continue .
- ( FR ) The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy unanimously approved the report by Mrs Rothe on the Council common position on the directive on the promotion of electricity produced from renewable energy sources ( RES ) in the internal electricity market .
The common position adopted in March differs considerably from the position Parliament adopted at first reading last November , even though the Council has accepted about one third of Parliament ' s proposed amendments .
The rapporteur went to great lengths to achieve a compromise before the second reading in the EP and explained to the committee that the Council had agreed to eight of the nine compromise amendments during the trialogue held on Tuesday , 19 June .
The only outstanding point was whether waste incineration should be regarded as a renewable energy source .
The Council wants to include it .
Members , however , have pointed out that the support given to renewable energy sources must be compatible with the other Community objectives , in particular the principle of " respect for the waste treatment hierarchy " .
That is why the incineration of non-separated household waste should not be promoted under this directive and under a future support system for renewable energy sources .
Where the two legislative bodies disagreed most profoundly was on the question whether the national targets for the use of renewable energy sources should be mandatory or merely indicative .
In November , Parliament called emphatically for mandatory targets , but the Council was opposed .
The compromise stipulates that if the Member States have not made progress towards achieving their national indicative objectives , the Commission shall present proposals that may contain mandatory targets .
The national indicative targets must be consistent with the global indicative target of 12 % of gross national energy consumption by 2010 from renewable energy sources .
At the same time , these renewable energy sources must account for a 22.1 % indicative share of total Community electricity consumption .
( Explanation cut short pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( IT ) The importance of renewable energy and increasing its use in Europe are at the basis of the measure we are examining at second reading .
I would like to reiterate , on this occasion , my satisfaction at the united effort that sets the important figure of 12 % as the target for the share of the European electricity market produced from renewable sources which also benefit the environment to be reached by 2010 : we know how topical these issues are , especially in relation to climate change .
This means that the ' white gold ' , the water used in mountainous areas of Europe to generate hydroelectric power , will clearly acquire greater value as a fundamental resource for the mountain economy .
I am pleased that , as recorded in the Minutes , some of the improvements I suggested figure decisively in the text .
This will make it possible - a substantial , tangible example , albeit on a small scale - for my Valle d ' Aosta , an Alpine region par excellence , to focus on and invest in the hydroelectric sector , after being deprived for 40 years of a great asset in terms of the wealth of the local economy by the nationalisation and monopoly of the electricity sector in Italy , a situation which is only now being remedied thanks to the European impetus , which is opening the doors once again for regional competences granted , in the case of my Valle d ' Aosta , by the Statute of autonomy .
In this sense , it is a good thing that the European Union is attaching due importance to that - by definition - renewable source , hydroelectric power , providing security and incentive mechanisms on the market which will certainly benefit the mountainous areas as well , particularly those where the electricity companies are directly managed by the local communities .
. - ( NL ) As a result of market forces , where the main objective is to find the cheapest rather than the cleanest electricity , we are threatened with a new upsurge of polluting fuels such as nuclear energy , coal , brown coal and oil .
In the Netherlands relatively clean power stations have been shut down to enable dirty electricity to be imported .
The replacement as soon as possible of those dirty fuels by solar , wind and hydroelectric power is indispensable for the preservation of our environment .
Instead of campaigning actively for new forms of electricity generation the individual consumer is first asked to buy cleaner energy at a different price from another supplier .
Those suppliers can now supply less clean electricity than the consumer is asking for .
This leads to attempts to include more forms of electricity generation with clean energy .
The incineration of undivided organic domestic waste and wood waste has always taken place , and is now suddenly included in the clean category so that targets can be met .
My support for the generation of clean energy does not apply to this addition .
Large-scale investment that anticipates requests from consumers and is not dependent on waste collection are an alternative to the system at present required by the Council .
. ( SV ) We Swedish Christian Democrats welcome the Directive on electricity from renewable energy sources .
We accept that the electricity gained from incinerating that part of household waste which is biodegradable should be included in the national guiding targets .
However , we would like to see incineration of unsorted household waste not being counted as electricity deriving from a renewable energy source .
Therefore , we do not accept that incineration of unsorted household waste should receive aid .
We believe that the compromise negotiated with the Council in this case is too weak .
In this regard the Council has reached a decision , but not understood its significance .
However , we believe that the importance of the directive being adopted as quickly as possible , especially in view of the vital role which the EU has and must retain during the coming climate negotiations , constitutes sufficient grounds for supporting the compromise which has been negotiated with the Council in this respect .
We therefore choose to support the compromise .
Karas report ( A5-0220 / 2001 )
Madam President , the Karas report concerns professional pension funds .
Today , Madam President , is not 4 July 2001 : it is 4 July 2030 .
Do not worry about calculating how old we will be in 2030 ; just listen to the rest of this explanation of vote .
In 2030 , a French pensioner meets an English pensioner and says to him : ' Look what a good pension we have got !
Just think : in the year 2000 , the European citizens ' pensions were less than half the size of ours .
And how did we manage it ?
By adopting a further European directive compelling all the States to transfer all the pension funds paid to the State up until that time into professional funds , which managed the money well and thus generated good pensions ' .
- ( FR ) The draft directive and the Karas report on pension funds and supplementary systems represent yet another attack on the existing pension schemes in the European Union .
The Karas report draws on the very liberal conclusions of the Feira European Council in approving the directive .
It takes an ' Anglo-Saxon ' approach to regulation , based on a minimum of harmonisation , as reflected in the absence of specific rules to define the commitments entered into by the pension funds .
The directive meets the demands of the UK and Netherlands pension funds , which want to be able to intervene at European level by having a single fund instead of separate funds set up in each country .
Once again , the European Union is surrendering to the dictatorship of the single market , this time in regard to retirement pensions , with the consequences we know so well : even worse inequality between workers , the stranglehold of the financial markets and shareholders on retirement savings schemes , and heavier pension fund pressure on employees .
Instead of harmonising downwards and creating a single retirement pension market , we should set up a system based on solidarity and equality at European level .
That is why we voted against the Karas report and reject the proposal for a directive .
. ( NL ) Entrepreneurs have discovered company pension funds as a source of venture capital .
Governments regard those funds as part of an integrated financial market designed to contribute to the competitive power of the European economy .
In expectation of increased returns pension capital is passed on to companies whose sole object is to make profit .
Soon the shareholders of banks and insurance companies start benefiting from profits , the retired bear the increased risk as a result of protective instruments being eliminated and the disadvantages of moving to a different employer or to another Member State are not resolved .
The proposed European regulation does not do justice to the reasons why those pension reserves were created .
Pensions are a means of redistributing and supplementing incomes , offering everyone lasting social security , even when , at the age of 70 , 90 or 110 , they are no longer productive .
An equal state pension for all of a sufficient amount is the best guarantee that no one loses the right to an income .
On the other hand company pensions are only favourable for those with permanent highly paid jobs .
They offer no solution to people who have frequently had to change jobs or employers .
That is even more true of supplementary private pensions , which are only affordable by those who are able and willing to invest surpluses in an insurance company in their productive years .
Ettl report ( A5-0211 / 2001 )
Mr Ettl ' s report concerns the solvency of life assurance undertakings .
I feel , Madam President , that Europe , which cares so much about the quality of life of the European citizens and the quality of all kinds of consumer goods , should force life assurance undertakings to respect this directive and subscribe to the declaration : ' This is a reliable assurance company in accordance with the European directive ' .
For example , they could use the format : ' Such-and-such assurance , reliable ' , so that the citizens will know that the assurance undertaking uses its funds well .
Ettl report ( A5-0212 / 2001 )
Mr Ettl ' s second report provides greater guarantees that insurance undertakings other than life assurance undertakings will remain solvent too .
Well then , I was thinking about that last night , Madam President .
I slept extremely badly last night and had a real nightmare .
Why is that ?
I dreamt , I am sorry to say , that the house where I live was going to be destroyed ; I was running out of the bedroom and , distraught , I saw Mr Fatuzzo ' s house fall in ruins .
My despair was all the greater because I was insured with a dreadful insurance company .
At that moment , I woke up and remembered that , I am glad to say , I am insured with a good insurance company and , most importantly , my house is still standing and I am in Strasbourg .
Flesch report ( A5-0226 / 2001 )
Madam President , in order to illustrate my explanation of vote on Mrs Flesch ' s report concerning the ' .EU ' designation in computers , I have to tell you that , in the last few days , right here in Strasbourg , I met a very attractive girl from one of the Eastern European countries , one of the countries that have applied to join our Union .
While we were talking , as we walked along , the young girl from this country - a Bulgarian country - asked me : -Why do you not authorise the candidate countries that want to join the European Union to use the ' .EU ' Internet domain as well ? '
That is why I am putting this question to Mrs Flesch .
- ( FR ) This report is about a proposal for a regulation on the Internet Top Level Domain ' .EU ' .
The Commission proposal is a response to the instructions of the Lisbon Council ( 23-24 March 2000 ) .
The Stockholm Council ( 23-24 March 2001 ) confirmed that " the Council will take the necessary measures , together with the Commission , to ensure that the .EU top-level domain is available to users as soon as possible . "
This wording may sound a little far-fetched and need some explanation .
The regulation is meant to be a general act laying down a framework for the creation of an ' .EU ' registry .
This registry should enter into contracts both with the Commission and with ICANN ( Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers ) .
Let me remind you that ICANN was created in October 1998 in order to stand up to American hegemony in Internet running .
This private , non-profit-making company is concerned with four key Internet sectors , including DNS ( domain name systems ) and allocating Internet Protocol addresses .
ICANN has a Policy Advisory Board of 19 members .
Its external directors and members are appointed on a geographically balanced basis .
ICANN also has four advisory committees , including the GAC ( Governmental Advisory Committee ) to which the European Commission and the Member States belong .
To my great satisfaction , the European Union has decided to devote more attention to this body so as to play a decisive part in the international running of the Internet and to make ICANN more neutral .
In the same context , if the European Union wishes to exist in cyberspace , it will have to create a domain name like its Member States .
Then the national territories will be able to recognise each other on the Internet by means of domain names such as ' .uk ' or ' .be ' .
That would certainly be a factor in speeding up the development of the e-economy and e-commerce in Europe .
I therefore felt it important to endorse the good work done by the rapporteur .
Gothenburg European Council
Madam President , I would also like to comment on the report on the Gothenburg Council .
As you know , it was decided at the Council to tackle the issue of pensions in the 15 States of the European Union resolutely .
In your opinion , how could I not take the floor to explain why I voted for the motion ?
Yesterday , at lunchtime , at a meeting of the Kangaroo group , here at the European Parliament , I listened with pleasure to the leader of a Japanese company , who said : ' We Japanese industrialists are waiting anxiously for there to be a single European pension in Europe , governed by the same rules and laws throughout Europe ' .
Therefore , I am not the only one to call for a European pension !
I rejoice at this and so I voted for this report because the Gothenburg Council has started out along this path .
Madam President , in this resolution , we have expressed our views on the issue of Macedonia , and I would just like to say that I welcome the European Union ' s active commitment in Macedonia . However , we should not proceed in a didactic way , but on the basis of respect for the people and nations there .
Macedonia has an all-party government in which all the nations are also represented .
It has a pro-European prime minister and an outstanding pro-European president .
If we continually talk about minority rights , we must acknowledge for once that the European standards on minority rights which we constantly refer to actually do not exist , unfortunately , in the EU itself .
We really would be well-advised , therefore , to approach the matter with some measure of humility . We can offer our services , but we should be careful not to adopt a didactic approach all the time .
Above all , we should strengthen the government by making it clear that countries such as Macedonia which work with the European Union will also receive massive political and financial support from us .
This was why I thought it was regrettable that Commissioner Patten , who is unfortunately no longer present , said that if we were to provide funds , the money would simply be used for bombs .
This was a most inappropriate statement towards this democratically elected all-party government . I hope that our Macedonian friends , represented by their President , will visit us here in Strasbourg soon , and that the visit by Boris Trajkovski can be rescheduled .
We must tackle the signs of disintegration , but we can only do so by strengthening the country ' s democratic authorities .
Madam President , in the interest of a democratic and just European Union I ask the Council to respect the Irish people ' s rejection of the Treaty of Nice by immediately halting further ratification .
I also call on the Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , to ensure that the requirement for unanimity is upheld .
I likewise request that all further ratifications stop .
I , and those people I represent , support a united democratic Europe and enlargement .
I welcome , therefore , the Commission ' s confirmation of my understanding that enlargement can proceed without the ratification of the Nice Treaty .
I believe that enlargement should proceed with all speed so that the accession countries can not only share in the benefits of European Union membership , but also contribute fully to the debate on the kind of European Union we hope to build .
I support a full and open debate prior to the 2004 Intergovernmental Conference , but not in the form of a convention .
- ( FR ) The European Union is about to invent a new form of democracy : democracy without the people .
That is the only conclusion we can draw from the arrogant way the Gothenburg Council dismissed the Irish vote .
Today the new President-in-Office of the Council , Guy Verhofstadt , has just confirmed this impression by giving us a preview of the conclusions of the debate that is supposed to be held in preparation for the 2004 Intergovernmental Conference .
The way this debate is being organised in France , following the communiqué of 11 April this year published jointly by the Prime Minister and the President of the Republic , makes it quite clear that it has been rigged from the start .
Various people pretend they want to initiate a discussion on the future of Europe , but our country deliberately evaded the issue of the ratification of the Nice Treaty , which is vital in this regard .
The Constitutional Council was not consulted , there was no referendum , the debates in the French National Assembly and the Senate were extremely short , the speeches were mediocre , except for those of members of the pro-sovereignty group , including Philippe de Villiers , who seem to be the only ones to have retained their freedom of thought in this debacle that has hit the national political community .
This means that the document that is most crucial to the future of the Union , the new supranational developments set out in the Nice Treaty , have been taken out of the debate .
For the rest , it is clear that everything has been organised in such a way that the discussion forums only produce conclusions acceptable to the federalists .
Not only are the meetings prepared by the prefects - which says a lot about their independence vis à vis the government - their conclusions will actually be drafted by a group of ten experts freely chosen by the President of the Republic and the Prime Minister .
I myself wrote to the two heads of the executive on 20 April this year to ask them to ensure that this group was made up of all the political elements elected at the European elections .
The result is plain to see : among the appointments that have just been made it would be hard to find any opposition , however slight , to the line pursued by Brussels .
To crown it all , this ridiculous procedure is to be closed in October , which means that the great national debate will have lasted four months , of which two were holiday months .
But it is easy to understand why it will be concluded so speedily : at the end of the year we will be entering the dangerous period when we have to exchange our national coins and banknotes for euros .
Clearly , our national leaders have no wish to be burdened with a debate about Europe at that particular moment .
UE / NGL ) , in writing . ( EL ) The Gothenburg Summit will go down in history not just for what happened inside the conference room but also for what happened outside it .
The tens of thousands of demonstrators expressing their opposition to the anti-grass roots , autocratic , centralised structure of the ÅU were dealt with by the police with unprecedented violence , proving yet again that the leaders of the ÅU make their decisions without consulting the people .
Not only does the European Parliament resolution fail to make any reference to the demands of thousands of demonstrators , let alone the victims of police violence , it also talks of special riot squads , thereby helping to pave the way for even harsher , anti-democratic measures to deal with " the enemy " at future summits of the ÅU and other imperialist organisations .
Faced with the Irish " no " to the Treaty of Nice , the European Parliament has aligned with the Council , which is determined , so it says , to help in any way it can in assisting the Irish government to find a solution , thereby pressurising the Irish government into ratifying the Treaty by the end of 2002 come what may and disregarding the opinion expressed by the Irish people .
When it comes to the tragic developments in the FYROM , the resolution approves both of the interventionist policy and of NATO ' s intention not to get drawn into taking on a full peacekeeping role .
Of course , how the EU perceives the process of reaching agreement was clearly expressed by the special envoy Mr Leotard , who called on the government of the FYROM to institute a dialogue with the Albanian extremists .
The resolution even approves of progress made in militarising the ÅU , developing the rapid reaction force and establishing permanent and constructive relations with ÍÁÔÏ and it calls on the Member States to restructure their defence budgets to take account of the sums required in order to achieve the ambitious objectives of the CFSP .
On the question of enlargement , the internal imperialist contradictions which have arisen notwithstanding , its insistence on a policy of trapping new countries in the ÅU is clear , even if the timetable is becoming more and more obscure .
At the same time , because they know that grass-roots opposition to the prospect of integration is increasing in the candidate countries , they are trying to lure them with the prospect of taking part in European elections in 2004 .
For the rest , the Gothenburg summit confirmed the direction taken in Lisbon and Stockholm , which requires that the state of the economy be tackled with harsher , even more anti-grass roots measures which hit the workers , starting with the pension system and the national insurance systems in general .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the resolution .
- ( FR ) In January 2001 , the Swedish presidency of the European Union modestly announced three priorities : the environment , enlargement and employment .
Six months later , with the Gothenburg Council , we have to acknowledge failure .
In employment , this period was marked by a huge wave of redundancies in large transnational groups that are making millions of euros in profits , like Marks & Spencer and Danone .
The EU has once again proved unable to counterbalance the dictatorship of the markets and shareholders , for example by introducing a tax on speculation - such as the ' Tobin tax ' - by strengthening employees ' and citizens ' rights of economic control or by introducing European-level legislation banning redundancies .
In relation to enlargement , the only prospect opened to the candidate countries is quite simply for their economy to be absorbed into the single market .
At no moment will the people concerned be consulted on either the contents or the implications of accession .
Yet the Irish ' no ' vote shows once again that Europe cannot be built without the people and without their support for a democratic , political and social project .
Finally , at international level , the European Union has shown itself unable to make a positive contribution to resolving conflicts , notably by imposing a just and lasting peace in Palestine on Israel .
The Swedish presidency will be marked mainly by the provocative police actions that punctuated the Gothenburg summit .
Instead of embarking as they should on a thorough review of the European projects , the governments , from their bunker , have for the first time turned to violence and fired on the demonstrators .
We urgently need a different Europe : a Europe based on democracy and social progress .
That is why we voted against the joint motion for a resolution .
. There is much to commend in this resolution , especially in terms of sustainable development .
I welcome the call for the EU to ratify the Kyoto Protocol , which is an essential international agreement in terms of protecting our planet .
I welcome the renewed commitment to reaching the UN target for development assistance and hope that , at last , this will be achieved as there is a desperate need for this .
I also welcome the need expressed for the EU to prepare fully for the World Summit on Sustainable Development .
Why then did I abstain on the motion as a whole ?
I do not believe that developing a Common Security Policy , which seeks to link us closely to NATO , has any part in the sustainable development of the EU .
Nor do I believe that we should be asking Ireland to negate its recent referendum and prepare for the ratification of the Nice Treaty .
Such a call ignores the democratically expressed wishes of the people and does this House no credit .
- ( FR ) The joint resolution modelled on the report of the European Council held on 15-16 June 2001 in Gothenburg is the combined effort of the green , pink and white liberals and the purple Christian Democrats , i.e. of a syncretic and political majority ranging from Messrs Schröder-Jospin to Messrs Aznar-Chirac , via the Greens , the Joschka Fischers and Dominique Voynets and the ultra-liberals of Alain Madelin .
It is like a jumble sale of words , concepts and issues ranging from the death penalty ( paragraph 32 ) to the ' tax package ' ( paragraph 25 ) , via bananas ( paragraph 30 ) , Mr Léotard ' s diplomatic mission to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , which has now become FYROM ( paragraph 42 ) , not forgetting residually the CAP , development aid , Kyoto , the US tax fraud via the Caribbean tax havens , enlargement and the need for a convention - in unsaid memory of Philadelphia in 1787 - to adopt a European constitution in 2004 .
But beneath all this apparent jumble of bric-a-brac lie the two key notes of the oligarchic sect that governs us , namely contempt for the people and the quest for an obscure world ' governance ' .
The contempt in which the euro-federal oligarchy in Brussels holds the people is reflected in both paragraph 3 , with the refusal to respect the clear implications of the Irish referendum , which is analysed as a kind of deadlock from which ' a way forward ' must be found , and in paragraph 9 , where the spontaneous rejection by the people of the excesses of globalisation - from Seattle to Gothenburg , via Prague , Nice , Davos , Washington , Salzburg and perhaps Genoa next - is condemned as ' provocation ' , forgetting that the right to ' resist ' the economic pressure the global market is exerting on the women and men of Marks & Spencer and Danone , not to mention Moulinex , Michelin , Vilvorde , Alcatel , Ericsson and AOM , is one of the basic freedoms that was established two centuries before the European Charter , which proclaims for the rich alone formal rights that the unemployed , the excluded young and the old and poor do not , for their part , regard as fundamental .
Similarly , the nine paragraphs devoted to sustained development - even going so far as a world summit in Johannesburg in 2002 - can scarcely conceal , in the dark recesses of this vague concept that has become a kind of catechism , the quest for a global approach that would miraculously resolve the problems , facing Africa in particular , of under-development , the AIDS epidemic and the economic slavery and poverty so skilfully maintained by the free traders who do not pay the real price for cotton , cocoa , coffee and all the raw materials , i.e. the price of the life of the people whose labour they exploit .
I have noticed that recent events have borne out my predictions on 15 March and 3 May .
Just read up on them in the Minutes , if you so wish .
I said then that pledging support to the Macedonian Government and condemning so-called extremists would not lead to the search for solutions , peace and conciliation , but to the encouragement of violence .
A section of the Macedonian population and of the Macedonian Government believes that all the problems will be solved by ignoring or driving away the large Albanian minority .
That section is keen to buy weapons with EU subsidies .
They continue to reject an arrangement whereby Albanian becomes the language of administration and education for that part of the country where the Albanian-speakers live .
I do not expect a sustainable solution without a state arrangement similar to that in Belgium .
I wish the Council and Commission much success in their attempts at long last to ensure that their interference does not lead to more violence and suppression , but to a peaceful solution which is sustained by all the parties
. ( PT ) I did not feel able to vote in favour of the Joint Resolution on the Gothenburg Summit , despite the fact that it contains several positive conclusions , specifically with regard to enlargement , to the circumstances surrounding the summit , to the follow-up to the Lisbon European Council , to external relations and to the Middle East in particular , amongst others .
Nevertheless , I have been forced to abstain by the fact that a majority of Members of this Parliament still insist on a post-Nice model for debate which , in terms of both method and content , goes further , not only than the conclusions of the Heads of State and Government in Nice , but also than the very Treaties currently in force , especially with regard to its harsh criticism of the intergovernmental method and its ambition to establish a broader , not to say quite unrealistic agenda for this debate .
Nor do I consider Conclusion No 5 to be a positive addition , because I do not feel that it is the Irish Government ' s place to ratify the Treaty . It is up to the Irish people , in accordance with the constitution of that country .
- ( FR ) A European Parliament resolution on the Gothenburg summit might have been useful if it had taken a less offhand approach to the outcome of the Irish referendum on the Nice Treaty than the Council did in its conclusions . This is another example of the extremely disturbing decline of democracy in the process of European integration .
Alas , the resolution did not do so .
Henceforth , however , whenever we consider the future of Europe , and in particular its enlargement , we will have to take this quite unambiguous vote into account .
How can we deplore the very largely anti-democratic nature of the European Union in its present form and pretend to want to remedy this if we do not begin by respecting the clearly expressed wish of the people , in this case of the only nation asked to pronounce on the new treaty by referendum , an eminently democratic procedure ?
Following on from two referendums that had already shown the growing gap between Europe as it is and the Europe the people want to see , the Irish people ' s decision should give us a salutary shock .
The lesson to be drawn from the Irish referendum is that Europe can only endure in the long term if it is founded on respect for the national democracies .
We urgently need to review completely the way Europe is being constructed , basing it on principles quite different from those of Nice , which should represent the final manifestation of a process that began with the Single Act and continued with Maastricht and Amsterdam , concluding with a Europe that is now rejected by its people .
Clearly this is not the direction the Belgian presidency wishes to pursue .
It in fact proposes to make up for the democratic deficit within the Union by introducing a European tax , although only the national parliaments are democratically entitled to levy taxes .
It is in favour of having the future treaty drawn up by bodies whose democratic legitimacy is , if not doubtful , at least very indirect .
It exalts the euro , which no nation wished to see introduced and which , on the contrary , is emblematic of a Europe imposed on the people against their wishes .
The Irish lesson does not seem to have been understood .
Sooner or later , however , we will have to listen to the people .
Sooner would be best if we want to restore their belief in a European idea in which they are currently losing faith .
. Today on the Gothenburg summit resolution I abstained overall , and recommended to my UK Conservative colleagues to do likewise , since , although we fully support the references to welcoming the enlargement process of the EU and the calls for supporting reform of CAP and sustainable development , we had a number of reservations on other aspects of the report .
These include , paragraph 3 , which may be seen to suggest that the EU is not fully respecting the decision of the Irish people in their referendum to reject the Nice Treaty ; paragraph 6 which recommends a controversial Convention model to take the negotiations forward to the next IGC ; paragraph 25 which supports the tax package involving tax harmonisation and a withholding tax ; paragraph 26 which recommends social-chapter-inspired works council measures ; and paragraphs 33 and 34 which are supportive of an independent ESDP which could decouple us from NATO .
Otherwise there are many positive aspects to the report , so overall an abstention was the correct position in the view of the UK Conservatives .
Randzio-Plath report ( A5-0225 / 2001 )
- ( FR ) The European Parliament ' s report on the financial year 2000 of the ECB and that bank ' s own Annual Report on the same subject attempt to iron out their differences of appraisal and present a united front on the eve of the physical changeover to euro coins and banknotes .
As soon as we scratch the surface , however , we discover contradictions , which have extremely serious implications because they go back to certain faults in the construction of the single currency that will be very difficult to put right .
Let us begin , for example , with the institutional issues .
The first difference concerns the powers of the Council of Ministers .
The European Parliament ' s report advocates the strengthening of economic policy coordination and stability programmes ( paragraph 5 of the resolution ) , which would mean strengthening the Eurogroup and its means of action .
The ECB report , however , emphasises that " the first two years of the euro have also shown that the policy-making framework at European level is satisfactory " ( page 3 ) .
This makes it clear that the Bank is fiercely protective of its independence , knowing full well that the growing political pressure on the management of the single currency , within a monetary zone that is not optimal , risks leading to difficult conflicts .
But is management by technocrats any better ?
To tell the truth , both systems are unworkable .
The second difference concerns transparency .
The European Parliament ' s report calls once again ( paragraph 14 ) for the minutes of the ECB Governing Council meetings to be published , together with a summary of the stance of both the approving and dissenting parties .
The ECB finds this proposal repugnant , for a very good reason that the European Parliament obstinately refuses to accept : in the specific case of the eurozone , made up of separate nations , conflicts between governors could easily be assimilated with conflicts between nations , which would do further damage to the already weak credibility of the euro .
Once again , this brings us back to the non-optimal nature of the monetary zone of the Twelve .
The third difference concerns voting in the Governing Council .
The ECB report upholds the " one member , one vote " principle , because the governors of the national central banks deliberate with entire personal independence and not as representatives of their country ( page 181 ) .
The European Parliament ' s report , for its part , takes note of the reform introduced by the Nice Treaty to Article 10 of the Statute of the ECB , which could make it possible , in future , to weight the votes in accordance with size of country ( paragraph 17 of the resolution ) .
That reform would suit the large countries , especially Germany , which is complaining of the ECB ' s failure to act , implicitly blaming this on the disproportionate influence of the small countries within the Governing Council .
However , this would be very difficult to carry through because it seems contrary to the spirit of Maastricht , to the ECB ' s position and to the interests of the small countries , which would have something to say about it .
Once again , the idea of a single currency for several nations is beset by contradictions .
. ( PT ) The European Central Bank ( ECB ) is pursuing its basic aim of guaranteeing price stability , which means , in practice , maintaining moderation in wage increases in the eurozone .
This is a short-sighted aim , based on controlling inflation , which ignores the contribution of monetary policy to economic growth and employment . This is a concern which , if carried to the extreme , could cause deflation and unemployment .
The ECB is using this aim as a justification , even in the midst of an economic slowdown , for not reducing interest rates to stimulate investment or reducing the costs of excessive debt for families and other economic agents , forgetting that the eurozone is not a homogeneous area and that the cohesion countries in particular , including Portugal , face specific structural difficulties .
This is the policy for monetary stability imposed by the Stability Pact , which the rapporteur is so pleased with , and with which we disagree , even though it does attempt to implement the ECB ' s policies , by means of greater economic coordination and greater development of the quarterly dialogue with the European Parliament .
The ECB , however , requires effective political supervision and not just economic coordination , which is increasingly linked to the objectives of the Stability Pact and to the EU ' s neo-liberal guidelines .
. ( NL ) In the run-up to the compulsory exchange of bank notes and coins of eleven Member States for euro coins and notes all attention is being focused on the annoyance that this will generate shortly after the turn of the year .
Mr Maaten ' s proposals attempt to make that process run faster and more efficiently . But the fundamental problem is more connected with the annual report of the European Central Bank .
Unlike Mrs Randzio-Plath , the rapporteur , I see no reason for compliments .
The value of the euro had to be kept up by means of a stability pact , which forces national governments to reduce the level of expenditure and refrain from taking out loans .
That policy has failed completely , now that the euro has fallen considerably below the dollar , not temporarily , but for a considerable amount of time .
In the meantime , in a number of Member States , including the Netherlands , annual inflation is already higher than the interest rate .
Price stability will probably not survive the coming turn of the year .
It no longer looks as if the euro will gain a position as an international currency , as the dollar has .
As a result , it is not possible either to follow the American model and pass on a portion of the annual government deficit to the rest of the world , which continues to compete for possession of an exchange currency that is falling in value .
In short , the ECB ' s efforts have resulted in a flop that forces us to reject this annual report .
. ( EL ) The report by the European Central Bank under discussion covers its 2nd year in operation following the start of the third stage of EMU .
This is precisely why the European Parliament needs to be even stricter and more demanding in its criticism of the ECB ' s annual report , because there are results which hit the workers and because it supports closer links between the general guidelines to economic policy and the stability and convergence programmes .
On the pretext of fighting inflation and adhering strictly to the Stability Pact , that ' plague ' on the workers , the ECB has activated the sanctions mechanism in order to achieve that wonder of wonders , price stability , while ignoring the economic and social impact of its decisions .
It announces that wage policy is to be modernised , for which read flexible and insecure labour , and it is pushing for privatisation across the board in order to promote the competitiveness of and reward big business .
But it says nothing about speculation and " scams " on the money markets , given that its policy of cutting interest rates does everything it can to support them .
So far , the European Central Bank has raised or lowered its interest rates in line with US interest rates in a bid to fund speculation .
Will Mr Duisenberg tell us if he subscribes to the views of his counterpart , Mr Greenspan , who feels that the new growth cycle should be based on greater returns from the huge amount of capital at the disposal of companies whose performance is what will shore up stock prices and trigger a new round of investments ?
He probably agrees because he has told us that the executive board of the ECB is continuing to monitor wage developments and trends in domestic and foreign demand and that , despite the oil crisis , wage increases were moderate , which he described as highly positive , stressing that inflation will be kept to 2 % in 2002 thanks to wage restraint , while the monopolies ' profits will , of course , keep on rising .
What else can we say ?
The report and the governor of the ECB say it all .
They have told us about the acutely negative liberal policy which pushes economies into recession and what they have announced for the workers is greater unemployment , the abolition of everything they have fought for and a guaranteed level of poverty , given that prosperity is reserved for big business , which is getting bigger by the day .
We are therefore against the European Parliament ' s supporting the policy of the ECB , because it is a policy which generates more poverty for the many , i.e. for the workers , and more profit for the few , i.e. for the European monopolies .
It is a policy of inequality and increased exploitation of the workers .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report and we believe that the people will unite in their fight to overturn this anti-grass roots , barbaric and inhumane policy .
.
( NL ) My group voted against Paragraph 20 .
The reason for this is as follows . Paragraph 20 talks of a tightening of the conditions that countries entering the European Union must meet if they wish to become part of EMU .
We are not against a debate on the Member States ' joining of the EMU , but feel that it is a little premature at this moment .
It will be at least two years before the first countries join after which there will be at least two years in which these countries will have to function in the exchange rate mechanism .
We must not tie ourselves down too early , a lot can happen in the meantime .
It will become a lot clearer in one or two years ' time .
.
I welcome this third annual report by the Governor of the European Central Bank , Mr Duisenberg .
I regret , however , that the ECB does not follow the high standards of transparency , accountability and openness set by the Bank of England .
The Bank of England was granted operational independence in May 1997 in one of the first acts of the incoming Labour Government .
Minutes of meetings of its Monetary Policy Committee , including voting records and reasoning , are now published after about 6 weeks .
This boosts market confidence in its decisions and is a great example of open government .
It can surely be no coincidence that , since the Labour Government ' s brave decision in May 1997 , Britain has enjoyed an unprecedented period of economic stability .
It can also be no coincidence that the Labour Government ' s decision was criticised at the time by the boom-and-bust Tories , who have an outstanding record on economic instability and incompetence .
The ECB will not have the full confidence of the market until it becomes more open .
Mr Duisenberg will surely face a challenge second to none with the introduction of euro banknotes on 1 January 2002 .
I welcome the ECB ' s decision to distribute euro coins to consumers and larger banknotes to business beforehand .
However , I am concerned that shoppers and small and medium-sized enterprises will not have smaller notes in their hands until " e-day " itself .
This may well give rise to endless chaos and confusion which should be avoided at all costs .
The practical changeover to the euro on 1 January 2002 will clearly be a litmus test for the ECB and I very much hope that it will rise to the challenge .
I would very much like to see the ECB follow a policy of openness and transparency similar to the Bank of England .
It would be perverse for Britain to go from a position of transparency to one of relative secrecy .
Therefore , if Britain is ever going to embrace the euro , the ECB must be seen also to embrace greater openness .
Maaten report ( A5-0222 / 2001 )
Madam President , my last explanation of vote relates to economic actors during the period of transition to the euro .
On 1 January 2002 , we will , at last , have the euro in Europe .
However , Madam President , last week , I was at the bar of the town where I live - Curno , in the province of Bergamo in Italy - and while I was paying for my coffee , the owner , who was talking to other customers , said : " How are we going to manage in January 2002 ?
If people pay me in lire , will I have to give them their change in euro ?
And if they pay me in euro , will I have to give them their change in lire ? "
I could find no answer to that question in this or any other document and so , in this explanation of vote , I call for the euro to be introduced directly on 1 January 2001 , without the transition period .
- ( FR ) Looking at the proposals in the Maaten report for easy ways to physically exchange coins and banknotes as from 1 January 2002 , one is struck by the disproportion between these ridiculous little tricks and the real scale of the problem .
Obviously , this entire operation was conceived from the outset with no regard whatsoever for the difficulties people come up against in their day-to-day life .
And it is still going on .
Indeed what is the point of frontloading the public with euro notes so that they can get used to them ( a point which , in fact , has not even been accepted ) when at the same time we find that retailers will have to make huge efforts but will receive no financial aid , that they will have no guarantee of counterfeit euros being refunded and that the proposal to allow the national currencies to be used alongside the euro to make life easier for our fellow-citizens was rejected out of hand ?
Not surprisingly , it now turns out that the public is not very enthusiastic .
Referring to the information campaigns , the Maaten report even notes that : " it is fair to assess how disappointing the results have been so far " ( explanatory statement , page 15 ) .
Its reaction , however , is disturbing .
The way to motivate small companies is to warn them that it would be illegal not to switch over to the euro after 1 January 2002 : " as ' soft ' campaigns have barely influenced small- and medium-sized companies , there is the need to be more explicit " ( ibidem ) .
So Europe will be interfering hugely in the day-to-day life of our fellow-citizens from 1 January 2002 . In fact , it will make things worse because the public will realise at once and in a very tangible way that the whole massive changeover operation could only have been conceived by a brain totally indifferent to or ignorant of even the slightest practical problems and that this operation could only prosper in an institutional system cut off from the people .
Our only hope is that one good thing will come out of it , namely that this experience will help change the course of Europe tomorrow .
. ( PT ) Despite the negative position that we adopted when the single currency was created , not only due to issues of sovereignty , but also because of the potential economic consequences of a State losing control over monetary and exchange-rate policy , with the resulting consequences for employment , as well as the philosophy underlying the Stability Pact and wage moderation , we feel it is crucial that closer attention be paid to this preparatory phase for the introduction of the euro .
We must create macro-economic mechanisms to minimise costs and , in terms of the transition period , the workers and the small and micro-enterprises must not be the ones who ultimately pay for the introduction of the euro , either through an artificial increase in prices or through the costs of the whole process and the attempts at abuse and fraud that could take place over that period .
It is particularly important to give effective support to the crucial role of traditional trade in enlightening the public , because these traders are closest to the people .
They are a key factor in the entire process of replacing national currencies with the single currency , which requires an extra effort in addition to all of the enormous changes , specifically in terms of accounting , internal and external documentation , IT , etc .
- ( FR ) I voted for Mr Maaten ' s report and I want to emphasise what a good job our rapporteur has done .
I am glad Parliament is finally stating its position on such an important issue , but , at the same time , I regret that it left it until 181 days before the introduction of the euro .
It is high time we took a stance on an issue that is an economic priority and continues to give rise to some doubt and disquiet among the general public .
The Maaten report draws attention to the main problems and suggests practical solutions that could make the switchover to the euro easier .
These suggestions should be taken on board at all levels of decision-making and in every sector .
Let us not forget that the people of Europe also have a key role to play , alongside the companies and financial circles , and that their reactions depend on the effectiveness of the information campaigns conducted so far .
Once again , the disappointing results of these campaigns show how necessary it is to make practical proposals that have a direct effect on people ' s daily lives .
If these proposals are put into practice , they should help turn understandable apprehension into legitimate expectation .
- ( FR ) In my capacity as member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I tabled a number of amendments to Jules Maaten ' s draft report on means to assist economic actors in switching to the euro .
I note with satisfaction that they have all been adopted .
During this debate , I very much want to emphasise once again that we must leave the door open to the three Member States that have chosen not to enter the eurozone immediately .
Let me therefore point out that it is important to launch an information campaign addressed not only to the Member States that are participating in the single currency project but also to the others , giving them a special position with regard to third countries .
Our report sends out a political signal in that regard .
Another amendment , which was largely incorporated in the final report , concerned the conversion free of charge into euros of the coins of another euro-zone country .
All the citizens of the European Union have amassed foreign coins from their travels abroad on business or pleasure .
Many of them will not have a chance to spend them before the new euro coins and notes are introduced on 1 January next year .
That is why I put a written question on the subject to the Commission at the end of November last year .
The Commission evaded the question by referring to the disproportionate handling charges .
Yet I wonder whether it is right to expect the citizens once again to have to pay the price of not being able to exchange the coins they have acquired from other Member States .
So I note with satisfaction that Parliament " believes therefore that recommendations should be made to banks to ensure that coins from the twelve eurozone Member States can be exchanged on the same terms as banknotes " .
I hope the government and banking authorities will not lend a deaf ear , like the Commission .
- ( FR ) I congratulate Mr Maaten on his excellent report on means to assist economic actors in switching to the euro .
Six months before the entry into force of the single currency , it would be a good idea for Parliament to show an interest in the economic actors and their preparations for this final stage .
Today , during this final stage , the Member States have a crucial role to play .
For instance , some economic operators will be tempted to raise prices by unfairly rounding them off upwards .
As chairman of the Marseilles tourist office , I have heard tell of practices of this kind and of the anxiety of some of the professionals involved .
A period of adjustment will be needed for the establishment of the single currency , during which the consumers will have to be reassured rather than exploited .
The economic actors concerned must realise that it is wrong to give priority to immediate small profits over consumer confidence and the smooth changeover to the single currency .
Let me also point to the importance of flanking measures for all small and medium-sized companies .
In the tourist sector , for instance , I find that many of them are not adequately prepared .
I deplore this and I assume economic operators in other sectors are just as vague .
The idea of introducing tax incentives put forward in Mr Maaten ' s report is a good one .
Following on directly from that , the Member States must endeavour to find ways of encouraging the economic operators to start thinking in terms of the euro very soon , so that they will not have to pay the price of further delays .
( The explanation of vote was cut short pursuant to Rule 137of the Rules of Procedure )
( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , my point of order is exactly the same as Mr Provan ' s .
I , like many Members in this Chamber , have looked at the official record at lunchtime today and it does say 273 for , and 272 against .
If that is the official record - and that is the record that is published - then I would suggest that the result given by the President this morning is incorrect .
Mr President , obviously my name is not Al Gore and this is not Florida .
I do not want to discuss the question of pregnant chads or whatever they were in Florida , but like the other colleagues , I have looked at the written record and it shows 273 votes for , 272 votes against , contrary to the declaration of the result and the statistical evidence of earlier today .
When , for once and with considerable effort , the Liberal Democrat Group managed to vote as one and we find ourselves on the losing side of such a vote , it is all the more important to us to raise this issue .
There may be various explanations of a technical sort and I should be interested if so , to hear them .
But this touches on something of a very fundamental political nature , and merely technical responses to a record which shows a difference in votes may not be enough .
I am aware of the rule which states that the President ' s ruling on votes shall be final .
At this moment , I do not insist on a particular outcome , although I reserve the right to continue questioning the technical and political dimensions .
What I do ask , Mr President , is whether you , on behalf of the presidency , are in a position consistent with Rule 138 , to make a clear declaration at this time as to what is the position and what is the result of the vote cast .
The presidency will say what it has to say when the list of speakers on points of order comes to an end .
Mr Poettering has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I would have welcomed it if there had been no reason for me to rise at this point . I had assumed you would be making a statement at the start of this sitting on how you see this difficult situation .
I rose only because others have now risen and I then feel obliged to do so as well .
First of all , however , I believe it is essential for you to make a statement on your view of the situation .
I reserve the right to speak again at that stage .
I will only refrain from commenting further at this point if you now supply this House with the information it requires .
Mr President , I am not the President of the United States Federal Court , but perhaps I can help you .
Firstly , since it is the tradition in this House and furthermore is in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , what matters is the public declaration of the results by the presidency .
This is a rule which has been applied in this case and also in other dubious cases , and I am referring to the presidency ' s interpretation in relation to the Ruiz Mateos case , which has been discussed here recently .
What matters is the declaration by the presidency .
Secondly , I would like to draw the Members ' attention to a document they all have , or have had , on their desk today : yesterday , Tuesday , Mr Provan , presiding over the House , announced that there was a new Member of Parliament to replace Mr Casini , Mr Mario Brienza .

I would like to know whether you have checked if Mr Brienza , as is his right , has voted today without the services of this House having had the opportunity , with their usual diligence , to include him on the register .
If that is the case , it explains everything and I return to what I said at the beginning : what matters is the declaration of the results by the presidency ; if not , we are led to a very dangerous interpretation which takes us nowhere .
Mr President , I would ask you to check whether Mr Brienza has voted .
Since I can see , ladies and gentlemen , that all the speeches are dealing with the same issue ....
( Laughter and comments ) You know that presiding over this House requires acute observation skills .



( Laughter and comments ) Since I see that you are all referring to the same issue , if Mr Bouwman , Mr Lehne , Mr Medina Ortega and Mr Bourlanges , who have asked for the floor , are going to do the same , I would ask them to give up the floor so that the presidency can give an appropriate explanation .
Ladies and gentlemen , this morning a vote took place which the electronic system recorded as a draw of 273 votes to 273 votes .
The electronic system accurately reflected the reality of the House at that moment .
However , later on , in the verification , the result recorded by the electronic system did not coincide with the number of Members appearing on the list of Members of Parliament available to the services .
This difference must naturally have an explanation , and a simple and logical explanation .
Ladies and gentlemen , the explanation is that a recent replacement had not yet been incorporated into the list available to the services .
This is , as I say , a simple explanation of a perfectly understandable circumstance which I would even go as far as to say was trivial .
You now know the explanation , which will be given in detail at the Conference of Presidents which has been called for the purpose for 4.15 p.m. , although I am telling you in advance .
The vote took place correctly , the result is the one you know and which have seen with your own eyes this morning and , therefore , that clears this issue up .
( Applause ) Mr Poettering has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I note your statement and believe that you are correct , both in terms of process and under our Rules of Procedure .
I simply think it is important that the President of this Parliament naturally has the right to convene the Conference of Presidents .
However , the Conference of Presidents - and this is why I have risen again - can only accept information from the President of Parliament again ; it has no right to make any further amendments to any decisions announced this morning by the President .
Mr Poettering , the calling of this Conference of Presidents is simply a gesture of courtesy by the presidency towards the group presidents , in order to duly inform them of this incident .
Mr Cox has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , when I spoke earlier I said I should like to reserve the right to speak again .
I was personally aware of the explanation , which you have now given publicly .
It is an unfortunate technical slip-up , but I accept it was an honest mistake .
I also accept the declaration , albeit reluctantly .
But if it is merely a technical slip-up , it would be a political mistake to call a Conference of Presidents for the purpose of dealing in a political organ of the House with something for which there is a perfectly reasonable technical explanation .
I shall not attend such a meeting because it seems to me you should make a ruling from the Chair and we should be done with the matter .
This is not a trivial matter .
We accept the logical reason that you have given , but I have to ask you a further question .
Was the Member who replaced Mr Casini indeed entitled to vote , as Mr Casini ' s resignation was only announced on Monday evening .
Under Rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure , there has to be an exchange of letters between the European Parliament and the Italian Government so that we can actually confirm his entitlement to vote and if that is the case , of course , it is a valid vote .
Mrs McCarthy , I am pleased to inform the House that all the Members present this morning were able to exercise their vote .
Mr President , if you would permit me to make one final comment : all this confusion would have been quite unnecessary if the parliamentary administration - after producing the record and noting that contrary to the result given , only 272 votes against were printed out - had detected the error before this record was published .
Surely that is not an unreasonable expectation ?
Welcome


Ladies and gentlemen , it is my pleasure to welcome a delegation from the Parliament of Yemen , presided over by Dr Abdelwahab Mahmoud , Vice-President of Parliament , who is in the gallery and who is doing the honour of visiting us on the occasion of the second interparliamentary meeting with the Delegation for Relations with the Mashreq Countries and the Gulf States .
This House is very pleased to note Yemen ' s will to come closer to Europe and we pray that this second meeting will be the beginning of an important step towards strengthened cooperation with the European Union which will allow Yemen to once again find the road to prosperity and the consolidation of its democracy .
We wish the Yemeni Delegation fruitful meetings and an excellent stay in Strasbourg .
Human rights in the world and EU fundamental rights
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A5 ­ 0193 / 2001 ) by Mr Wuori , on behalf of the Committee on External Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on human rights in the world in 2000 and the European Union Human Rights Policy ;
( A5-0223 / 2001 ) by Mr Cornillet , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on fundamental rights in the European Union .
Mr President , the discussion of this report has in many ways shown the intolerably lightweight attitude to human rights amid the daily pressures of serious politics .
Nevertheless , human rights , which have even been called the last temporal religion of our time , go deeper than the politics of the day .
Politics is necessary in order for us not to have to look history in the eye .
But , at the same time , it may seem less obvious that human rights are not just a convenient tool for driving political objectives , or , at worst , a pretext for action or inaction as dictated by common sense politics .
Human rights are thematic , systematic and , above all , normative .
They are the result of our cultural evolution and they represent those values to which historical change , including the development of the European Union , is anchored .
They must not nor cannot be sacrificed on the altar of mere political expediency or rhetorical commitment .
So that one day the EU might have a genuine common foreign and security policy , it must be founded on a common human rights strategy .
Right now I think we are headed in the right direction .
Internally , the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and , externally , both the EU ' s annual report on human rights and , in particular , the latest Commission communication contain valuable points of view to consider in making human rights work more effective .
Belgium , the country to hold the presidency , whose Foreign minister , Mr Michel , is , I am pleased to say , here participating in this debate , has stressed the need for increased coherence and consistency , which will hopefully go further than the requirements of mere political correctness , as well as greater penetration , transparency and clear priorities regarding human rights , which the conclusions of the General Affairs Council of 25 June 2001 also reinforce .
The annual report placed emphasis on the importance of dialogue and cooperation between governments and civil society .
As Commissioner Patten said during the Finnish presidency at the EU ' s first human rights forum in 1999 , it would be intellectual vandalism to ignore the opinions of NGOs as the knowledge and experience of the European human rights community is unparalleled in all the world .
But we must begin by improving our own approach .
If there is no strategy , then tactics will beget a strategy , which means that ad hoc political action will disregard the basic , intrinsic principles of human rights and the rule of law .
We are ready to lecture others on these , but we can easily bypass them for compelling political reasons , as was the case just last week in connection with Slobodan Milosevic ' s rushed extradition .
It may indeed have been an important legal and political milestone that reflected a new doctrine in the making , where state sovereignty may have to step aside to make way for universal human rights .
We must also be consistent in the way we judge non-member countries and especially certain EU candidate countries , including Turkey .
For harsh criticism to be justified it must be based on fair play and impartial treatment .
Otherwise , EU enlargement may become more and more like a Potemkin village , in which the applicants implement cosmetic changes in order to comply with the EU ' s demands issued from behind a deceptive façade , one which even smacks of sanctimoniousness .
This year ' s human rights report , which the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy adopted unanimously , contains numerous proposals for making EU human rights policy more effective with regard to non-member countries .
In the light of that , thematic , topical choices would seem to be the best way to proceed , as now is the case with EU guidelines and common attitudes regarding the death penalty and torture .
It is vital to have more dialogue between the EU ' s own experts and greater transparency , but we should also be able to make bolder use of existing remedies to prevent conflicts and promote observance of human rights , such as the human rights clauses contained in agreements with non-member countries , when they refer to Russia , for example .
The report ' s key theme is freedom of speech , not just because both traditional and very new dangers threaten it , but because it has a strategic importance in improving the human rights of all - first , second and third generation human rights - and in exposing violations .
It would be naïve to play down the importance of human rights .
It is high time we put principles into practice and we took determined , pragmatic action to create an integrated human rights strategy for the EU as a whole .
Mr President , let me say - and I am certainly not laying any blame on Mr Wuori here - that it is rather surrealistic to combine human rights and fundamental rights in the same joint debate .
In fact , we are entirely responsible for fundamental rights in Europe , while we can only take a humble approach to human rights in the world , knowing how little influence we can exert there .
Yet there is perhaps an intermediate area : in the candidate countries we can look at human rights and fundamental rights as a whole in view of their forthcoming accession to the European Union .
I would like to explain the new title of this report and why the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs endorsed the method adopted for this year ' s report .
Our report is now called a report on fundamental rights rather than a report on human rights .
We deliberately chose to take a broader and more neutral approach .
This new method is based on the European Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights , which offers a fresh perspective by introducing a new and innovative element into political life ; it is up to Parliament to breathe life into this Charter .
So it was only natural for Parliament ' s responsible committee to take the Charter we adopted in the House as its starting point for this report .
We agreed that since there was to be an annual report , it had to be a report and it had to be annual .
Let me explain myself .
A report looks at facts , so we had to analyse verifiable facts .
And the report had to be annual , because it is interesting to compare what happened from one year to another and to check the year after what happened to Parliament ' s resolutions of the year before .
So why choose the Charter of Fundamental Rights ?
I think we had to do so .
This is in fact an eminently European document since it came out of the Convention , i.e. it was the combined effort of the three legitimate bodies that made up the Convention .
In any case , this Convention has been quoted as an example that can point the way forward for other European texts .
The Charter is a complete text because , for the first time ever , it includes civil and political rights but also economic and social rights and , therefore , covers a broad sweep of fundamental rights .
Lastly , it is a reference document .
Whatever the outcome of the debate on its inclusion or not in the Treaties , it has already become a reference document since the European Court of Justice draws on it and the Commission itself has undertaken to have the activities of its services screened for compatibility with the Charter .
And , as I said earlier , it is a reference document , for the candidate countries because the Union could not accept a country that did not respect the values upheld by the European Charter on Human Rights with regard to its own inhabitants .
I also agree with Mr Wuori that our credibility is at stake here .
We can only criticise others if we have the political courage to do the same to ourselves .
This report offers us a means of doing so .
Turning now to the working method , let me remind you that the Charter of Fundamental Rights sets out a minimum number of rights to which every citizen of the Union is entitled .
So we looked at the 50 articles of this Charter and checked whether they were applied in the 15 Member States and at Union level .
The report is planned in the same way as the Charter ; the resolution repeats the chapter headings of the Charter , as does the explanatory statement .
We have drawn on a wide variety of different sources : the Council of Europe , of course , and the activities of its committees , the national parliaments , the NGOs , civil society , the Vienna observatory , a network of jurists .
In fact we have used every source we could find , feeling we should not disregard any important or reliable source available to us .
Let me point out here that the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms has very few resources for these activities .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has nine individuals and one administrative unit for this purpose .
This is not the case of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and you will find that the resolution calls for the necessary resources to enable us to do our work properly .
While taking this opportunity to thank everyone who helped draw up this report , let me also say that we call for a network of jurists .
I think it is important to be able to consult a network of national jurists to support the team of rapporteurs and help collect information .
Lastly , we want to work with the other Parliamentary committees , for given that the Charter also focuses on environmental rights and economic and social rights , the committees responsible for these areas must of course also have a say on the way the Charter is applied in the European Union .
The philosophy underlying this report is the refusal to brand this or that state , to draw attention to this or that blunder .
Quite the contrary .
In any case , the rapporteur believes that the " zero defect " idea is utopian when it comes to human rights . Instead , human rights and fundamental rights in Europe mean that when a mistake is discovered , we can complain , condemn the perpetrator , hold an administrative inquiry and take regulatory or legislative decisions to prevent its recurrence .
That is the kind of respect for human rights to which we can rightly aspire .
Lastly , this report is in two parts , as required by the rules .
First there is the resolution , which has been amended as a result of the discussions in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and the plenary Assembly ; then there is the explanatory statement .
I just want to say that no country has been spared and those who take the trouble to read this report will find that both the explanatory statement and the resolution put forward proposals to resolve the matter in the spirit to which I referred a moment ago .
In fact , this first report is intended as a rough draft , the matrix of a new method .
If the plenary accepts the rapporteur ' s proposals and the report adopted in committee , we will be able to work in a much more collective manner , based on cooperation within and outside the European Parliament , on a dialogue with the NGOs , a dialogue with the national parliaments , which are our natural partners .
We will have a report that is detailed , checked by an entire committee and which , I believe , will be awaited , and perhaps feared , by public opinion .
At any rate , that is my hope .
Mr President , the first thing I have to say is that I do not recognise myself in the opinion which I myself am signing in relation to this report .
This is for one fundamental reason : at the point of voting , two paragraphs were removed from this opinion of the Committee on Petitions which seemed to me to be extremely important . They were voted off essentially by Members from the Right .
I would like to quote these two paragraphs which seemed so important to me and which , when they disappeared from the text , obliged me to abstain from my own opinion .
One of them said - actually it was the end of one paragraph - that ' economic , social and cultural rights are essential to the exercise of civil and political rights ' .
A person who is hungry , who has no work and who has no home , is in no position to enjoy civil rights .
I thought this sentence was important and it was removed .
The other , which is perhaps a bit more arguable , said : ' the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union should be supplemented with such important binding rights as the right to work , housing , a minimum income , the right to a healthy environment and the voting rights for citizens of third countries who have resided for five years in the Union , as well as the extension of civil rights to immigrants who arrive in Europe in search of a decent life ' .
This paragraph was also removed .
I therefore had to abstain from my own opinion , Mr President .
Nevertheless , I believe that the Committee on Petitions clearly contributes to the defence of the rights of the European citizens .
The proof is that more than 1 400 citizens in Europe send petitions to this committee each year , which relate to the recognition of qualifications , free movement , the rights of immigrants and the right to a healthy environment .
Mr President , I unfortunately have to recognise that in Europe we have a scourge , terrorism , which seriously harms the human right to expression and the fundamental right , the right to life .
We would very much like - and I repeat this in my recent modest capacity and I will continue to repeat it - Europe today to be a continent which is distinguished in the defence of its own human rights and of human rights outside its borders .
I believe that that is the role we must play .
Unfortunately , I believe that we are not playing it at the moment but I hope that we will be able to do so in the future .
Mr President , may I start by commending Mr Wuori for a challenging and focussed report , which has attracted overwhelming support from this Parliament .
I also enjoyed listening to the minister ' s speech : Parliament knows his personal commitment to the enhancement and protection of human rights .
The year since Parliament ' s last report on human rights has been punctuated with important institutional and policy developments .
The reform of external aid has taken root and Europe Aid is tackling the avalanche of responses to the two recent calls for proposals on human rights , some 1 400 proposals for a total of EUR 1.6 billion .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights has been solemnly proclaimed and it is an important element in the European Union ' s efforts to ensure coherence between internal and external human rights policy .
The adoption by the Council of guidelines on torture has provided a clear framework for policy and action in that area and the communication on human rights and democratisation , which was long in gestation , but strong in delivery , was adopted on 8 May and it sets out a clear strategy for the short term and the medium term .
We now have to focus on the implementation of its proposals .
It is evident from Mr Wuori ' s report that Parliament and Commission are thinking along similar lines when it comes to human rights .
This is my first opportunity to present the communication to Parliament in a plenary session .
Boiled down to its essence , the communication seeks to promote coherent and consistent human rights policies in the European Union ' s relations with third countries , to maximise the leverage afforded by political dialogue , trade and external assistance , and to set out a more strategic and focussed approach for the European initiative , for democracy and human rights .
Several issues raised in Mr Wuori ' s report dovetail with points in our communication .
For example , we make clear that Parliament will be consulted on the programming of the European initiative for democracy and human rights for 2002 and the years beyond .
On reporting and evaluation , the Commission is committed to publishing regular reports on the activities that we fund .
The latest report was released on 22 May and it provides a thorough analysis of projects supported under the 2000 budget .
The promotion of human rights is , as the honourable Member ' s report makes clear , an indispensable element in the prevention of conflict .
The communication on conflict prevention issued in April confirms the high priority given by the Commission to developing the Union ' s capacities .
More systematic use of country-strategy papers will help to ensure the cogent use of Community instruments to address both the root causes of conflict and other human rights problems .
As regards the rapid reaction mechanism , the Commission will provide Parliament in due course with an evaluation of activities undertaken .
The central theme of the honourable Member ' s report , freedom of expression , finds an echo in the communication , which makes clear that this will fall under the first of the four priority areas for the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights Programme for 2002 and beyond , and that theme is indeed of pivotal importance .
The right to express one ' s opinions without fear or consequence is to borrow a phrase from the great English judge Lord Devlin , -A lamp that shows that freedom lives . '
When state authorities start to close down newspapers , when they start to harass or imprison journalists , it is a sure sign that human rights and freedom are crumbling .
The European Union makes its views plain on this subject in its contacts with third countries , and in international fora such as the UN Commission on Human Rights .
Moreover , the rhetoric is matched with hard support .
Under the European initiative alone , over EUR 5.4 million was allocated in 2000 to projects in support of freedom of expression , free media and the protection and training of journalists .
A large project in Africa and Asia undertaken by ' Rapporteurs Sans Frontières ' , offers a good example .
Fact-finding on imprisoned journalists , and the provision of practical assistance to journalists and their families , is coupled with education and media campaigns .
I would like to look now at another thread running through the honourable Member ' s report , the relationship between our two institutions .
Parliament has cultivated a high profile with respect to human rights .
As I mentioned when I presented the communication to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on 15 May , the reports and resolutions of Parliament on the Commission ' s previous performance on human rights were of great use in drawing up the communication .
The Commission is keen to reinforce its dialogue on human rights with Parliament , and this is reflected in the consultations which will take place on programming the European initiative in 2002 .
In cooperation with the presidency , the Commission would also seek to ensure that the timing and location of the human rights discussion forum with non-governmental organisations , and with others , takes full account of the need for systematic participation by Members of this House .
Moreover , we want to enhance the potential of the forum .
We will begin by evaluating the events held so far , in consultation with Parliament , the Council and NGOs .
On human rights clauses , I note Parliament ' s concern about the lack of implementing rules on suspension in many agreements .
As we know , the most recent version of the essential elements clause , as contained , for example , in the Cotonou agreement , makes provision for a consultation procedure prior to any suspension of an agreement .
It is state-of-the-art in that respect , but changes to existing agreements would require individual renegotiations with partners , which is an undoubtedly lengthy process .
Nonetheless , the Commission stands ready to discuss the future shape and use of the clause , an issue that I raised at the informal foreign ministers ' meeting last month , and it will continue to attach importance to Parliament ' s views .
A final word on police and security equipment , a point which is not directly addressed to the Commission in the report .
The Commission intends to submit to the Council before the end of summer a proposal for controlling and , where necessary , prohibiting exports of equipment that may be used for the purposes of torture and cruel inhumane or degrading treatment .
The Commission will examine with Member States whether there is a need for Community action in respect of manufacturing , promoting or using such equipment .
I know this is of concern both to Members and to NGOs such as Amnesty International , and I am glad that we are close to taking such a significant step .
I congratulate the honourable Member once again on the excellent report and look forward to working with him and with the House in taking forward our shared concern in human rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to congratulate Mr Cornillet , the rapporteur , and the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the high quality of the report submitted to Parliament today for its approval .
Like my colleague , Mr Chris Patten , I want to join in the congratulations to Mr Louis Michel for the commitments he has just entered into as representative of the Council , in regard to the protection of fundamental rights , in foreign policy and in the Union ' s domestic policy .
In particular , let me draw your attention and thoughts to a highly significant phrase : " the Union should teach by example before it starts to preach . "
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms drew up a most ambitious report this year , covering a wide range of fundamental rights .
Clearly , it has achieved its objective .
The report contains a highly detailed and extensive explanatory statement .
It also includes a large number of pertinent recommendations , which would quite tangibly improve the protection of fundamental rights in the Union .
I also admire the structure of the report , which faithfully mirrors the structure of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I think it was a very good idea to opt for that approach .
Without doubt , it will help promote a community culture when it comes to the protection of fundamental rights .
I personally am convinced that over the years this parliamentary report will become a prime means of ensuring the constant and objective evaluation of the situation of fundamental rights in the Union .
We very much need this kind of evaluation if we want to maintain and develop the area of freedom , security and justice .
As we all know and like to repeat , fundamental rights really must be protected if we are to create an area that genuinely guarantees the free movement of persons .
We actually have the necessary legal instruments to achieve this : the charter proclaimed at Nice , but also Article 6 of the EU Treaty , which refers to the European Convention on Human Rights and the constitutional tradition common to the Member States , together with Article 7 of that treaty , which will be further strengthened by the Nice Treaty when it enters into force .
We now need to acquire the instruments to conduct our policy .
The Commission very warmly welcomes the various proposals set out in the report , in particular those on creating the technical tools to deliver expertise in this area .
The Commission took careful note of the recommendations addressed to it more directly : the appointment of a Commissioner with responsibility for fundamental rights in the Union and the implementation of policies linked to the establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice , on the one hand , the reorganisation of the departments responsible for monitoring the charter , on the other hand .
These two recommendations are undeniably logical and deserve serious thought .
I can assure Mr Cornillet and Members that I will encourage the Commission to hold a political discussion on these two matters .
Turning to the first recommendation , I pointed earlier to the link between the protection of fundamental rights and establishing an area of freedom , security and justice .
So I can only agree on the need to look at this subject in the context of the on-going reorganisation of the Commission following the changes brought about by the Treaty of Amsterdam , looking ahead to the entry into force of the provisions of the Nice Treaty and especially with a view to the forthcoming enlargement .
I am in a position where I can well appreciate the real importance and necessity of these changes and of the new report on fundamental rights that the organs and institutions of the Union and the EU Member States will be drawing up pursuant to Article 7 .
Coming now to the second recommendation , let me draw Parliament ' s attention to an internal memo the Commission adopted last March calling on it to show strict respect for the charter in all its activities .
In particular , the services in question were asked to ensure that texts proposed or adopted by the Commission were examined a priori for their consistency with the charter .
A standard recital was to be introduced to ensure that this had been done in the case of proposals that clearly had a bearing on the protection of fundamental rights .
This has in fact been done in the various proposals recently submitted to Parliament and the Council .
I cannot give you my position on the many recommendations set out in the motion for a resolution under the various headings of the charter .
Personally , I consider these recommendations , addressed in the main to the Member States , quite feasible and , as I said , likely to bring very tangible improvements in the protection of fundamental rights in the Union .
We know that democracy is a model that can never be attained in full , but more importantly it is a model we aim to attain .
I believe the Member States must look at these recommendations in the perspective of gradually approaching our aim .
We must see them not as criticisms but as suggestions on how to give better protection to fundamental rights throughout the European Union .
The Commission has also taken careful note of the recommendations addressed to it on European citizenship , especially in regard to points 122 and 123 of the report .
Let me point out that the Commission has made a proposal , which was forwarded to Parliament and the Council late last week , on reviewing the texts in force on the free movement of persons , to which point 123 refers .
I hope the Belgian presidency will be able to examine these proposals rapidly , under the codecision procedure , since they are an important means of ensuring real freedom of movement and right of residence in the Member States .
Fundamental rights are , without doubt , the identity card of a European political and social model whose values we want to preserve , not for purely defensive reasons but mainly with a view to being proactive , while accepting the need to adapt them to a world undergoing profound change .
When we build Europe ' s future we must place fundamental rights at the heart of the essential political compromise and show the prime role played by the dignity of the individual and by a humanist vision of the European political project .
I hope that this new role that has now been assigned to fundamental rights will also be the key to restoring public enthusiasm for Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by thanking Mr Wuori very warmly for producing such a good and comprehensive report .
As the shadow rapporteur of the PPE-DE Group , I would like to express my sincere thanks to him for our cooperation .
The European Parliament quite rightly views itself as the European institution which , time and again , intervenes most resolutely in the internal affairs of third countries , in particular , in the interests of individuals in these states .
Yes , we intervene , for we believe that protecting human rights is not an internal matter at all .
In protecting human rights , however , individual events are often of great relevance too .
Since last week , President Milosevic is now facing justice in The Hague - a fact which is now giving many other dictators and autocrats sleepless nights .
These legal proceedings against a former head of government are classical preventive human rights policy .
I can only advise certain despots to be on their guard in future .
Their time will come !
Earthly justice will prevail .
Yet does this type of report have any real impact ? This is a frequently asked question .
Let me state the case quite clearly : once you have seen how those affected , or the governments which believe they are affected , redouble their efforts , even before the report is produced , in order to prevent what they perceive as embarrassing statements from being made , it is clear that these reports must have an impact , an impact which extends into the civil society of the countries concerned .
Indeed , in some cases , the criticism is very convenient for these governments too .
Among the candidate countries , for example , they offer an opportunity , based on the failings identified in our reports , to take appropriate remedial action .
Let me take the recent example of Romania : here , Baroness Nicholson has painstakingly revealed the appalling conditions in orphanages , trafficking in children , and abuses in the field of adoption . In this case , the government is genuinely taking the initiative in a positive sense and addressing the problems identified .
However , we must continue our efforts . This is a task for the Commission ' s local delegation and our 15 ambassadors as well , so that we can monitor how the measures are implemented in practice .
India is another example : I fully endorse Mr Haarder ' s proposed amendments on the issues of caste-discrimination and untouchability .
The Indian Government opposes these practices in principle as well , but I have the impression that it must do more in this area .
Perhaps it needs us to call openly for action .
Human rights are not an opportunistic issue .
In specific cases , we are justified in repeatedly reprimanding all our governments .
Anyone who applies double standards , for pragmatic political reasons , to China , Russia or , indeed , one of the parties involved in the Middle East conflict ultimately does nothing to help the situation .
No double standards : this was Commissioner Patten ' s call to the foreign ministers in Sweden as well .
I hope that the governments will heed this warning .
I do not want to see any more tortured looks on our side when , in delegation talks with China for example , we raise the issues of the death penalty , Falun Gong or Tibet . These tortured looks are due to fears , perhaps , that taking a stance could jeopardise good business .
Anyone who goes sleigh-riding with Mr Putin but does not find the strength to protest about Russia ' s latest methods of bringing the press into line through financial takeovers does no favours to our relations with Russia or help strengthen civil society in the country .
Let us ensure that human rights become an integral and pro-active element of every minister ' s speaking notes and the ensuing press conference whenever this is necessary .
Then we will have real political credibility , both internally and externally .

First of all , may I also commend Mr Wuori for his wide-ranging report and Mr Cornillet for his boldness and his vision in trying to fashion a new procedure for the annual report on Fundamental Rights in the EU , linked to the Charter .
In both reports , however , there is still cause for concern and alarm .
The reality is that as we speak in this House , human rights abuses continue ; human rights defenders disappear .
In Vietnam , for example , religious persecution continues and Buddhist monks remain imprisoned and under repressive house arrest .
Flung San Suu Kyi remains imprisoned in her home in Burma .
The death penalty is still carried out in democracies such as the United States .
In Belgrade , the police stand by and watch as hooligans attack lesbians and gay people at their gay pride celebration only days after millions of EU dollars were committed to that region and Milosevic was sent to The Hague .
Egypt incarcerates 55 gay men who are still denied legal representation and now face up to eight years in prison because they are gay .
Women are still genitally mutilated , human beings stoned to death , their limbs chopped off in the name of law .
Homosexuals are stoned to death , there is religious persecution , and children are abducted into war , not to mention the obscenities of rape and terrorism , torture and false disappearances - a catalogue of almost unutterable suffering which grows year on year .
In the EU , our own record on fundamental rights needs closer examination .
The treatment of refugees and asylum-seekers ; discrimination sometimes state-induced , against homosexuals ; racism and racist murders ; and inequality before the law .
The same applies to applicant countries .
The message we should send is that human rights are non-negotiable .
So long as one individual or one group suffers discrimination , we have all failed and we are all culpable .
A hierarchy of oppression is perpetuated by legislative inaction and democratic inaction .
We defend some minorities but not others .
When we name and shame countries , we are accused of imposing our standards .
But the standards we aspire to and we set are international standards , standards by which we must all be judged .
That is why we must be consistent in implementing human rights policy and systematically follow up human rights abuses .
I commend the Cotonou Agreement , as mentioned by Commissioner Patten .
We need to work closely with the United Nations and with the special rapporteurs as well as the NGOs .
We must develop our own in-house expertise and ensure that men , women and children born equal are afforded their natural human rights and civil liberties .
Our most powerful weapon is our imagination .
Imagine , that is you being tortured , mutilated , imprisoned , stoned to death because you are different or hold a different opinion .
Imagine that it happens to your daughter , your son , your father , your mother , your brother , your sister .
That is the reality and that is why we need a new approach .
We need it now .
We must not fail those who look to us to succeed .
Mr President , Commissioners , Mr President-in-Office , the fact that Serbia ' s former dictator Slobodan Milosevic is now in court in The Hague is a major victory for everyone who believes in human rights and international justice .
It shows that genocide and ethnic cleansing cannot be accepted by the international community .
The world has become a harsher place for dictators .
However , the outlook is not much better for the position of human rights in the world .
Human value is being violated on a daily basis , every minute individuals and groups are suffering various types of cruelty - torture , persecution , oppression .
In recent times , the EU has considerably increased its involvement in human rights , and it is clear that the EU shares common values .
This is expressed internally and externally , both in our new Charter of Fundamental Rights and in the demands we are making upon the candidate countries .
The EU stands united in its criticism of the death penalty , whether used in dictatorships such as China , Iraq and Saudi Arabia or democracies such as the US .
However , coordination between the EU institutions and between the EU and Member States could still be better .
In this year ' s report on human rights in the world , Mr Wuori chooses to focus on the issue of freedom of expression .
No democracy can function without free and independent debate , journalists being able to feel safe and citizens being able to express their views .
However , these conditions do not prevail .
Journalists are being killed , threatened and persecuted .
The situation is particularly serious in Iran , Belarus , China , Colombia and Cuba , while developments in Russia also give cause for concern .
In several countries , the regime is trying to prevent and limit citizens ' access to the Internet by censoring and closing websites .
These regimes are doing so because they know that the Internet is making it increasingly difficult to oppress their people .
As such , the Internet is a vital weapon in the fight for a better world .
Mr President , liberals around the world have stood and still stand at the barricades in order to fight for freedom of expression and human rights everywhere and for everyone .
We will continue to do this .
My group would like to thank Mr Wuori for an excellent report and the Belgian presidency for the support shown earlier for human rights .
Mr President , in areas such as human rights , the European Parliament has traditionally been , in a sense , the eye of the international community and has tried to goad the EU institutions into action .
Many people believe this is totally useless , but I think they are wrong .
Today we can do more than we could yesterday and no doubt less than tomorrow , but even that is very important .
Rather as in the case of sustainable development , respect for individual rights must become an integral element of the Union ' s external policy . It must be structured and based on a genuine strategy and it must apply as much to economic relations as to political relations .
This is not yet the case , as the rapporteur , Mr Wuori , points out .
But there are signs of progress .
For the rest , I firmly welcome the good cooperation Mr Wuori managed to establish with the human rights NGOs .
If Europe is to appear credible as a Union , basing its action on respect for human rights and sustainable economic development founded on solidarity , we will have to reject all forms of hypocrisy or ambiguity .
We must take a very clear stance in our political and economic relations with countries such as China , Russia , but also Saudi Arabia , the United States and many others .
We cannot disregard the fact that in these countries prisoners are executed , civilians foolish enough to belong to ethnic and political minorities are massacred , women are prevented from living free and people are tortured indiscriminately .
Mr Patten raised these aspects and I hope his words will very soon be followed by deeds .
Mr Michel ' s statement is reassuring as regards the coming six months , and I hope even longer .
I would like to ask him a very direct question .
Will Belgium launch a European initiative and table a resolution in the United Nations General Assembly calling for a moratorium on capital punishment ?
As you know , the Finnish presidency made a first attempt in 1999 , which failed .
What do you intend to do in this regard , Mr Michel ?
Thank you very much , Mr President .
I would like to begin by pointing out that the GUE / NGL Group is in favour of the two reports , by Mr Wuori and by Mr Cornillet .
They are both very good reports .
I witnessed a visit which Mr Cornillet made to Spain in relation to the situation of the immigrants , exactly a year after the incidents in El Ejido and I can testify to his concern .
And Mr Wuori has distinguished himself by producing a very complete report which we have all participated in and which I believe is a source of pride for the Committee on External Relations .


Furthermore , I am grateful for the speeches by the two Commissioners , Mr Patten and Mr Vitorino , as well as the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Michel , because they support the idea of Europe becoming the obligatory reference point for guaranteeing human rights in the world .
It is important to highlight this issue because , so far , it appears that only the United States represents this guarantee when in fact I think the opposite is happening .
Europe ' s cultural , historical and social heritage , the four generations of human rights which , since the French Revolution , have been building up within European history , and also the success we have had with European integration are a guarantee of the unique privileged role which the European Union can play in the rest of the world .
Nevertheless , this should not stop us believing that we have an historic shared responsibility with regard to the tragic situation of human rights on the three continents .
Because it is precisely our presence on those continents which is one of the causes of these peoples ' difficulties in having their human rights respected .
I think it would be worth establishing European Union human rights observatories in each of the three continents , which would maintain relations with the NGOs and with the instruments of the United Nations , so that the annual reports carried out by Parliament , to the Commission and the Council , may have the effect of improving our interventions .
We must not be surprised if sometimes our multinational companies ( as I have observed in Colombia or as happens in Africa and Asia ) are funding paramilitary groups which directly attack human rights .
It is our responsibility to bring these facts to light so that we can make progress in the establishment of human rights .
Finally , I would like to point out that , in the European Union , as Mr Cornillet has rightly said , we must offer an example rather than preach and therefore on this occasion we have the opportunity to begin with immigrants as one of the issues which Europe has still to deal with .
We cannot say that we need 70 million immigrants in order to make progress with our economy and then discriminate against them .
For all these reasons , it is important that we support these reports .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Cornillet for his work on the fundamental rights situation in the Union .
This is a detailed , balanced report which could genuinely provide constructive impetus for each Member State to give increasingly tangible , concrete substance to the principle of justice and the protection of the principal , inalienable rights of the European citizens .
This report could provide the opportunity for a moment ' s reflection , for an initial stock take of the effect of the new Charter of Fundamental Rights , which represents a stage which is only just the beginning and yet so important if we are to achieve a European unification which consists of more than finance and economics , which is also the home of rights and opportunities for all the European citizens , and where special attention is given to those whose rights are most often violated such as children , the marginalised and the poorest people .

Although I support the line taken by the report , I do have a few criticisms .
With regard to the chapter on non-marital relations , I feel that it is unacceptable to envisage equal legal status for marriages between people of the opposite sex and unions between people of the same sex .
Without prejudice to the right for all people not to be subjected to discrimination on the basis of their sexual orientation , there is still a legal and social need to protect the traditional marriage union as a fundamental unit of society , particularly where recourse to fertility treatment or the adoption of minors is concerned , which must remain the exclusive privilege of natural families .
This is precisely because of the need to protect minors for , all too often , we forget that fundamental rights are the prerogative not just of adults but also and above all of minors .
I would , however , like to draw Parliament ' s attention once again to the case of the male descendents of the House of Savoy who , in a Europe which is an area of justice , freedom and free movement , have been unable to return to Italy for over 50 years .
It would be appropriate if Parliament could help to resolve this matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is something very important missing from the motion for a resolution on human rights in the world : the principle of the self-determination of peoples .
We Padanians consider this to be a serious omission because it is impossible not to see that the denial or , in any case , the decision not to emphasise this right is one of the greatest possible violations of human rights .
Just consider the events of recent weeks , of recent months with regard to the Palestinian situation : a genuine , tragic violation on a daily basis of the principle of self-determination , which it is Europe ' s duty to give greater emphasis in its human rights documents .
Moreover , some of the States who are knocking on the door of the European Union were , until recently , stateless nations .
We must remember now , especially after the dissolution of the Soviet Union , that they are free , independent States .
How , then , can the European Union subject these countries to an assessment of their respect for human rights when , in its own documents , it does not proclaim loud and clear the protection of that principle - the principle of self-determination - that the peoples of those States have been denied for decades ?
Then , the part of the report which deals with the protection of cultural rights is wholly insufficient , not to say non-existent .
A guarantee of the right , for example , to see one ' s own language or religion protected cannot be considered to be fully effective if that guarantee merely constitutes the protection of the individual freedom to use that language or practise that religion .
In order for there to be genuine freedom to speak one ' s own language , we must ensure that new generations are educated in that cultural context , that the traditions and history of that minority are included in school curricula .
For example , in Padania , where I come from , those whose mother tongue is Piedmontese , as mine is , or Veneto , do not have the right to be taught it at school because those languages - Piedmontese and Veneto - are not part of school curricula .
Finally , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that point 93 fails to include a fundamental issue , the trafficking of human organs , which is a disgrace ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , in this combined approach respect for human rights in and outside the Union is central which has prompted me to reflect yet again on the issue of human rights .
More than ever this topic is high on the agenda . And rightly so , since there are still harrowing violations .
However , on the basis of my Christian philosophy , I should like to stress that even human rights are not above all norms .
The maintenance of human rights involves protective rules for human life in accordance with the design that God the Creator has for that life .
The Wuori report deals in a realistic way with this concept .
It limits itself to the most fundamental human rights .
But I wonder whether the European Union , with its limited financial and diplomatic means , can supervise the observance of those rights .
The policy of the Union must complement the individual capabilities of the Member States .
The only pressure that the Union can exert through human rights clauses in treaties and agreements is undermined in this report by arguing for flexible application .
We support maintaining critical dialogue , but flexibility must not become the norm for our policy .
Finally , Mr President , I should like to devote a few words to the Cornillet report .
As I have said I am a supporter of proper observance of human rights .
However , I do not believe that the European Union has the authority to concern itself in such detail with observance in Member States .
I also note the lack of a distinction between human rights and government policy objectives .
Too fanatical a plea for government action in human rights questions can simply lead to a restriction of civil liberties .
I should like to discuss Paragraphs 82-84 of the Cornillet report separately .
I regard marriage as a unique gift of the Creator .
Marginalisation of marriage through the introduction of alternative forms of cohabitation will do great harm to society .
Even in my own country I have come to be in a minority with such a view .
Still I cling to the good Biblical institution of marriage as a lasting union between man and woman .
I sincerely hope that the Netherlands government will have second thoughts on the decisions it has made .
I appeal to the Member States of the European Union to pay no heed to the call to follow in the footsteps of the Netherlands .
The attempt in Amendment No 24 to call attention to the position of terminal patients is in itself praiseworthy , but the concrete form it is given is misguided .
For this reason I have requested a split vote on this amendment .
Mr President , Commissioners , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Mr Cornillet very warmly , for his report is a sign of progress , above all in terms of structure , for it gives us the opportunity to review annually the extent to which we are genuinely fulfilling the provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the European Union .
However , as is the case every year , progress has been slowed down by various votes and proposed amendments , with efforts being made yet again to pack the report with political ideologies which actually do not belong there . They are political ideologies which perhaps cannot be achieved at home and which also violate the principle of subsidiarity .
They have no place here .
I am against every form of discrimination , and I would like to make this clear with a number of examples .
I am against every form of discrimination against homosexuality , but I oppose the politically-motivated attempts , apparent yet again in this report , to present homosexual marriage as the absolute norm and demand the same rights for it as marriage between partners of different sexes , which is actually still the norm today .
The fact that marriage between persons of different sexes - the core unit of society - is still the norm is a good thing , comrades , as people would say nowadays in Berlin .
I also oppose the attempts to grant all non-EU citizens the same rights to vote and stand for election as EU citizens .
This would be unique in the world , and would constitute discrimination against EU citizens .
I oppose the attempts to recast family reunion as an instrument of immigration by extending the term ' family ' to a large and ill-defined group .
This is unacceptable , for it removes Member States ' right to decide which workers they wish to , and are able , to admit , and how many .
Let us admit the immediate family by all means , but not the entire extended family .
We will not support the examples which I have cited or other political demands .
However , we will certainly vote for the report presented by the rapporteur Mr Cornillet .
Mr President , as shadow rapporteur for my group for the report by Mr Cornillet , whom I should , by the way , like to congratulate on the result of his work , I should like to address the question of respect for human rights in the countries of the European Union itself .
If we look at the facts on the table two complexes of problems stand out .
In the first place this time there are again reports on misbehaviour by government servants , such as police officers , prison staff , security services , and officials involved in the handling of asylum seekers .
Secondly one is struck by the number of reports of forms of unequal treatment and discrimination , especially of people belonging to so-called " weak " groups in society .
Racist violence against foreigners is the most visible manifestation of this phenomenon , but it also relates to the trafficking in women , discrimination in the workplace , to say nothing of homosexuals , since I have had enough of the topic for the time being .
Unfortunately in the preparatory phase in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs this substantive aspect of the human rights problem in the European Union was scarcely mentioned .
All attention focused on the way in which human rights reports in the European Parliament should be produced in future .
I have great appreciation for the commitment and stamina of the rapporteur , Mr Cornillet , but believe that the means are in danger of not achieving their end .
The discussion on the future design and organisation of this work took up a great deal of time and energy and was carried out under an undue amount of pressure .
A compromise turned out to have been almost reached , but elements were lost and now we must simply hope that things will turn out all right with the amendments .
Some aspects of the discussion have not yet been completely concluded and therefore I should like to raise some of these points now .
In the first place , the choice of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights as the coathanger for the report .
This choice , in itself an obvious one , must not , however , become a restrictive corset .
The discussion on the scope of human rights and the concept of human rights is still fluid .
Human rights are also a matter of living law .
Moreover , we must not forget that the Member States are also bound by human rights treaties of the Council of Europe and the United Nations and the specialised bodies .
The findings of the supervisory agencies of these treaties should in fact play a much greater part in the deliberations of this Parliament .
Secondly , there is the question : who does what ?
There are two parliamentary committees which deal with the matter : the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights .
There is a great deal of overlap both in the conclusions and in the themes , unnecessary and duplication of work is being carried out and there is stiff competition for staff and resources .
This requires intervention by the authorised bodies of this Parliament in order to coordinate things better .
My third question is : where should the countries of the European Union about which there is concern regarding the observance of fundamental rights be named ?
In view of the nature of the supervisory mechanism itself the only appropriate answer seems to me to be in the resolution itself and not tucked away in a note , as was the original intention of the rapporteur himself .
I find that in conflict with the fact that every month in this Parliament we rap third countries over the knuckles for violation of human rights .
Mr President , it was Mrs Malmström and myself who wrote the reports on human rights last year .
We are very pleased that the approach adopted then has been carried forward into the reports we are discussing today .
We Liberals support Mr Cornillet ' s desire for the new charter of human rights to be a model and criterion of relevance for this Parliament ' s work on human rights .
Like human rights watchdogs , we can make use of the charter even before it acquires formal status , and we can at the same time acquire a much needed means of opposing that watering down of the concept of human rights that threatens to turn the latter into everything and nothing .
There has , of course , been a tendency in this Parliament to make every conceivable subject from the party programmes into human rights issues .
It happens with the best of intentions , but it damages human rights because it makes citizens who disagree about one point or another say , ' f those are human rights , then we are opposed to them . '
The whole Austria business did a lot of damage , because it was all about opinions and suppositions .
If , instead , it had been about specific breaches of the charter of human rights , there would have been a lot of sympathy for the action .
That is why we here in Parliament must make the charter central .
We must guard it like watchdogs .
We must use it in such a way as to resist its being watered down by do-gooders .
That is why we Liberals are voting against almost all the amendments : not because we disagree with the intentions behind the amendments , but because we attach too much importance to human rights to be a party to using them to adorn every conceivable point of view that does not fall within the charter ' s human rights criterion .
As I say , however , we warmly support the two reports as they stand , except with regard to just a few points , and we are grateful for the fact that we have in this way acquired a better organised treatment of human rights for the future .
We have indeed before us two massive and authoritative reports for which we are indebted to the two authors .
Mr Wuori said , in introducing the debate , that this is about the fundamental principle of respect for human personality in all its manifestations .
Charters and conventions and rights seek to quantify and give exact terms to the impermissible forms of disrespect and then discountenance them everywhere .
The moving section on enlargement in Mr Wuori ' s paper reminds us that both a condition and a consequence of enlargement of the Union will be to expand the recognition , enforcement and upholding of human rights throughout this continent .
What could be a more welcome outcome ?
Mr Cornillet suggested that we should not take the two papers together .
I think we have to .
We must always remind ourselves , as we call upon others outside the Union to rise to the standards of respect for persons which seem to us fundamental , that we are continually at risk ourselves of falling below the standards .
Last night as the Echelon Committee adopted its report , it made it clear that running systems of random interception of messages breaches the fundamental right to privacy in one ' s personal life and communications .
That must stop .
Those who are doing it in the United Kingdom and elsewhere must be urged to put a stop to it .
There are other areas , such as the right to a speedy trial , where other states are not up to the mark .
We must press for rights to be recognised at home as well as abroad .
The annual report on the human rights situation in the European Union , on the one hand , and in the world on the other is a laudable and useful means of reviewing the Union ' s policy in this area .
It is certainly a necessary undertaking when we think of the infringements of human rights perpetrated against millions of men and women in too many parts of the world .
I will confine myself to two specific issues in this debate .
First of all I am thinking of the disturbing decline of the situation in Tunisia , at this very moment .
In the coming five days alone , militant democrats will be further harassed with at least three political trials coming up : the trial of the journalist Sihem Ben Sedrine , brutally arrested as he stepped from the plane ; Doctor Moncef Marzouki ; and Fathi Chamkhi , President of ATTAC Tunisia .
The European Parliament has already , on several occasions , condemned this unacceptable repression .
Yet it still needs to acquire effective tools and the necessary political will to ensure respect for the Association Agreement provisions on human rights , so that it can exert pressure that goes beyond mere words .
This question is all the more topical when we remember that on his visit to Tunis Commissioner Patten reaffirmed that Europe wants to act in close conjunction with Tunisia to give new impetus to the partnership .
It is indeed a real and beneficial partnership for the people on the two shores of the Mediterranean , but it must be based on the recognition of freedom of expression , movement and opinion .
So when will we see a special Association Council on these issues with Tunisia ?
The human rights situation really has declined .
Arrests , violence and torture are the common lot of the militant men and women who support human rights and who quite simply want to establish and live in a free society .
But there are also signs of a decline in the rights that affect the day-to-day life of every individual in the European Union itself .
Everyone , be he a European citizen or a foreign resident , has the essential right to a job , to acceptable wages , to a roof over his head .
The same applies to political rights , to the right to be treated as a full rather than a second-rate citizen in one ' s place of residence .
Accordingly , it should become the established rule that third-country nationals who have resided in the Union for at least five years have the right to vote and stand for election , as advocated by the Council of Europe since 1992 .
Let me conclude by saying how urgently necessary this is to the very future of a Union based on solidarity when we remember that the prospect of several candidate countries ' participating in the elections ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I would like to draw the attention of this House and the Commission to a matter which has been dealt with brilliantly in the report , a matter which is certainly less tragic than the physical violation of human rights which , I am sad to say , lies before us now , but which relates to a crucial , pivotal factor in the democratic processes of all countries and , above all - I am convinced - in the future of democracy in European and world societies : I refer to the issue of information , to a question which I feel to be central , the question of pluralism - and I will repeat this word , pluralism - of information .
At a time when this is becoming increasingly important , in a historic period in which television , in particular , is becoming an incredibly powerful and influential mass medium in the history of humanity , securing the pluralism of information in Europe means securing the basis for a democratic future .
Failure to guarantee this means exposing our countries and our area to hazards .
In my opinion , the question gains in importance precisely when we consider it in relation to enlargement , for countries are joining the Union whose experience is different , countries are acceding which have a greater need for tangible rules than ever before .
Well then , Europe does not have these tangible rules .
The Commission has been instigating and developing initial proposals for directives since the 1990s and the European Parliament has elaborated on these ideas on a number of occasions , but everything appears to have come to a standstill .
An idea also seems to be circulating which I consider to be dangerous : that world competition , particularly North American competition , should promote mergers rather than guarantee pluralism .
If that is the case , then I say to you that this is a great mistake .
The greater good , the greatest good is democracy .
I call upon Parliament and the Commission to address this issue and to produce a directive on the matter without delay .
Mr President , I had a prepared speech , which I decided to abandon after listening to Mr Michel .
He is no longer here but I am sure Mrs Neyts will pass on my words .
This is what I wanted to say to him .
Are you not slightly embarrassed , Mr Michel ?
You came to tell us about human rights in the world .
You represent a government that has just failed in judicial terms by arbitrarily banning one of the most important political groups in your country , the " Flemish bloc " , whose leader ' s only crime is to have stood for election according to the law .
The supposed anti-racism in Belgium - led by an unfrocked Dominican - is funded directly by the prime minister ' s cabinet , and all he wants to do is to muzzle the opposition .
In Belgium as elsewhere , love of country is fraudulently assimilated with xenophobia and xenophobia with racism .
They speak of the persecution of minorities while allowing certain minorities , ethnic , public or other , to persecute the majority of the population .
In Belgium there are occult lobbies - mainly freemasons and pederasts - that have been cornering the real power for aeons .
The political or trade union bosses have shared out among themselves the state , finance , the media , the university and the public offices .
One side has the right to a state prosecutor , the other to its judge .
New political groups can only stand for election if they can collect enough signatures and are prepared for police intimidation .
Mr Michel appears before us rather like the hypocrite Tartuffe in Molière ' s play : fat and pink , rosy-cheeked and carmine-lipped .
He ought to blush with shame , or laugh like the augurs of ancient Rome who no longer dared believe in their own religion ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , last month we witnessed the remarkable sight of Bulgaria , an ex-communist country , electing the party by its former King , Simeon II , to office , having removed all legal barriers to his entry , ironically in preparation for EU membership .
I have always believed that the great benefit of enlargement of EU to the east is to anchor these countries in a climate of peace , prosperity and an institutional respect for democracy and fundamental human rights .
However , spare a thought for Simeon ' s unfortunate Italian cousin , Prince Victor Emmanuel of Savoy and his son Philibert , who are not only formally barred from standing from public office in their country , a founder Member of the EU unlike Bulgaria , but have nurtured the dream since childhood of being allowed to enter the territory of the country of which they are citizens both by birth and descent .
In the past , I have spoken with concern in this house on the Charter of Fundamental Rights with regard to the attempt to make binding its new controversial , social and economic rights , as opposed to the civil and political rights enshrined in the much respected 1950 European Convention of Human Rights .
The EU Treaty right to freedom of movement and establishment also enjoys universal support , and yet is so clearly breached by Italy ' s 13th so-called transitional constitutional article , which exiles in perpetuity the male descendants of the House of Savoy from their own country .
There is no derogation afforded to Italy to discriminate on the grounds of sex or birth with regard to freedom of movement of all its citizens , other on the basis of threats posed to public security or health .
It is frankly ludicrous if the Republic of Italy feels threatened by one old man and his son wanting to return home .
I therefore call once again on this House to show compassion and non-selective respect for human rights by joining me in supporting my Amendment No 7 calling on the Italian Parliament to honour the commitment by the last government of Italy to put a speedy end to this cruel and anomalous situation , and align its constitution with the right of all EU citizens to move around the Union freely .
I congratulate Mr Cornillet , in this respect , on his report in what is a very difficult area .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Wuori not only on his report and its recommendations , but also because it reminds us of all the atrocities which are still being committed in the world .
It is normal for us to make our aid to third countries conditional upon their respecting human rights and , naturally , we must continue urging them to do so and putting pressure on them until they do so , but , while we do not make the same demands of the larger countries , we will not deserve to consider ourselves the world reference point for the defence of human rights .
Again and again we threaten the United States when it executes a person , when it murders a human being according to its laws .
But it goes no further than these words which , though forceful , are nevertheless only words .
They sentence to death minors , the mentally handicapped , blacks , Hispanics ; in short , the poorest people .
In the statement on the Gothenburg Summit , we have once again called on the United States to establish a moratorium on the death penalty , we have once again expressed our regret that it appears in their federal law and that in 38 of their jurisdictions citizens are executed in the name of the law .
We need to apply even more pressure .
Cases such as that of Joaquín José Martínez lead us to be more optimistic about the influence of the European institutions and , in particular , our Parliament .
We must continue to fight to defend and extend the values of European civilisation .
Without liberty , without tolerance , without respect for human rights , there is nothing .
A country may be a great economic power , it may even be the envy of many others for its missiles , its strength , its powers of veto , but , if human rights are not respected and enforced , it is a society without values , an under-developed society .
This very morning , President Verhofstadt said that when Europe speaks and speaks in unison , we are heard .
We must therefore continue to exert pressure , ladies and gentlemen .
Yesterday also , before the Committee on External Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , the President of Peru , Alejandro Toledo , reminded us that democracy has no borders and human rights have no colour .
Neither , ladies and gentlemen , should they have a cheque book .
Mr President , I should like to thank the two rapporteurs for two outstanding reports .
It is true , as one of the speakers , Mrs Swiebel , said , that they overlap , but I really do not think that that matters very much .
I think it can be said that they complement one another but , above all , they of course form a fantastically good basis for further discussion in Europe .
Mr Michel mentioned that there is a gulf between the EU and its people and quoted the Irish example .
I , of course , come from Denmark where , in a way , the result of the Irish referendum can be appreciated for what it is . However , the situation is , of course , the same in other countries where there are no referenda .
I do not believe that , for example , it would have been at all possible to implement European monetary union if there had been a referendum in Germany .
This would have clearly shown that the Germans were opposed to it .
So we are all basically faced with the same problem , then , and this is naturally also highlighted by the fact that we in this Assembly and all other assemblies continue to say that there is a lot that needs to be changed and that democracy is getting a poor deal etc .
We could , however , use these two reports as a basis for saying that there is , in fact , something that is very good in Europe .
There really is something that operates outstandingly in Europe .
We succeeded in formulating sets of values which 15 countries - perhaps 27 countries following enlargement - can provisionally agree upon .
Where else in the world has that been achieved ?
Nowhere .
I think it is a brilliant idea for Mr Cornillet to have taken the charter as a point of departure , for it really does offer a very good yardstick for measuring how the development of our rights here in Europe is proceeding .
I think that the charter may be used as an indicator of this development , so that if we regularly - once a year - review the charter , we might acquire a sense of this development .
Mr President , Matti Wuori ' s report has shown that the political campaign against censorship through violence must become a joint campaign within the framework of European foreign policy .
After all , freedom of opinion and independent journalism are the backbone of democracy .
It is important , therefore , to ensure that such information is recognised as freedom of opinion and a basic prerequisite for individual fundamental freedoms , and for collective and social basic rights .
We can only achieve this in practice if censorship through violence is abolished .
Yet many journalists continue to risk their lives or freedom in defence of the public ' s right to information .
What is the European Union doing ?
It has established deeper partnerships with countries which continue to practise censorship . It is very important that in the partnership and cooperation agreements and at the summits which take place in this context , these are used as instruments to make this a central political theme , and not merely a footnote , in Russia , Ukraine , Armenia and Azerbaijan .
I would like to ask the Council and the Commission whether they are prepared for the issue of press censorship to be anchored more centrally in European policy in order to give fundamental rights , human rights , social and collective rights an opportunity to develop .
Mr President , the report was excellent , as was the Belgian minister ' s speech , as were Commissioner Patten ' s and Commissioner Vitorino ' s speeches .
However , there is one problem .
The European Union ' s policy on human rights is rather schizophrenic : while we get ten out of ten for reports on ideas , declarations of good intentions , we barely scrape through and we demonstrate cowardice when it comes to applying them . A great deal of cowardice .
We can make claims and demands on Moldavia , Latvia , Lithuania , certain African countries , certain former central American colonies , but when Mr Bush was here , who opened their mouth , who said a word about the death penalty ?
Mr Schroeder ?
Mr Blair ?
Mr Chirac ?
Mr Jospin ?
No-one said a single word !
This pragmatism colours all our positions , even this report .
Although Mr Wuori has produced an excellent report , I should like to ask him , why Amendment No 10 Mr Wuori ?
Why , when it comes to Turkey , delete the passage stating that the Kurds must be allowed to return or that the European Court decision on Cyprus must be applied ?
What has changed in the meantime ?
Mr President , the Italian radicals of the Bonino List support the proposal by the rapporteur , Mr Cornillet , to consolidate the legal and other value of Parliament ' s report on human rights , not least because we would like to be able to have , at last , a forum for condemning , describing and recording unbelievable incidents completely unknown to the vast majority of you .
We would like to be able to tell you about referendums which have been illegally denied in Italy on subjects of fundamental importance for the Italian citizens ; we would like to be able to tell you about referendums in which tens of millions of voters voted and won and were then betrayed some months afterwards by the Italian parliament ; we would like to be able to tell you about electoral lists illegally presented at the elections of our country and illegally accepted ; we would like to be able to tell you about an electoral campaign which illegally excluded subjects , parties , movements , policies and proposals from the possibility of being chosen by the Italian electorate ; we would like to be able to tell you about all these things .

There is no genuine forum protecting human rights and the civil and political rights of the European citizens .
We feel that democracy is under threat , not just outside the Union and not just in Italy , but in the Union as a whole ; we also feel that the institutional mechanisms of the European Union itself and the inappropriate division of powers therein make it an increasingly a democratic , if not undemocratic institution .
We call for a forum in which all this can be discussed .
There is a committee ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , we are dealing with a novel report by Mr Cornillet which , as he himself recognises , is limited and incomplete due to a lack of resources , which he has tried to substitute through personal effort and this is worthy of recognition .
It is difficult to analyse what is happening in each Member State and , above all , know the facts and circumstances which affect each country in the light of our recent Charter of Fundamental Rights and , therefore , we must continue to study the procedure in depth .
I would like to thank him expressly for his sensitivity to one of the most fundamental rights of human beings , the right to life , which , together with freedoms of expression and movement , is being persistently violated by ETA in an area of European territory , the Basque Country , and in Spain as a whole .
Unfortunately , terrorism has warranted a specific mention with a new section which refers to the right to life and the intensification of the fight against terrorism , based on the legal instruments agreed at the Tampere Summit to combat it , such as , for example , the arrest order , which we are creating at the moment .
Another aspect , which the Socialist Group in particular should reflect on , given that they do not even accept its application in places where the governments are of its same colour , is that mentioned in points 119 and 120 , which recognise the right to vote of citizens of third countries , not only in local elections , but also in European elections .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us not start building the house from the roof .
When we have still not been capable of laying the foundations of genuine integration , which include education , housing , healthcare and the mutual respect for our cultures , there is still much to be done in the field of immigration and asylum .
And false demagoguery will only hinder the resolution of such a serious problem .
Mr President , I would firstly like to point out that it seems to me absurd to hold a joint debate in this House on the human rights situation in the world and in the European Union .
My group said this in the Conference of Presidents and was only supported by the GUE / NGL Group .
Furthermore , Mr President , I would like to ask you to note that I find it incredible that we are organising a debate in this way , because it seems that human rights in the world are more important to us than human rights in the European Union .
The comparisons are odious and I am not talking about the victims of a lack of human rights , but we should be more concerned with dealing with what is exclusively in our hands .
I would like to say to Mr Cornillet that I am grateful for his effort and his work , and I would like to ask him to consider the possibility that in the coming months , and based on his experience , we should seek amongst all of us , calmly and serenely , a method which will allow us to work in the future , taking account of his extremely valuable experience .
His experience has been valuable because this is the first year that we have produced this report , after the declaration of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I would like you to take this into account , Mr Cornillet .
In my last few seconds I will speak not about methods but about content .
Mr Pirker , Mr Hernández Mollar , we do not want to put forward a common immigration policy .
We simply want recognition that Mr Cornillet ' s report clearly demonstrates that the people most affected by violations of human rights are minorities and , especially , asylum seekers and immigrants .
If human rights are deteriorating in this respect , we must put forward solutions and conclusions which reflect it .
That is what we want .
Mr President , anyone who believes that apartheid has been abolished is wrong .
It still exists as a caste system in India and neighbouring countries .
European human rights policy has wrongly been silent up to now on this blatant injustice .
In India systematic discrimination has deep historical roots and is completely integrated into the social system .
A hundred and sixty million people from the lowest caste and chained in the dungeons of cultural and religious tradition .
There is legislation against the system , but social practice pays no attention to it .
A dalit or untouchable is without prospects from birth and is doomed to a lifetime of humiliations and an existence on the fringe of society .
Dalits are regularly abused by the higher caste .
Women are raped and no one can attain justice .
There is systematic inequality of opportunity .
There is absolutely no question of social mobility , one of the characteristics of a true democracy .
India is not only the largest , but also the most undemocratic democracy in the world .
There is no cultural or religious justification for the structural violation of universal human rights .
In India itself awareness of the inhumane character is slowly dawning , but there is a great reluctance to change among those who benefit from the system .
The caste system is a culturally constructed form of political and economic exploitation .
A massive consciousness-raising campaign must be launched and Europe must put this crude form of racial discrimination on the international agenda , to begin with at the forthcoming World Racism conference in Durban .
It is not an easy task , but we must have courage , as Mr Michel said , before he disappeared .
We must not as if the whole caste system is itself untouchable .
Apartheid is only unchangeable if we resign ourselves to it and we must therefore not do so .
I should be glad to hear the responses of the Commission and the Council .
Ladies and gentlemen , even though the adoption last year , in Nice , of the Charter of Fundamental Rights represented a step forward for human rights in the European Union , it constitutes only a minimum standard for the protection to which every citizen is entitled .
Unfortunately it is still inadequate to combat the distress suffered by thousands of individuals , whether they are refugees , immigrants or illegal immigrants , in particular where women and children are concerned .
At no time are the countries concerned , whether European or not , called to order or condemned for the violations that they have committed .
Proof of this lies in the reports that have been tabled here today .
However good they may be , and for that we can thank the rapporteurs , they still do nothing more than list the many cases in which fundamental rights are giving cause for concern .
Human rights and fundamental liberties are universal and inseparable .
They must not recognise any boundaries , whether of nationality or of gender .
We must reaffirm this argument , strongly and vigorously These rights will only become a reality if everyone is aware of their existence , but also only if everyone has confidence in those who are responsible for applying and respecting them .
It is therefore essential to enforce those rights , but also to make them visible and accessible to everyone .
If we are to be constructive , we must set up a dialogue with all those involved in the recognition , promotion and defence of fundamental rights , particularly those who are closest to the least-favoured individuals , those who are the victims of discrimination .
Another key factor lies in ratifying international instruments and translating them into everyday life : the right to move around freely , to live with one ' s family , to be a citizen .
Whatever a society is like , it can only flourish in peace , and there can be no peace without justice .
Apart from these generalised speeches in favour of human rights , nothing will happen without the political will to achieve real equality of rights for all men and women who have a share in wealth and in the construction of Europe and European citizenship .
Instead of fussing about the structures that the European Parliament might give itself in the future , we ought to equip ourselves with the means to ensure that human rights and fundamental liberties are respected , including social and political rights , without which the principles of a state under the rule of law and of democracy will no longer have any meaning .


Mr President , I cannot fail to stress the positive aspects of the Wuori and Cornillet reports on human rights in the world , for a number of reasons : most importantly , the reference to the human rights clause in the conclusion of trade or other agreements , and then the request , which has been made on a number of occasions in the past as well , for closer involvement of Parliament in the coordinated , consistent monitoring of Community action in respect of the violation of rights .
However , I must also point out the considerable vagueness and haziness , particularly of Mr Cornillet ' s report , regarding the violation of rights in different countries , especially where the subject is controversial and the governments responsible are not identified .
I would not like this House to have to face , once again , the dilemma in which we can only ever take moral decisions where our values or political affiliations are not called into question .
Mr President , it would be appropriate for me to begin by congratulating Mr Cornillet on the excellent report with which he has provided us .
I have seen , in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedom and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , how much commitment , hard work and quality he put into the report , in terms both of its structure and its content .
Respect for human rights is a requirement of the society we live in , which we must value and pass on to future generations , without distinction on the grounds of colour , gender , language , religion , opinion or other beliefs , or of national or social origin .
The adoption of the Charter of Fundamental Rights by the European Parliament and its proclamation in Nice were an innovation and made this a seminal text in the field of human rights .
It is now up to the European Parliament , in cooperation with the national parliaments , to ensure that the Member States and even the European institutions respect fundamental rights .
The Cornillet rapport closely follows the structure of the Charter and divides fundamental rights into six separate chapters , as has already been pointed out , and rightly so , by Commissioner Vitorino .
The report first of all states the importance of respecting human dignity by affirming the right to life , specifically by stepping up the fight against terrorism , by banning torture and inhumane treatment , slavery and forced labour .
The report then examines freedoms , specifically in the protection of private life and personal information - and I hope that both the Community and the Member States adopt the necessary measures to protect the public from intrusions by illegal communication interception systems , such as Echelon .
It examines respect for freedom of thought , conscience and religion , and improving European citizenship and justice , which involves speeding up judicial processes .
The slowness of justice is in itself a factor for injustice : by the courts not resolving the problems put before them in due time , the feeling of being able to commit crimes with impunity spreads .
My country , Portugal , is no exception and suffers unacceptable delays within its judicial system .
This Europe of ours must be a model in this field . It must set an example .
The European Parliament is an essential actor in the design and practical application of the Union ' s policy on human rights .
Its influence in ensuring that treaties are amended with those rights in mind is becoming increasingly evident .
We must therefore pay close attention to the human rights situation in Member States when shortcomings are revealed in our systems .
In my home town of Lyons I am confronted every day , in the most graphic terms , with the suffering of refugees and with trafficking in human beings , particularly in women .
We must therefore harmonise our legislation and adopt a legally restrictive instrument , so as to guarantee real protection for the victims of trafficking in human beings .
We ought to be able , without any problem , to extradite those who traffic in human beings , and to confiscate the profits from their criminal activities , using the proceeds to create a European compensation fund to be used to help their victims .
We ought to be able to give a humanitarian right of residence to the victims of trafficking in human beings and domestic slavery , and we ought to be able to guarantee that people who are arrested and held at police stations are given immediate access to legal and medical assistance and , where necessary , to an interpreter .
We ought to be able to obtain , as a matter of urgency , better protection for unaccompanied minors , in particular by offering them , as quickly as possible , the assistance of a tutor or legal adviser .
I should also like to ask for a certain amount of consistency in this Parliament .
If the Community ' s policy on immigration , which is the subject of a report currently being examined at the committee stage , were to be based solely on the selfish economic interests of European countries , it would not really guarantee all the fundamental rights that we are defending here today .
Mr President , the European Charter of Fundamental Rights has gained in importance through the rapporteur ' s proposal to use it as a touchstone to test the human rights situation in the Union .
Although the charter itself was only supposed to relate to the actions of the Union , that is , the European institutions , the Member States themselves are now being tested .
But a critical test is more than a shopping list .
In order to expose violations , it is important to quote chapter and verse .
We regard that as effective where the rest of the world is concerned , but " to name and shame " our own Member States we call undesirable stigmatisation .
We are using double standards and that must change .
A group of renowned experts should conduct research into the concrete observance of human rights in the Member States and Parliament must then draw the political conclusions .
That concludes my administrative shopping list .
My group will support the report of Mr Cornillet .
It contains a number of important declaration .
For example , in Paragraph 58 it argues that the Aznar protocol , through which the individual right to apply for asylum is restricted , must be scrapped .
Paragraph 109 calls for a guarantee that everyone in the territory of the Union is given access to health care , that is , regardless of their residential status .
This also applies to the right of children to education .
Combating this divide deserves our support .
Mr President , the author of the Cornillet Report has listed many areas in which , even within the territory of the European Union , human rights are totally or partially flouted .
We shall be voting on several proposals which might represent a certain amount of progress .
Even in those cases , however , we are anxious to express our reservations , insofar as these are recommendations , which the countries concerned will either observe or not , as they choose .
Yet in matters concerning commercial law , the legislature knows how to be more stringent .
In its explanatory statement , the report refers to the Charter of Fundamental Rights which was proclaimed at Nice , where much praise was lavished on a text which combines civil and political rights and economic and social rights as if they formed a consistent whole .
Yet what are proclamations on employment rights worth , when company bosses have a ' divine right ' to hire and fire ?
What is the point of having the right of residence , when the report itself admits that 11,8 % of the population of the European Union are living below the poverty threshold , and therefore do not have the means to provide themselves with suitable housing ?
We shall be abstaining on the whole of this report , because declarations of good intentions are not enough to constitute a policy that will benefit the lowest and most oppressed strata of the population .
Mr President , I should first like to congratulate Mr Wuori on his report , a very exhaustive report ranging from arms dealing , homosexuality and the rights of minorities to asylum , child labour and capital punishment .
Perhaps indeed a little too exhaustive .
Perhaps in future we should prioritise more and coordinate the timing of such a report better with the annual meeting of the Human Rights Commission in Geneva .
One positive point at least is that attention is paid to the press and to press freedom .
Journalists are still being persecuted and murdered all over the world and the recent developments in Russia are particularly disturbing .
Independent journalists are attacked , dismissed and even physically eliminated .
The independent television station NTV was taken over by the state corporation Gazprom , which also forced a prominent daily newspaper to close .
I particularly welcome Mr Wuori ' s idea of nominating a special parliamentary representative to follow up the specific violations of human rights on which we debate and vote here every month .
Identifying violations is one thing , monitoring them and doing something about them and especially encouraging the Council and the Commission to take up the matter is another .
Allow me to say that the Swedish presidency somewhat disappointed us on this point .
The assertive action of the Belgian government in the Pinochet case , but also in Central Africa , awakens high expectations among those arguing for a more pro-active human rights policy in the European Union .
Especially now that the United States has been voted off the United Nations Human Rights Commission , Europe must play a leading role .
If the Council and the Commission really do take steps in the direction of a more consistent and more coherent human rights policy , they will definitely find a convinced ally in the European Parliament .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Wuori on this magnificent report .
I believe his report is up to the challenge of responding to economic globalisation through a proposed globalisation of political and social human rights , since they are indivisible , and democratic principles .
The essential thing is to know whether the European Union has the instruments to implement that globalisation of rights and , above all , whether it is prepared to use them .
Take , for example , the European Union ' s role in the United Nations and the Geneva Commission , which is often weak and even contradictory .
Also , what can be done within the World Trade Organisation which , by the way , is going to meet in Qatar , a world leader in human rights , as the whole world knows .
Also , in the use of the democratic clause with third countries , in which the European Parliament should have a clear role , regulated by the Treaty , and , of course , in bilateral dialogue and in the use of the code of conduct on the export of arms , a code which is still nothing more than a proposal and a suggestion and which does not stop Member States from committing aberrations by selling arms to countries which systematically violate human rights .
The rights of peoples are also human rights .
In this regard , I believe that collective rights cannot be forgotten either , starting with the right to self-determination .
I would like to fly the flag here by asking the Government of Morocco to fully respect the rights of the Saharan people who live in its country ' s occupied territories .

Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate Mr Wuori and Mr Cornillet on their reports and the excellent work they have done .
However , I regret that Mr Wuori ' s report does not refer to the situation of one of the most violated fundamental rights and the most forgotten : the right to education , to receiving essential basic training as a means for escaping the underdevelopment and poverty which so many children and adults are condemned to living in because they are not guaranteed this fundamental right .
In fact , according to Unicef data , 130 million children have never been to school and a further 150 million have started primary education but have left it before becoming fully literate .
In sub-Saharan Africa , furthermore , the figure for children not attending school is increasing , rather than decreasing .
This is in spite of the objectives set by the World Conference on Education for All at Jomtien , in 1990 , or at the World Education Forum which took place in Dakar in 2000 .
Given this situation , we cannot close our eyes , nor ignore the lack of political will of the European Union and its Member States when it comes to translating the rhetoric of great declarations into budgetary contributions .
If we say we are going to defend human rights , we must also defend the right to education at all costs .
With the same vigour with which we defend the right to life or the right to non-discrimination or the right to freedom of expression .
Let us not forget that human rights are indivisible , inalienable and universal .
Mr President , does a peasant suffering from AIDS have the right to access medicine and treatment that he cannot afford ?
Does a child born in poverty have the human right to receive basic education and appropriate vaccines to protect him from killer diseases ?
Does a peasant farmer devastated by natural disasters such as drought , pests and soil erosion have the right to our assistance ?
Do millions of people living in misery for political reasons in isolated countries like Palestine and Iraq have any rights ?
What do we mean when we talk about human rights ?
I urge every colleague concerned with human rights to visit , unannounced and informally , any peasant in any poor country and ask him about our views on human rights , political freedom , economic freedom , religious freedom , free access to education and health services .
That peasant will look at you in bewilderment and plead : " All I need is a supply of fresh water to my house .
All I need is a source of energy so that I can light my house and cook the next meal " .
Internal conflict and civil war resulting in violation of human rights will continue to impoverish the poor until we help them to do the following . Firstly , to have a stake in their rural economies .
They need to own their own land , their home and their farm .
And secondly , to acquire the technology to break the cycle of dependency on us and seize the opportunity to be self-sufficient , self-reliant through their own local enterprise .
When the poor have an economic stake , then civil society and democracy will take root .
These people will see the need for law and order and political representation .
Then you will see the courts replacing the bullet - and that is when we will see human rights .
Mr President , unfortunately I was not in the chamber when the content of the human rights report was being discussed .
At that moment , we had a problem outside with a small group of people who do not agree with the situation in the Turkish prisons .
This was why I was not in the chamber .
However , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Cornillet , for his report , as he offers a good approach with this report .
I am particular impressed by its structure .
We have already talked about this .
It is quite right to link this report with the human rights charter .
This is certainly the right decision and was undoubtedly a tremendous challenge , and there will have to be a great many further amendments .
We all agree on this .
In terms of its content , however , I should also like to comment on what we have witnessed around Parliament today .
In his report , Mr Cornillet has addressed the situation of prisons in the European Union .
I should simply like briefly to remind us all of one thing : we often visit other countries and criticise the accession countries , especially about conditions in prisons .
Conditions in prisons in the accession countries are unacceptable , in our view .
Yet reading through Mr Cornillet ' s report , it is apparent that we have a great many problems with our own prisons in our own countries .
This should not merely be noted down by you on paper : the governments in the European Union must take steps to address this situation .
In any event , some thought must be given to this issue as well .
Mr President , I would like to thank my colleague , Mr Wuori , for his excellent report .
Slavery was abolished in the nineteenth century , but now it is estimated that people are being sold from their countries at a rate of four million a year , and the number is growing .
The global markets are so free that human bodies now have a market value .
The violent trade in human organs focuses on the poor .
Some poor people positively rise from their graves , in a manner of speaking , when their organs are transplanted into living people .
The problem is also that human rights violations have become ever more profitable and , in a society of greed , it takes money to protect human rights .
We therefore face the sort of problem that results from greed .
The most widespread is the numbing of the human brain in the name of business .
The global mass entertainment of television creates a false world , a virtual world , where every kind of business or trade flourishes and the importance of democracy is diminished .
The international sex trade has acquired an excellent tool in the Internet . Legislation lags behind because many people think the freedom of the Internet should not be restricted .
I suggest that we establish a European body to make rules for the protection of privacy in the information society era .
The notion of human rights will not work where they are being violated both mentally and physically .
Mr President , the annual report on human rights in the world shows a good grasp of what is currently at stake .
However , the European Union must state more clearly the action it intends to take in three areas .
First of all , history shows us how difficult it is to ensure that human rights are respected in countries where economic development does not exist or is extremely poor .
This evidence should be given greater emphasis .
This means that we should create a global-development methodology , bringing together converging criteria , centred around a principle which I shall refer to as the ' evolutionary principle ' .
Secondly , the report points the finger at a number of countries which do not respect human rights .
If we are to avoid falling into the trap of having one law for the rich and another for the poor , and in order to ensure that any action taken by Europe has credibility , we should place greater emphasis on the inseparability of human rights within and outside the boundaries of a state .
Finally , we must acknowledge the special responsibility of those countries which have achieved a high level of democracy and development but which , instead of setting an example , cynically continue to disregard human rights .
The developed countries must set an example to the developing countries , and not the other way round .
Our action will be on a long-term basis .
We must insist , loudly and clearly , that human rights are a universal value and do not depend on circumstances .
With that in mind , it is absolutely essential that Europe should think about setting up a programme of project study and development in the area of human rights , which will take our political will into account .
That is the price that Europe will have to pay in order to gain credibility .
Mr President , given the small amount of time available to me , I am not going to waste a single second on rhetoric or demagoguery and , therefore , I am going to concentrate on issues which , from my point of view , are more significant .
I would firstly like to say that I completely agree with Commissioner Vitorino when he says that the European Union should first teach by example and then preach .
I also wish to congratulate Mr Cornillet on the excellent work he has done , despite a lack of resources .
His work clearly reflects the fact that within the European Union there are still groups and people who suffer discrimination , whose fundamental rights are not properly respected .
I therefore believe that we must make greater efforts in accordance with Article 6 of the Treaty , as well as Article 13 , after Amsterdam , since those groups mentioned in Article 13 are still suffering discrimination and a lack of respect for their fundamental rights .
I am referring to issues as regrettable as racism , which still takes place in the Member States ; discrimination as a result of the sexual orientation of certain groups , specifically homosexuals , who still suffer legislative discrimination in certain Member States ; the protection of disabled people ; women , that vast group that suffers discrimination ; and immigrants , which this report reveals to be the new group which suffers the greatest discrimination .
Unlike some speakers , I would like to say that I am in favour of recognising the right to vote of immigrants , who only then will enjoy sufficient respect for their rights .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank Mr Wuori for his sound and critical report .
Sound and critical , for he does not shrink back from pinpointing any sensitive areas in EU policy .
One of those areas concerns fact that a number of international Union agreements still do not contain clauses for deferring an agreement in the event of a serious human rights violation . I should like to quote China in this connection , candidate for the 2008 Olympic Games .
Commissioner Lamy has been hard at work concluding an agreement with China , also mainly within the WTO framework .
But this coming Thursday , a widely supported motion will be discussed which will ask the Olympic Committee not to give China the Olympic Games in 2008 , precisely in the light of human rights violations in Tibet , among others , and on account of the dubious way in which the country treats its flora and fauna .
In fact , I support Mr Wuori in his opinion that our Parliament should be involved in the suspension of relations with third countries on account of irresponsible behaviour in terms of human rights .
Moreover , our Parliament has been the initiator in this field on more than one occasion .
I would refer to EU measures in the past against Nigeria and at present against Sudan and Burma .
However , I should like to take the opportunity of drawing your attention to another point which , in my opinion , was neglected in the report , namely the freedom of religion .
I will give you three examples . One is close to home , namely Turkey , where Syrian Christians are still being put behind bars if they actively profess their religion .
The Netherlands has a community of 12 000 Syrian Christians from Turkey who have fled to Western Europe over the years .
Surely that is very worrying for a country that would like to join the European Union .
Then there is Vietnam , where over the past few months , Buddhist monks have increasingly been arrested on religious grounds .
We will be discussing a resolution on this very topic on Thursday .
And what is , as a matter of interest , the state of play with regard to the trade agreements with Vietnam ?
Then there is the continuous threat in respect of the Christians in Indonesia , especially on the Moluccas .
That problem has also been highlighted in this House on several occasions , but what is the latest on the trade agreements , and what exactly is going on in that country in terms of human rights ?
I wish that next time we could address this point in isolation , and that is the message that I should like to drive home .
Mr President , it is a tragedy , in the Europe of the 21st century , that there are so many serious problems with violations of human rights , as we have heard in Mr Cornillet ' s excellent report .
If human rights are to be respected in practice rather than merely in declarations , we need to defend them vigorously against the hated dark , reactionary forces which hamper dialogue and freedom of thought and conscience .
The Union should , once and for all , find policies and ways and means of wiping out all forms of discrimination based on sex , ethnic origin , colour , religion or sexual orientation .
No cultural tradition can gain recognition if it puts itself above fundamental human rights and equality of the sexes .
We urgently need to wipe out xenophobia , fundamentalism and racial violence and to crush phenomena such as slavery , trafficking in human beings and the sexual exploitation of women and children which stigmatise our civilisation .
We also need to create the mechanisms needed to monitor and apply the Charter of Fundamental Rights and to give moral and financial support to organisations fighting for human rights , such as the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims .
Mr President , when Europe ' s leaders go on state visits , they take weighty political baggage with them .
The focus is on economic relations , trade agreements , financial assistance , and so on .
Ecological issues are seldom dealt with , while human rights are a peripheral issue .
Yet human rights and the rule of law are the foundation of our society .
My experiences with Asia , from India via Nepal to Korea , show that our commitment to human rights awakens great hopes among citizens there , among the disadvantaged , the excluded , the persecuted , and families and children .
They invest their hopes in our resolution and active involvement on the ground , although we must include the NHO , our competent partner in dialogue , at a much earlier stage in this process .
Their hopes are also awakened by our partnership agreements with the human rights clauses .
These agreements are suspended if massive and systematic human rights violations take place .
This is an effective way of bringing pressure to bear .
The more resolutely we address specific problems , the clearer it becomes that human rights are not a Western but a universal concept .
Our approach does not constitute impermissible intervention in the internal affairs of states , but necessary action against racism , torture , exploitation and the death penalty .
Commissioner , the European Union must take on a far more pro-active and leading role on human rights issues at international level .
Was enough achieved at the 57th Session of the Commission on Human Rights in Geneva , for example ?
The EU Member States were united in their support for the United States ' initiative to put the ongoing human rights violations in China on the agenda .
However , there was no support from Africa or South America in the overall vote , although we certainly have traditional alliance partners there .
In advance of important decisions , the European Union therefore needs a far better coordinated strategy so that our commitment to human rights is much more successful in future .
I welcome today ' s debate and the European Commission ' s long-awaited communication on human rights .
I particularly welcome the commitment to give real substance to the human rights clauses in our trade and partnership agreements with third countries - something we badly failed to do with Mexico .
I also welcome a number of the specific country statements in the draft resolution , including our strong call for the dismantling of paramilitary groups in Columbia .
I share our strong statement of support and solidarity for human rights organisations and defenders , who risk their lives daily in conflict situations around the world to defend principles , which we hold dear .
I have three specific points I want to raise in the context of the debate .
Firstly , whilst I welcome the commitment in the communication to appeal to European enterprises to do more to respect human rights , reflected in paragraphs 55 and 92 of our resolution , I have to say to the Commission that I am disappointed that the Relex DGs appear to have opted out of the draft Green Paper on Corporate Social Responsibility .
I ask them to revisit that before it is too late .
Words should be followed by action .
Secondly , I welcome , and I call for wider attention to , paragraph 108 , concerning human rights abuses against disabled people .
The organisation Disability Awareness in Action has recorded over 2,000 such abuses within Europe and they should be dealt with by human rights monitoring organisations and by the Commission .
Finally , I welcome paragraph 16 which calls for a review of the way we deal with human rights issues in Parliament .
Mr President , I would like to thank the two rapporteurs for their fine and excellent work .
At the same time , I would like to agree with Mrs Maij-Weggen ' s view that religious freedom has been addressed in a far too limited manner .
This issue concerns the deepest values of millions of people and the whole basis for their lives .
In Egypt , a neighbour of the EU , converting from Islam to Christianity is punishable by death .
The Coptic Christians feel like second-class citizens .
The Christian minority in Turkey continues to shrink .
Why are an increasing number of people of the Christian faith moving from this country ?
The European Parliament played an important part in ensuring that Syrian Christian priest Yusuf Akbulut was acquitted of all charges in the State Security Court in Diyarbakir at Easter .
There is much to do in this area .
Three hundred thousand people have left the Moluccas - most of them Christians .
They are persecuted by Muslim Jihad fighters .
Compulsory conversion has taken place with over 1 000 people being forced into a faith and view of life other than their own .
I would also like to say that the French act on religious freedom leaves a great deal to be desired .
There is considerable concern among many Protestant and evangelical Christians around Europe regarding the implications of French legislation on religion .
What a poor - and I mean poor - example this is for a large number of countries in Central and Eastern Europe , including the Czech Republic , as these countries are about to adopt new legislation .
We must be careful to ensure that we do not create an intolerant Europe where only one faith is acceptable .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , given the fact that we are running late , I shall be very brief , but please allow me to state how important this moment is for me .
As a former Member of this Parliament , between 1994 and 1999 , it is naturally a great honour to be here in this totally new hemisphere , back in this institution which is so familiar , and be able to take the floor .

On behalf of the Council , I should first of all like to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Wuori and Mr Cornillet very warmly on their sterling report , and I should also like to thank all the speakers for their contribution to the debate .
From now on I will confine myself to answering the very specific questions that have been raised .
To Mrs Frassoni , who is no longer here , but I shall say it anyway , I should like to assure her that the presidency will naturally make every effort to ensure that all the necessary conditions are in place so that a resolution against the death penalty can be tabled at the United Nations General Assembly .
To Mrs Boudjenah , on the subject of Tunisia , I should like to say , briefly , that the Council takes the view that it really is a pity that a country which has made such remarkable social and economic progress should be denied the credit that it deserves , simply because those who are in charge are apparently incapable of understanding that , to us and to their own population , elements such as freedom of expression and freedom of the press are essential , and it is precisely this situation which is preventing the European Union from pushing further ahead with the Tunisian model , which would be worth doing if only the situation with regard to human rights and the treatment of the human rights league was considerably better than it is at the moment .
( NL ) To Mr Schröder , I should like to say that during this presidency , human rights will not , under any circumstances , be a footnote .
One of the honourable Members has already alluded to the fact that Foreign Affairs Minister , Mr Michel , has already left .

I can reassure that Member : Mr Michel has not simply disappeared , he left to catch a plane to Madrid where crucial discussions will be held concerning the presidency .
For the rest , I should like to assure Parliament that during the next six months , the fight against the trafficking in human beings in general , and the fight against the trafficking in women and children , in particular , will be one of our key priorities .
I should like to thank Mr Johan Van Hecke for his kind words regarding our presidency , and I hope that we will be able to meet his expectations .
I have to say that the aims are rather ambitious , but we will do our best .
Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Sacrédeus , it goes without saying that , in our view , freedom of religion is one of the fundamental rights and freedoms .
We are running out of time so I will just say that , on behalf of my colleague , Chris Patten , who had to leave because he is attending at the same time another parliamentary meeting on Latin America and on my own behalf I would like to thank all participants in the debate .
The Commission is taking note of all the remarks and is looking forward to the resolutions that will conclude these debates as guidelines for our reflection and further action .
Finally , I would like to congratulate Parliament on the broad consensus that has been expressed on the new methodology of the report on Fundamental Rights in the European Union , and express my wish that the approach which has been launched by Mr Cornillet will be retained for the future .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
You have been almost excessive in your brevity .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Bonn Conference on Climate Change
Mr President , I apologise for my lateness .
Human rights seem to have been taking up quite a lot of time , and quite right too .
I want to express Parliament ' s concern that the Kyoto Protocol may falter and fail , leaving the world without any coherent network of obligations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
We in the European Parliament offer our full support to the Commission and to the presidency in their endeavours to ensure that the Kyoto Protocol survives and comes into force .
We would like to use this brief debate to explore what Europe can do to lead the world in the absence of American leadership and in what ways the Members of the European Parliament who attend the Bonn Conference can speak for the people of Europe and actively participate in the proceedings .
We very much appreciate the work of the Dutch Minister , Mr Pronk , in seeking to find a way to solve the unresolved issues left over from The Hague , and we would appreciate it if the Commission could give us its view on how successful he has been to date and whether or not the work he has done has now cleared the way forward .
But the big question for us is whether it will be possible to show that the European Union , and the other major parties to the Protocol , are prepared to take decisions without the United States .
Here the attitude of the new Japanese government is crucial .
Without the votes of Japan and Canada the Protocol cannot enter into force .
We gather that the omens are not good and that Japan probably , and Canada certainly , lack the political will to go ahead without the United States .
If Japan is prepared to go ahead , then there is the suspicion that the Japanese may want to re-write the crucial proposals within the protocol , notably using the year 2000 perhaps rather than 1990 as the base year for calculating greenhouse gas emission reductions .
One of my colleagues , Mr Moreira Da Silva , who will be leading Parliament ' s delegation to Bonn , wishes to move an oral amendment on this point to the resolution we have tabled , since the problem with Japan has really only come to the fore in the period since we tabled it .
Our resolution reiterates in paragraph 3 our basic expectations about the action that will follow ratification of the protocol .
But as Europeans we must make a sober assessment of what this will mean for us if it were to happen and still more if it were to happen without the United States .
First and most crucially : money .
As the protocol stands , financial contributions from individual parties will be based on each party ' s share of CO2 emissions .
It is not difficult to see that the United States , with 39 % of the total 1990 emissions , would pay the lion ' s share .
The question that occurs to me , which should perhaps have been asked earlier , is how the Clinton government ever thought it could persuade Congress to sign up to the Treaty .
Perhaps greater honesty at the outset might have helped provide a more realistic atmosphere .
Without the United States the burden will fall on Japan , Germany , the United Kingdom , France , Canada and Australia .
The finance available for measures to reduce CO2 emissions in poorer countries will be greatly reduced without US participation .
The strain on the Europeans will be greater .
Are we prepared for this , I ask ?
Secondly , if we ratify Kyoto alone or without the United States it will mean taking certain actions that are going to be painful .
We MEPs who follow these issues recognise that .
Every year , every month , far into the night , we deal with directives designed to reduce emissions , but we also know that in most instances when we encounter the Council or their representatives it is extremely difficult to get the Member States to agree to these proposals in their original , very demanding form .
We now face a situation where , according to the European Environment Agency , only the United Kingdom , Germany and Luxembourg reduced their greenhouse gas emissions between 1990 and 1998 .
All the other countries of Europe increased them .
So how will Denmark , the Netherlands , Belgium , Austria , Finland , Italy and , to a lesser extent , Sweden and France , meet the Kyoto targets ?
Or will we , as the United States suspects , not be willing to take the actions that will give reality to our ambitions ?
We hope that the Bonn Conference and the Belgian presidency will be able to move the Europeans on from words to action .
Finally a word on the participation of the EU delegation in the Bonn conference .
We are tired of being a Greek chorus in this tragedy .
We are tired of coming on to stage when the main action has taken place to lament or celebrate what has happened and to offer philosophical reflections on the sad state of mankind - " Ïßìïé ç ôÜëáéíá " indeed !
This is unsatisfactory because we should ourselves be reckoned as protagonists since we will have to adopt the legislation that will flow from Kyoto and we will have to explain it to the people of Europe .
We may not want to be negotiators ourselves , but our ambition is to play a full part in the meetings with the European Union delegation that decides how Europe will act .
We are not content to remain as a chorus .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking Mrs Jackson for the question she has raised and the remarks she has made concerning this very serious issue indeed about which we are all concerned .
On behalf of the Council , I can only reiterate our commitment , as referred to in the Council conclusions of 8 March and 7 June 2001 , to reach an agreement at the resumption session of the Conference of the Parties No 6 which is soon to take place in Bonn .
This agreement is to safeguard the environmental integrity of the Kyoto Protocol , is to lead to an actual reduction in the emission of greenhouse gases , and is to help reach the broadest possible participation of the industrialised countries . In that way , the conditions can be created for the Protocol to be reinforced and to be entered into force by no later than 2002 .
We therefore confirm our commitment to try to achieve this .
All these objectives remain unchanged and the European Union is prepared to negotiate with all partners in Bonn on the unresolved issues in a constructive manner .
Although the Council recognises that the European Union and the United States do not see eye to eye concerning the Kyoto Protocol and the ratification thereof , despite this , the Council welcomes the pledge , made by President Bush during a recent meeting with the EU Heads of State and Government leaders , that the United States will not block the Kyoto process , and will cooperate during the forthcoming session of the Conference of the Parties in Bonn in a constructive manner .
During the high-level consultation of 27 and 28 June last in Scheveningen , the European Union managed to establish fruitful contacts with different partners on climate negotiations .
And the European Union was delighted to note that the international community continues to strongly support the Kyoto Protocol and its swift implementation . That is despite the United States ' refusal to ratify the Protocol .
As was apparent in Scheveningen , there is a strong sense of urgency with regard to this matter and also a high level of awareness of the fact that the outcome of more than ten years of international negotiations can surely not be put on the line .
Since the Council is of the opinion that your presence is definitely significant , the Council has invited eight MEPs to take part in the Conference in Bonn .
The specific conditions for this participation , about which you may not be happy , are explained in a letter from the Council to the European Parliament of 18 November 1998 .
However , given the wish of the participants for more and regular information , a wish that was underlined by Mrs Jackson , but which certainly reflects the feeling of many among you , the presidency intends to organise informal meetings with the MEPs during the conference at regular intervals , thus allowing an exchange of ideas to take place about the progress and the state of affairs .
Mrs Jackson , I am aware that this may not satisfy you entirely , but on the other hand , it does mean that you will be able to do more than just sing or lament on the sidelines or behind the scenes .
President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I would like on behalf of the Commission to thank Mrs Jackson for raising such an important issue in the House .
As the President-in-Office has already said , in Gothenburg , the heads of state and government confirmed that the European Community and the Member States are determined to meet their commitments under the Kyoto Protocol .
The Union ' s summit reaffirmed the European Union ' s aim of bringing the Protocol into force by 2002 and asked the Commission to prepare a proposal for ratification before the end of 2001 .
Regrettably , the Bush administration continues to oppose the Kyoto Protocol .
At the European Union / United States Summit in Gothenburg , President Bush acknowledged the science underlying climate change and the global importance of this issue .
The United States has indicated that while they will participate actively in the resumed COP6 in Bonn , their basic position , opposing the Protocol has not changed .
We will build upon this indication that the United States does not intend to obstruct the Kyoto process .
To facilitate this , we have agreed that there will be further high-level contacts with the United States on this subject .
The resumed COP6 in July will pick up the threads of the conference in The Hague and try and bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion .
To achieve this , the European Union will take a positive attitude while , at the same time , being realistic about what can be achieved .
The new consolidated texts by the Chairman of COP6 , Mr Pronk , are clear and concise and provide a good basis for the Bonn negotiations .
However , the texts still contain a number of important sticking points for the European Union , notably on funding for developing countries , compliance and supplementarity .
These need to be resolved .
In the end , we will strive for an overall package where compromises on one side are balanced out by gains on the other .
We must also take into account the specific importance of Japan and Russia for the entry into force of the Protocol .
The Commission welcomes the strong interest of the European Parliament in the global problem of climate change and the participation of Members of the European Parliament in the Community delegation to the resumed COP6 .
As in The Hague , the Commission and Council , the President-in-Office has explained , have proposed that the European Parliament be represented by eight Members .
In accordance with the institutional rules for their participation , the Members can attend plenary meetings , and the Commission will regularly provide information on those negotiations which are not open to observers on a regular basis to all Members of the European Parliament present at COP6 .
Mr President , Commissioner , Madam Secretary of State , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to speak first of all about precisely this issue of whether or not the European Parliament delegation should participate in the European Union ' s coordination meetings . I wish to state that I was far from satisfied with the way in which the Secretary of State answered the legitimate questions asked by Caroline Jackson .
The European Parliament ' s delegation is not asking for privileges . It is asking for its legitimate right to participate actively in the Bonn conference and not simply to play spear-carrier , as we did at the Hague Conference .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , climate change is more than just another environmental dossier .
It has become an issue that truly symbolises the international political agenda .
If the Kyoto Protocol fails , the interpretation will be clear : States and politicians move rapidly and effectively when it comes to promoting the advantages of globalisation , but they are incapable of reaching agreement on minimising the less pleasant aspects of our social model .
The current situation could not be worse .
On the one hand , action is more urgent today than it ever has been and the measures announced recently by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change leave no room for doubt on this matter .
On the other hand , it has never been as difficult to take action as it is today : the decision by the United States has dealt a harsh blow to international efforts over the last ten years .
These factors , urgency of action , pressure from the public and the withdrawal of the United States make the Bonn Conference critical .
It will really be the moment of truth for the Kyoto Protocol .
Our position is perfectly clear : it is crucial that we limit climate change and the Kyoto Protocol - and none other - is the most appropriate political instrument for achieving this objective .
Let us , therefore , go to Bonn with the aim of concluding an agreement with as many countries as possible on the ' left overs ' from Kyoto so that the Protocol can be ratified and implemented in 2002 .
In order for the negotiations to be successful , in particular with Japan and Russia , we will clearly have to be flexible , but in a way that respects the integrity and the spirit of the Protocol .
I should like to say one last word about economic issues .
It is true that , in the short term , implementing the Protocol will result in economic costs to European businesses .
Nevertheless , these costs , as we read only this week in the Commission ' s report , will be much lower than was initially thought .
I am , in fact , convinced that in the medium term , the Kyoto Protocol will make the European economy more competitive as a result of the technological transformation that we will achieve earlier than elsewhere in the world .
Mr President , the applause from all groups for Ms Jackson ' s speech shows that in Europe , there is consensus on climate policy .
There is obviously some sort of consensus in public opinion in the USA as well , but public opinion in the USA is different from Europe ' s .
This is why I believe we should not only be talking to one or two parliamentarians or government representatives ; the Europeans should actually be thinking how they can influence public opinion in the USA , and indeed in Japan , if the Japanese decide not to go ahead .
The task of managing climate change is so enormous that going it alone will be extremely difficult .
That is precisely the issue which arises here .
Even if the others do not go ahead , are we prepared to continue the course agreed at Gothenburg , which I support ?
Making a verbal commitment is easy .
Agreeing to take on these burdens is simple and costs nothing .
However , translating this into reality will be an immensely difficult task .
My fear - I admit this quite openly - is that the Europeans , or many Europeans , will hide behind the US .
In truth , we are a long way off meeting the standards set in the Kyoto Protocol .
We all know that .
The Commission feeds us a never-ending stream of fresh statistics .
We face a Herculean task - I just want to make this clear .
Despite these difficulties , however , let me say that for the first time since the Second World War , Europe now has the opportunity to take on political leadership at world level .
We should grasp this opportunity with both hands , well aware that this is not a simple task .
Incidentally , it is a noble task , not a dirty job , which Europe should address , and if others do not join us until later , we should accept this with good grace .
My third comment relates to the text itself .
I cannot stop myself from saying this : I must point out that what we are demanding , namely " halting " climate change , is sheer nonsense , of course .
I have no idea how this slipped into the text .
There has always been climate change , but this time , we are making our own contribution to it , and that is exactly what this is all about .
I would like to start by paying tribute to Commissioner Wallström , the Commissioner for the Environment .
I do not think any of the parliamentarians have any doubt at all about her passionate personal commitment towards trying to secure a positive outcome from the talks in Bonn , and I would also like to say a word of thanks to my Liberal colleague , Prime Minister Verhofstadt , for the emphasis he placed this morning on saying that the problem of climate change is the greatest single challenge facing the planet .
One thing that this whole issue has brought about - if it was needed - is a great awareness that this is a very small planet upon which we live and that mankind is very capable , through its industrial practices , of changing our environment .
Even the United States now recognises this , although they have yet to come up with an alternative in any practical form to the Kyoto Protocol .
There are great opportunities for , and advantages in , addressing this problem by using technology which is in the process of being developed or has been developed to change our practices and reduce global warming .
This offers great benefits to society , and economic opportunities for those of us who take a lead , but why are we not able to pursue this more effectively ?
One problem is vested interests - the classic example being the fossil fuel industries ; another is weak political leadership by all of us - we are all responsible for this .
We back down over taking decisions which will be unpopular in the short term with our electorates .
I wish to see harmonised environmental taxation at a European level - the objective being not to raise more money but to change practices and priorities and ensure that industry at the same time is able to compete on a level playing field .
We have had the problems - we have experienced the problems with fuel duty in Britain and elsewhere whenever politicians try really to apply taxes which benefit the environment in this way .
The odd thing of course , in Britain ' s case , is that harmonised energy taxation on fuel duties would also probably reduce our taxes .
I have just returned from a visit to Cyprus - one of the accession countries - where I find out that not only is there no fuel duty on the use of petrol but that petrol is actually subsidised .
So , my question to the Commission is this : when it comes to practical forms , when it comes to actually dealing with what I hope will be a positive outcome from Bonn , how does the Council pursue harmonised energy taxation at the same time as dealing with enlargement , which makes the possibility of unanimity so much more difficult to achieve if it we were actually to have harmonised environmental taxation of a sort which is worth having .
Mr President , over the past two years , more wind-energy capacity has been installed worldwide than nuclear energy .
Despite this , Messrs Bush and Blair are trying to breathe new life into nuclear energy .
Along with a clear majority in the European Parliament , my group believes that nuclear energy should not , and cannot , play a role in solving the climate problem , not even in the " clean development " mechanism .
On all other scores - I repeat , all other scores - the Greens can accept a compromise in Bonn .
That compromise must aim to keep Japan on board .
Even a higher reduction target for Europe is to be considered .
The Commission has recently published a study which shows that a reduction target which is twice as high as the current one is not a problem for us economically speaking .
Europe must now seriously look into renewable energy and saving energy .
A further development of solar energy is desperately needed to provide electricity to the last two billion people on this earth .
Providing two billion people with electricity generated by fossil fuels would spell an uncertain climate death to us all .
A weak agreement in Bonn is better than another fiasco .
The 1987 Treaty of Montreal protecting the ozone layer was also a weak agreement , but over the past fourteen years , it has been tightened up on every occasion .
We could adopt the same approach with the Kyoto Protocol .
Mr President , there is great unanimity here on our position regarding climate issues , which I believe is extremely important .
We must use this unanimity to put maximum pressure on those countries which are now deciding the future of the Kyoto Protocol .
In practice , we risk some sort of collapse in climate negotiations , a collapse which would risk setting us back several years .
The worst thing is that those causing the collapse , particularly the US , have no alternative to offer .
Therefore , everything must now be done to save whatever can be saved .
The European Union itself has a credibility problem because , as previous speakers have said , many of our Member States will not meet the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol , either .
We know that these requirements in themselves are insufficient to combat the problem of climate change .
What we see in practice when we meet the Council of Ministers , for example in conciliation on combustion plants and national ceilings for emissions , is that no-one is prepared to take the decisions which need to be taken .
By the time a decision was to be made in Gothenburg on a strategy for sustainable development , many of the most important points had been removed .
Of course the EU ' s credibility would also increase if we showed by our actions that we are prepared to meet the targets we set ourselves .
I believe this is important ahead of the meetings which we are about to have with other countries in order to decide the future of the Kyoto Protocol .
I would like , first of all , to compliment Mrs Jackson for raising this oral question .
It has already been mentioned that the Conference for Climate Change will be held in Bonn from 16-27 July 2001 .
We know that the US Government and the European Union could not reach agreement in the Netherlands before Christmas on setting a timetable for the reduction of the use of greenhouse gases .
Equally , it is very clear that the US Government is getting cold feet on the Kyoto Agreement .
This is very disappointing .
There is clear and unequivocal scientific evidence that demonstrates the effect of climate change .
Surely , the US and the European Union governments can agree on one item , and that is simply that the use of greenhouse gases depletes the ozone layer which results in higher sea levels and more coastal erosion , and affects the living environment of island communities .
I am calling on the European governments which will be represented in Bonn to use this conference as an opportunity to tell the US that this is not good enough , and that the full provisions of the Kyoto Agreement must be implemented : under the Agreement alone , the US Government would be required to cut emissions by approximately one-third by the year 2012 .
Mr President , if the US Senate were to vote in favour of the Kyoto Protocol , this would be tantamount to political suicide , as appeared during a video conference last year involving a number of US senators .
The new US President , Mr Bush , has meanwhile rejected the Kyoto Protocol .
This is referred to as a huge disgrace , with good reason .
On the other hand , this US President makes no secret of how the United States feels about the Kyoto Protocol .
The unfortunate result of this is that Japan is also questioning whether it should ratify the protocol .
Last week , the Japanese Prime Minister , Mr Junichiro Koizumi , said that he does not intend to go ahead without the backing of the United States .
However , we should realise that the countries of the European Union have not ratified or implemented the Kyoto Protocol either .
CO2 emissions may have fallen considerably in Luxembourg , Germany and Great Britain , but they have risen quite dramatically in Spain , Portugal and Ireland .
According to the Worldwide Fund for Nature prognosis , CO2 emissions in the European Union will be rising by eight percent in total , instead of falling by eight percent , as per the Kyoto Protocol .
Furthermore , it would be very inconsistent if the European Union were to blame the United States for not being prepared to do anything to reduce CO2 emissions , if the European Union is not willing to continue to reduce Nox emissions itself .
The US emission standards for Nox in 2003 are already stricter than what the Environment Ministers want within the framework of the directive on large furnaces in 2018 .
There is the risk that the failure of the Kyoto Protocol will be used as an excuse for not having to do anything .
The threat of climate change remains , so does the objective to counter this , with or without the Kyoto Protocol .
The EU should , therefore , not follow the example of the United States or Japan , but must fight climate change by focusing on saving energy , energy efficiency by , inter alia , total energy , and by developing wind and solar energy .
With regard to these aspects , it should also be possible to conclude agreements with the United States and Japan .
In addition , we must be open to extending the proportion that can be achieved by emission trade .
If we can persuade the United States to re-join the negotiations in that way , we should certainly do this .
Finally , we should no longer neglect third world countries , since energy consumption there is also set to rise considerably .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no question that at this time of disappointment and rejection for the European Union given the attitude of the United States towards compliance with the Kyoto commitments , the European Parliament must unequivocally reaffirm and reinforce its commitment to making progress on the reduction of CO2 emissions through the ratification of the measures proposed in the protocol .
Having agreed in 1997 on an international strategy for reducing polluting emissions , we cannot accept such a drastic and important change in approach towards the situation , which gives credence to arguments which , under a scientific veneer , intend to postpone the intensity and force of specific actions .
Furthermore , I believe that this proposed resolution is a necessary gesture by the European Parliament towards the Member States as an expression of the renewal of a political will in each of them to combat climate change and to intensify the establishment of the mechanisms necessary for the ratification of the protocol .
At the next climate summit in Bonn , the Member States will have to respond to the key points which were left unresolved at The Hague .
I believe it is essential that at least the leader or ' vice-leader ' of the parliamentary delegation should be accepted as part of the European Union ' s negotiating team .
Therefore , and in order to take the next step of negotiating with other countries a rapid ratification of the protocol , it is so important that this Parliament should unite in supporting the present proposal , renewing , as I have said , the European Union ' s will for international leadership in the field of the environment and as a gesture towards the Member States , so that they do not forget or delay the implementation on a national level of the measures necessary for the ratification of the protocol .

Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , it has been said in this House a number of times , and it is not unimportant : there is wide unanimity across the political divide on this issue , and you must support it in the forthcoming negotiations in Bonn .
That is not all : for many European issues , we have to battle against public opinion , but in this debate , we have the backing of a huge majority of the public opinion which is urging governments to take further steps in Kyoto .
That means that on the eve of Bonn , we have to propose a number of measures at the Conference , but also at Community and national level .
As has been said a few times , we can , and must , as Europe , play a global role in this debate .
This role suits us without a doubt , and largely discredits others , of course , including Mr Bush and his administration .
We must also try to bring the others on board , that we must definitely do , but not by putting concluded agreements at risk .
If the Protocol is adopted with unlimited trade in hot air or unlimited use of coal pits , the effect on the climate will be limited .
I should like to add one point to the debate .
I do not think there is room for complacency .
We have not yet ratified the Protocol either , nor have we completed any clear , concrete plans of action .
I would therefore urge the Belgian presidency to tackle this issue with both hands .
In what form will we be trading our emissions ?
Will this be done among States , or also among businesses ?
And how will the trade among sectors be regulated ?
And also , what is the latest on the national plans of action ?
What are we going to do about them , and have any budgets been earmarked in this connection ?
I should therefore ask the Belgian presidency to address this matter properly in the next couple of months .
Although some sceptics still doubt the phenomenon of global warming , nobody can doubt the cooling of relations between the EU and the US over its refusal to recommend ratification of the Kyoto Protocol .
The intergovernmental panel on climate change has no doubt that there is global warming taking place and that greenhouse gases , in particular CO2 emissions , are largely responsible .
Even the US National Academy of Sciences advising President Bush largely concurs with this finding .
The EU is now determined to go it alone , but the biggest culprit , the US , with 4 % of the world ' s population and 25 % of global emissions , still will not co-operate .
Sadly , to date , only Romania has ratified the Protocol .
Japan and Canada are now getting cold feet without US involvement .
In my country , the UK , under a Conservative Government , we made a dash for gas , since natural gas produces far less CO2 than coal .
We went on to see it rapidly reversed by the new Labour Government , anxious to preserve jobs in the mining industry .
Mercifully the UK is still online to meet its Kyoto commitments .
We are already witnessing in European winter resorts in the mountains the effects of the rising snow line , but the long-term prospects are far more frightening .
At some point , there is a danger of thermal runaway as the polar caps melt , reflect less sunshine and cause a rapid increase in atmospheric warming .
This threatens flooding around the globe and other climatic changes causing economic devastation with huge migratory pressures on peoples , not to mention potential wars over water supplies .
What is the solution ?
I believe that all nations must subscribe to policies of sustainable economic development and invest in renewable energy sources .
This also means reopening the controversial nuclear power debate , which I support .
We must also look at using market-based mechanisms , such as tradeable emission permits .
The Kyoto 5 % targeted reduction by 2010 from 1990 levels may not go far enough .
We may also have to look again at carbon sinks .
I believe that the US must reconsider its position and come back to Bonn with some really good proposals .
I congratulate my colleague , Mrs Jackson on her continuing interest in this critical area for the future of mankind .
Mr President , the world needs a powerful , political signal .
Kyoto should not remain an empty pledge .
Political leadership is now required to win over the world .
We need to display the necessary flexibility in this respect .
First of all , with regard to the United States and Japan . We have to abandon the emphasis on domestic action .
We must work towards a science-based approach of the ' sinks ' problem .
Secondly , with regard to the developing countries , climate changes impact greatly on the developing countries .
The effects are being felt in Bangladesh , India , Indonesia and the island states .
We desperately need a warm-hearted approach to developing countries , and a fund that allows for adjustments being made .
We must realise that if the United States does not take part , the incentive for the developing countries will actually be taken away , for it is precisely the United States that wanted to realise a large proportion of their duties outside of the US .
The European Union now has to assume this role , and do more for the developing countries .
Needless to say , the developing countries will in time need to be included in system of CO2 reductions , but then on the basis of equal emission rights .
Thirdly , we must commit ourselves to taking domestic action seriously and not to promoting nuclear energy .
We must now take swift action and launch a credible and reliable system for the trade in emission rights , and within Europe , we must set up a research agenda to make the transition to a low-CO2 economy possible .
Mr President , the EU delegation did not show itself to its best advantage in The Hague .
Indecisiveness and dissension contributed to the failure of The Hague .
Parliamentarians could play a role if they gain permission to attend the delegation meetings as observers .
As the President-in-Council stated a moment ago , we sang and lamented behind the scenes , but to no avail .
Therefore , we now want to be admitted in the delegation as observers , and we believe that this can strengthen the unity within the European Union .
Mr President , there is a great temptation in politics to consider everything to be a matter of negotiation which can be agreed on amongst people .
So that we might remember what we are dealing with , I will reiterate a few facts about climatic warming .
I would like to remind you that there is now ample scientific proof regarding this matter , and that climatic warming is a hard fact .
There is just one party we have to negotiate with , and that is nature , which does not make compromises . It just is .
The latest time series analyses of seawater temperatures say the same as what we have known about air temperatures for a long time .
During the last hundred years the seas have warmed up by 0.6 degrees , and the trend is accelerating .
In terms of average temperatures this is a very great change .
Glaciers are melting ; 85 % of them are receding at a very fast rate , as much as several tens of metres a year at their worst .
The Andean ice caps are in danger of disappearing altogether .
The polar icecaps have shrunk by 25 % in the last three years .
In northern areas of continents the permafrost is melting at a dramatic rate , especially in central Siberia and Alaska .
This also has large-scale effects on the exploitation of natural resources in these regions .
If we allow global warming to continue , the dreaded , worst-case scenario in northwestern Europe may well take place .
Warming could divert North Atlantic sea currents , causing northern Fennoscandia to have a far more severely cold climate than it does now as a result .
As the glaciers melt , the so-called Atlantic pump will cease working and the warm Gulf Stream coming up from the tropics and its extension , the North Atlantic Current , will stop flowing .
This could result in the whole of northwestern Europe becoming colder , which palaeo-oceanographic studies show could happen suddenly , with catastrophic results .
The same facts reveal themselves in every direction .
Just recently the Red Cross confirmed what other aid organisations have been saying : experience of an increased number of natural disasters shows that the change can be put down to global warming .
Unless we act quickly and , furthermore , put pressure on others also to act quickly , these new phenomena will increase exponentially .
Bonn needs to be a success .
Mr President , a thank-you first of all to Mrs Jackson for the initiative behind the debate we are having here today .
I think that climate change is one of the best documented of any of our environmental problems and , at the same time , the biggest threat to the environment and to future generations here on earth .
That is why the US administration ' s rejection of the Kyoto protocol is , of course , also completely irresponsible .
I think we have to acknowledge that Mr Bush and his administration have shown themselves to be just as primitive and populist as might have been feared .
However , that attitude in the United States ought , of course , only to give an edge to Europe ' s responsibility for global environmental development , as Mr Da Silva too pointed out .
We must stick by the Kyoto Protocol at the conference in The Hague .
We must ensure that the Member States and the EU are in the vanguard of efforts to get the Protocol ratified so that it can , if possible , come into force next year . With that in mind , we must naturally try to make Japan stick to this solution .
Like Mrs Van Brempt , I would warn against entering into a sub-standard conciliation or agreement with the United States .
Experience has shown time and again that when the United States has ended up with what , in our eyes , is a really bad agreement , it fails to honour it when the time comes to implement it .
On the contrary , we in Europe must ensure that our climate change programme is implemented effectively .
As quite a few people have mentioned , we also have problems here in Europe . At the moment , we are seeing a clear negative trend in the area of transport , for example .
We must work to ensure that , given the future we are now confronting , the United States does not obtain a competitive advantage from showing the kind of irresponsibility we have seen so far .
I hope that the Bonn conference may nonetheless be a decisive step towards meeting the enormous challenge we are all facing .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , combating the catastrophic effects of climate change is the most important environmental policy challenge of our time . Indeed , I would go as far as to say that it may even be the single most important challenge overall , also beyond the parameters of environmental policy .
There is thus a great deal at stake in Bonn .
It is important , then , for the European Union to present a united front , and so I appeal to the Council and the Commission to include the parliamentary delegation in its activities and ensure that the head of our delegation , at least , is involved in coordination at EU level , as we are keen to support the Council and the Commission ' s position .
Naturally , this is only possible if we are genuinely informed in detail .
The main problem , of course , is the USA ' s position .
This has already been pointed out several times .
It is not enough merely to agree that the USA ' s position is unacceptable .
Since gentle persuasion and appeals have not achieved very much , we must now consider how we can exert even greater pressure .
The European Union should make climate protection and the Kyoto Agreement its key priority in relations with the US .
Many of our positions differ from those of the US Government or Congress , but climate protection is the major problem , and that should be made clear .
This is why I was rather disappointed when , after Gothenburg , the message was : there is a difference of opinion , and that was it .
The EU must make it quite clear that while we may have different opinions on other issues and still carry on with the agenda , this specific topic is a priority for the EU .
Perhaps we should go as far as to make concessions in other areas in order to ensure that this priority is genuinely asserted in practice .
If the Americans are then prepared to ratify Kyoto and engage in practical cooperation in Bonn , we too should be flexible . Instead of promoting the EU ' s purist doctrine , e.g. on nuclear energy , we too should be prepared to compromise .
However , a precondition is that the Americans actually commit themselves to ratifying Kyoto and pursuing the climate protection process in a positive way .
Thank you very much , Mr Liese .
The Presidency-in-Office of the Council and the Commission inform me , I believe with very good reason , that they have been enlightened by your speeches .
To end the debate , I have received one motion for a resolution , presented in accordance with Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0329 / 2001 ) . We shall examine Questions to the Council .
We only have 40 minutes .
I must reach a consensus with you for the functioning of this Question Time , because otherwise we will be in an impossible situation .
If the first Members on the list of questions speak too much , the others will be deprived of their right .
We initially have ten questions which are going to be taken together by the President-in-Office of the Council .
If we have supplementary questions , you will appreciate that that would amount to thirty questions and that there would not even be time to hold Question Time .
I am therefore going to apply Rule 19 of the Rules of Procedure , which gives the President the authority to organise the debate on exceptional occasions .
If you need it , you can speak for a minute and a half instead of a minute ; but please do not , each of you , ask for the floor three times with the subsequent replies .
Please do not refuse this request , ladies and gentlemen .
It is absolutely rational and necessary .
I heard your ruling , but Annex II to the Rules of Procedure says that each Member may put a supplementary to any question .
We have been economical .
We get one answer , but we should each get a supplementary .
Yes , I agree , but Rule 19 refers to such exceptional situations as today ' s .
It is therefore necessary to apply the Rules of Procedure in a rational way .
If you continue raising points of order , not even the first ten questioners will be able to put their question or receive a reply .
Mr President , I would simply like to propose a rational solution to the problem .
I believe that we effectively have the right to respond to the President-in-Office ' s intervention and afterwards each of us should have the right to a supplementary question .
Mr President , I propose that we all have the right to a second brief intervention which would compensate for that hypothetical supplementary question which we would otherwise have the right to .
The debate will be brief but we would conserve our rights under the Rules of Procedure .
Even with Rule 19 , I have flexibility .
Therefore you can put the question again for one minute and the supplementary question , and you will have a maximum of one opportunity each ; after half a minute , the microphone will be turned off .
This is my final interpretation of Rule 19 .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 1 to 10 will be taken together .
Question No 1 by ( H-0516 / 01 ) :
Subject : The Laeken Declaration The December 2000 Nice European Council approved a Declaration on the future of the Union .
The declaration calls for a wide-ranging and searching debate on the European Union ' s future .
Not only the Member States but also states applying for accession , national parliaments , the European Parliament and the general public are all to be involved in that debate .
The European Council has thus improperly and in absolute disregard for the subsidiarity principle , bypassed the democratic legitimacy of the constitutionally established regions .
The Belgian Foreign Affairs Minister Louis Michel recently repeated his intention to allow MEPs to sit also as members of the Belgian Parliament .
We welcome what Mr Michel has to say about the closer involvement of members of parliaments , provided that he also includes the elected representatives of communes and regions .
Will the Council , in deference to the subsidiarity principle , include the constitutionally established regions in the plans it is drawing up for Europe ' s future ?
Question No 2 by ( H-0518 / 01 ) :
Subject : Laeken Declaration In view of the increasingly important and prominent involvement of the sub-state levels in the various EU decision-making procedures , the broad debate on the future of the Union which is taking shape mainly around the Laeken Summit should also provide answers to institutional issues relating to the involvement , from the legislative and judicial points of view , of constitutional regions ( sub-state entities with their own legislative powers guaranteed under the Constitution of the State to which they belong ) in the development , implementation , monitoring and assessment of EU policies .
Is the Council therefore intending to amend the Treaties ( Part Five , Section 4 ) in such a way as to grant these regions the right to appeal direct to the Court of Justice when their prerogatives are under threat , as the Member States are able to do ?
Question No 3 by ( H-0520 / 01 ) :
Subject : Laeken Declaration It is expected that during the Belgian presidency the Laeken Declaration on the future of the EU will be adopted .
A number of Member States , including Germany , Austria , Belgium and the UK , have established mechanisms for the participation of their regional or federal bodies in Council proceedings .
Given that the autonomous regions of the Spanish state , the German and Austrian Länder and the Belgian regions possess significant powers of their own which are in many cases affected by Community decisions , does the Council support the view that the regions could be directly represented within itself ?
Question No 4 by ( H-0522 / 01 ) :
Subject : Laeken Declaration With the declaration to be made at Laeken on Saturday , 15 December , the federal state of Belgium intends to make its contribution to the debate on the future of the European Union .
In that respect , the positive stance adopted by Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt on the joint political declaration by seven constitutional regions is particularly pleasing .
At the end of May , he received the regional president of Catalonia , the minister-president of Salzburg , the first minister of Scotland , the chief ministers of Flanders and Wallonia and the ministers for European / federal affairs of Bavaria and North Rhine-Westphalia , who are pressing for the role of constitutionally recognised regions in the European Union to be strengthened .
Does the Council support greater Treaty-based involvement for constitutional regions in the European project in view of the added democratic legitimacy they bring to the construction of the European Union ?
If not , why is it opposed to the greater Treaty-based involvement of constitutional regions in mapping out the future of Europe ?
Question No 5 by ( H-0524 / 01 ) :
Subject : Laeken Declaration Annex IV of the Nice Treaty contains a declaration calling for a deeper and wider debate about the future development of the EU .
The IGC also recognised the need to improve and to monitor the democratic legitimacy and transparency of the Union and its Institutions .
This formula opens the possibility of a form of convention with representatives of national parliaments , the European Parliament and the governments of the Member States .
Contrary to the principle of subsidiarity no reference was made to the constitutional regions .
Will the Council - following the democratic principle of subsidiarity - involve all the parliaments of the constitutional regions when it chooses a form of convention ?
Question No 6 by ( H-0525 / 01 ) :
Subject : Laeken Declaration According to the Declaration in Annex IV of the Nice Treaty the debate about the future development of the EU should address , inter alia , the following question : How to establish and monitor a more precise delimitation of competences between the EU and the Member States , reflecting the principle of subsidiarity ?
The present idea of subsidiarity in the EC Treaty is commonly interpreted as regulating only relations between Union and states .
This interpretation has to be broadened as outlined in the resolution of the European Parliament of 26 October 2000 on better lawmaking .
Will the Laeken Declaration propose to amend the Treaties so that they specifically include recognition of , and respect for , the political and legislative powers of the Member States ' internal political units in their executive , legislative and judicial relations with the EU Institutions ?
Question No 7 by ( H-0526 / 01 ) :
Subject : Laeken Declaration Annex IV of the Nice Treaty contains a declaration calling for a deeper and wider debate about the future development of the EU .
It also recognises the need to improve and to monitor the democratic legitimacy and transparency of the Union and its Institutions .
In December 2001 the Belgian presidency will be concluded by a contribution to this debate , the Laeken Declaration .
Will the Laeken Declaration recognise that a further democratisation of the European decision-making process calls for a more radical reform , with legislative power vested in two chambers , the European Parliament and a reformed Council that would subsume some aspects of the present Committee of the Regions and would strongly enhance the role of the constitutional regions ?
Question No 8 by ( H-0560 / 01 ) :
Subject : Laeken Declaration Annex IV of the Nice Treaty contains a declaration that calls for a deeper and wider debate about the future development of the EU .
Following a report to its Gothenburg meeting in June 2001 , the European Council at its meeting in Laeken in December 2001 will agree on appropriate initiatives for the continuation of this process .
According to the Declaration the process should address , inter alia , the following question : How to establish and monitor a more precise delimitation of competences between the EU and the Member States , reflecting the principle of subsidiarity ?
Will the Council - following the principle of subsidiarity - refrain from infringing the competences of the constitutional regions ?
How will the Council establish and monitor this respect for the competences of the constitutional regions ?
Question No 9 by ( H-0531 / 01 ) :


Subject : Declaration No 54 attached to the Treaty of Amsterdam on subsidiarity Declaration No 54 attached to the Treaty of Amsterdam , on subsidiarity , states : -It is taken for granted by the German , Austrian and Belgian governments that action by the European Community in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity not only concerns the Member States but also their entities to the extent that they have their own law-making powers conferred on them under national constitutional law . '

Similarly , Declaration No 23 attached to the Treaty of Nice , on the future of the Union , states in its third paragraph : ' In 2001 , the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies , in cooperation with the Commission and involving the European Parliament , will encourage wide-ranging discussions with all interested parties ' ; and , in its fourth paragraph : ' the European Council , at its meeting in Laeken in December 2001 , will agree on a declaration containing appropriate initiatives for the continuation of this process ' .
What approach will the Belgian presidency take to Declaration No 54 attached to the Treaty of Amsterdam , on the principle of subsidiarity and the entities having exclusive powers ?
What does the Belgian presidency believe to be the best means of resolving potential conflicts arising from decisions of the EU institutions where such decisions clash with the exclusive powers of those entities ?
Would the correct solution not be for the European Court of Justice to be given the power to rule on any appeals lodged by those constitutional entities and for the Treaties to legitimate the power of those entities to defend their interests in court at Union level ?
Question No 10 by ( H-0547 / 01 ) :
Subject : Recognition of the political and legislative competences of constitutional regions and nationalities What proposals does the Council intend to make to ensure that the planned 2004 reform of the Treaties includes the recognition and underpinning of the political and legislative powers of internal units within the Member States ( nationalities , federal states , autonomous communities or constitutional regions ) in their executive , legislative and judicial relations with the EU institutions ?
In a declaration attached to the Treaty of Nice , the Conference of Representatives of the Member State Governments expressed the wish for a broad and more profound debate on European Union ' s future to be initiated as a first step in a preparatory process which will culminate in the convening of the Intergovernmental Conference in 2004 .
The joint declaration of the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies , the President of the European Parliament and the President of the Commission of 7 March last , confirmed this objective and called for a debate in which all sections of society need to be involved more than ever .
The report by the presidency , submitted to the European Council in Gothenburg , describes the vast range of initiatives which have already been launched in Member States and candidate countries , and also by the institutions of the Union .
This report notes the numerous initiatives that have been taken in various Member States , involving different regional bodies .
It also lists the events organised as part of this debate by the Committee of the Regions .
The various questions raised , which are all on the subject of the role of the regional bodies in the process of preparing for the Intergovernmental Conference in 2004 , are concerned with two types of problem .
On the one hand , there are the detailed rules for implementing the preparatory phase which precedes the next Intergovernmental Conference , and on the other there is the issue of the role of the regional bodies in the construction of the Union .
As far as the question of the detailed rules concerning the preparatory phase is concerned , it is too soon yet to take a decision on the content of the Laeken declaration .
Most of you , I know , heard what was said by our Prime Minister , and that will have lifted a little corner of the veil .
However , most of the canvas which is currently covered by that veil has still to be painted .
That being the case , all I can tell you is that it is too soon .
However , it is obvious that the preparatory phase will have to take its inspiration from the various contributions which will be made by the European Council in December , and from the discussions and contacts which the Belgian presidency will be having with all the parties concerned .
In that respect I can assure you that the presidency has the firm intention of examining every aspect of the question , including those mentioned by the honourable Members , so that the detailed rules for implementing preparations for the 2004 Intergovernmental Conference will provide the optimum response to the initial requirements set out in the Nice Declaration .
( NL ) By way of response to the questions which are related to the content of the role of regional bodies in the future fabric of the Union , I can only remind you of the attention which previous Intergovernmental Conferences have devoted to this issue .
That was particularly apparent from the establishment of a Committee of the Regions , composed of representatives from regional and local communities , a committee which , as you know , plays an advisory role .
It would be premature at this stage to give you a detailed response to this issue of content on behalf of the Council - for I am talking on behalf of the Council - but I am certain that this point will be addressed in due course .
I shall listen to your supplementary questions with interest . I hope there will be time for a supplementary answer .
Mrs Neyts-Uytebroeck , or Annemie , if you will allow me to use your first name , we should not pull the wool over each other ' s eyes .
I simply want to say to you that , of course , I understand that you are replying here on behalf of the Council .
But all of the ten EFTA parliamentarians present here naturally want to promote the regional process in the European construction , because we are all MEPs from pro-European regions .
We fear that if the constitutional regions are not represented well in the European decision-making process , a gradual aversion to Europe will grow within those regions , because we will feel that our regions cannot have their say , that they are suffocating , as it were .
That is why I should like to ask you , as the driving force in a discussion which is about to start , how you will try to actively involve those regions in the decision-making process and how you will ensure that the Council actually makes a statement in this connection in the foreseeable future .
Mr President , Bart , please accept my apologies , for I am not all that familiar yet with the procedures .
I was under the impression that I would listen to all the additional questions first and then respond to them all in one go .
But your plea for constitutional regions is , of course , not falling on deaf ears , if I can put it that way . In a previous political life not so long ago , I was , in fact , Minister in the Government of one of those constitutional regions .
I therefore identify with your plea entirely . You have also undoubtedly listened carefully to our Prime Minister .
You can therefore count on it that I , on my own behalf and on behalf of Belgium , will do my utmost to broach this subject . But there are also fourteen other Member States , and it will therefore be important for the constitutional regions to bring harmony among themselves as well .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , this morning we heard the Belgian Prime Minister .
I agree with the basic tenet of his clear and intelligent speech and I hope that with the prospect of the Laeken Council , his action will serve to override the total failure of the Nice Conference .
I must say , however , that in his speech , as in the answer that he has just given to our questions , for which I thank him , I noted the absence of any explicit reference to the political recognition of national and cultural diversity which , together with statehood , is a fundamental element of the European character .
Within this diversity , the stateless nations that we represent have genuine historical and linguistic roots , as well as demographic and economic importance on a par with those of the Member States .
We would like to see acknowledgement of our political , civic and democratic realities , together with the executive , legislative and judicial powers that distinguish us , so that we are able to participate in the European Council , just as we also acknowledge that federal states , Länder and constitutional regions that have a different nature but similar powers must participate .
We would like to see these realities incorporated into the Laeken Declaration .
We would like these realities to be included in the future Constitution .
We hope , in any event , that our governments and our parliaments will participate in the convention drawing up the proposals for the European Union ' s constitution .
Our Prime Minister , the President-in-Office of the Council , was unable , in his speech , to include every aspect of the real situation in the European Union about which he is concerned , but I can tell you now that the safeguarding , deployment and development of cultural diversity , and indeed of linguistic diversity , are in his mind as they are in mine , and I believe that we all regard them as fundamental values .
This determination to safeguard cultural diversity will certainly be expressed , probably in the first section of the Laeken Declaration , which will deal with the principles and values that we have in common .
I can assure you , therefore , that cultural diversity , and the desire for cultural diversity , will certainly be included as one of the basic principles of the European Union , and it is a principle to which we are all very much attached .
Mr President , thank you for allowing me to take the floor .
This is the first chance I have had to speak to the House , because your Assembly only verified my credentials last Monday .
Could I just remind you that have taken over from the Basque MEP , Mr Gorka Knörr , who was elected to the Basque Parliament on 13 May and has now become its Deputy Speaker .
Madam Minister , I myself am Catalan , a Catalan from Roussillon , in other words a French national , and I applied to be included in a coalition in the Spanish State , a Basque-Catalan coalition , and that is why I , the Catalan , have taken over from Mr Gorka Knörr , the Basque .
As you know , Madam Minister , Catalonia is more than just a region .
It is a nation , a nation which has always been a courageous defender of liberty and has always been concerned with solidarity values .
Catalonia is a deeply Europhile nation , and yet today that nation has some difficulty in finding its place in this institution .
It cannot be content with the makeshift role which it has been granted in the Committee of the Regions , a committee whose powers , as you know , are extremely limited .
This is why , knowing your position and your history , I hoped , and indeed still hope , that your presidency will enable progress to be made on this issue , not only the issue of Catalonia , but also the issue of all the other nations without a State of their own .
First of all , I should like to congratulate Mr Mayol on his arrival here in this House .
I am able to speak from experience .
Mr Mayol , you will find that your mandate is an absolutely extraordinary one , but one which is nonetheless worth the trouble .
I hope that your years here will be fruitful , pleasant and interesting .
You will certainly have to work hard , but something tells me that you are not afraid of hard work .
So , once again , my best congratulations !
Actually I do know a little about Catalonia .
I do not speak Catalan but I can understand it , which is something at least .
The problem you have raised is obviously even more complex than the issue of constitutional regions within the boundaries of a single country .
You are talking about a nation which straddles two countries , if you will allow me to put it so cavalierly , both of which are anxious to maintain their territorial integrity .
I am happy to leave you with the responsibility for the prospects which you have opened up .
On the other hand , I completely agree with you when you emphasise the fact that the Catalans love their nation , their language and their culture , but that at the same time they are very European , very open to the world outside .
I can tell you that we are not unaware of the fact that the Prime Minister of Spanish Catalonia was one of the first people to launch the movement in favour of constitutional regions .
If I know him , and I know him well and have confidence in him , that movement will certainly not come to a halt , and as long as it keeps going it will be skilfully conducted .
Mr Pujol and the other Prime Ministers will see to that .
To that extent I believe that the debate will progress in the right direction in the years to come .
The President-in-Office of the Council is very receptive to the points we are making but her colleagues in the Council , generally , have very little to say about subsidiarity in a way that pleases us .
This is the kind of thing that makes an increasing part of the population of Scotland recognise that being a Member State is a much better idea than being a constitutional region .
However , things standing as they do , I would ask the President-in-Office if she would be prepared to discuss with colleagues the oddity of the structure of the Committee of the Regions which , instead of representing the regions in some proportion to their size , represents the states according to digressive proportionality .
Denmark , which is already a Member State , has twice as many Members in the Committee of the Regions as Scotland has .
Even Luxembourg has more !
I do not know the difference between the regions of Luxembourg intimately , but I dare say they are less than the difference between the regions of Scotland .
The debate is getting more complicated with each speaker and you will understand that I cannot possibly go into that issue .
However , I do know that within the Committee of the Regions the representatives of municipalities , cities , provinces , and constitutional regions find it increasingly difficult to build a common platform from which to develop their action .
The Presiding Officer of the Scottish Assembly is one of my very great and dear friends and so I am familiar with the problems you have referred to .
However , I cannot possibly give a detailed answer to your very precise questions .
I believe that the issue of subsidiarity and its meaning in practice is central to the whole debate on the future of Europe - not only in terms of the rights of nations and regions within the Member States , but also in terms of citizenship .
I represent Wales which has a new national assembly , just two years old .
It is a developing body that wants to play a full part in and have strong links with the European Union and help build the Europe of the future .
Would the Minister agree that involving this kind of regional level of government is crucial in terms of developing citizenship and bringing Europe closer to the people - a problem that we are all familiar with in all our constituencies .
If this is something that needs to be done on a European level in order to bring Europe closer to people , how will this be reflected in the work of the Council ?
As you will appreciate , this is a real debate .
In my first answer I said everything I could say as President-in-Office .
The rest is very much my personal point of view as a member of the Belgian Government .
I hope that you will make this distinction , especially as this is now a more spontaneous debate , which I like very much .
I believe subsidiarity is a very important notion but it is also a very difficult one because it is not very precise .
It is more precisely defined in the protocol to the Treaty of Amsterdam than previously and is perfectly usable .
The local and intermediary levels are essential in bridging the gap between citizens and authorities .
These levels and authorities have a very important role to play .
In light of recent developments , as in Denmark and Ireland , this awareness has grown and will be better taken into account than perhaps in the past .
Annex IV of the Nice Treaty contains a declaration calling for a deeper and wider debate about the future development of the EU .
It also recognises , importantly , the need to improve and to monitor the democratic legitimacy and transparency of the Union and its institutions .
In December 2001 , the Belgian presidency will be concluded by a contribution to this debate at the Laeken Declaration .
Will the Laeken Declaration recognise that a further democratisation of the European decision-making process calls for a more radical reform with legislative power vested in two chambers : the European Parliament , and a reformed Council that would subsume some aspects of the present Committee of the Regions and would strongly enhance the role of the constitutional regions ?
I will have to limit my answer to reminding you that the Laeken Declaration will be more about the right questions and indications of directions , than about formulae and definite answers .
Hopefully it will only be the start of the more formal preparations for the IGC .
Any answer now to your question would be quite premature .
All I can tell you is that we are very conscious of all these aspects , and that we are not the only ones who are conscious of them .
I would be very surprised if the issue was not addressed in the form of a question .
But do not expect answers yet , it is far too soon .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , the Belgian , Austrian and German Governments included declaration No 54 in the Treaty of Amsterdam in order to refer to the influence that European issues have on the internal bodies of the States , above all in the regions with exclusive competences .
The European institutions , and above all the Council , constantly take decisions which sometimes encroach on the competences of the constitutional regions or the regions with legislative competences in Europe .
Conflicts of competence are created and , in this respect , I would like to ask the opinion of the Belgian Government in relation to the possibility that these regions with exclusive legislative competences may be given the right to bring cases before the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
I would also ask your opinion of the Court of Justice of the European Communities ' capacity to pass judgement on these conflicts of competence between the Union and the regions with legislative competence .
Mr Ortuondo Larrea , I shall tell you what I can in reply to your question about how we organise our work .
I am sure that you are not unaware , precisely because of the protocol to which you referred , that a certain number of Councils of Ministers will be presided over by ministers of regional and / or community governments .
This has already happened in the case of the informal Tourism Council which took place last weekend in Bruges , and it will also happen in the case of the Education and Scientific Research Councils , and some of the other Councils too .
You can see , then , how we deal with questions of this type .
As far as the possibility of access to the Court of Justice is concerned , I know that this is something that the constitutional regions are asking for .
Sometimes I have the impertinence to wonder whether they are fully aware of the scope and the possible consequences of a positive reply to their requests .
You yourself have pointed out that if the regions had direct access to the Court of Justice in disputes about competence , it would seem almost inevitable that the Court would one day be called upon to give a ruling on the internal constitutional organisation of the Member States themselves .
I would ask you to think about that .
It is not possible for me to reply to your question .
It is a very delicate question , and a very controversial one .
Any reply would be quite premature .
However , if you will permit me I would like to ask you think about what I have just said .
Mr President , I would like to make it clear to the President-in-Office of the Council that it is not permitted in all States for governments of the constitutional regions to participate in the meetings of the Council of Ministers and , therefore , we are unrepresented , as is the case with the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country .
I believe that this is a genuine problem for Europe and we must deal with it .
We cannot be taking decisions in the European fora on competences which the laws attribute to regions which are not present to defend them .
As a final comment , Mr Ortuondo Larrea , I would just like to say that this is an arrangement that we came to in Belgium , between Belgian governments , governments with an ' s ' , always governments in the plural .
I would ask you to refer to your own governments , because that is where I believe this type of question should be resolved in the first instance .
Mr President , I do not represent any region ; as you know , I represent the pensioners of Italy and Europe .
Before tabling my question , however , I would like to express my admiration at the President-in-Office of the Council ' s willingness to answer so thoroughly all the questions she has been asked .
I paid close attention to the Swedish presidency and I was practically frozen stiff by the coldness with which the Swedes habitually responded ' This is not my responsibility ' .
I am therefore genuinely satisfied , having listened to the Belgian President-in-Office speak this morning , by his openness to pensioners ' affairs , and I am truly satisfied to have seen the practical undertaking by the Belgian presidency to respond to every question , even the most difficult ones .
I have exhausted the time available to me and so I will not be able to table my supplementary question .
I will do so on another occasion .
Mr President , The President-in-Office of the Council said that we want recognition of our national realities and of our constitutional powers .
I wish to reply that these realities are indeed part of European diversity but this is not simply a label to hold on to ; it is also the powerful political reality of my country , Galicia , which should be fully recognised , just like those of the States of the borderless Union of Europe , of which we are all a part .
Question No 11 by ( H-0545 / 01 ) :
Subject : Public access to Council documents Now that the Council has enacted the Commission proposal , what is the timetable and the procedure for the public to begin accessing the Council ' s documents ?
To Mr Newton Dunn ' s question , I can answer as follows .
First of all : the Council is impressed with the progress made in terms of openness and transparency since the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force , particularly with the adoption of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 regarding public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents .
The Council would point out to the honourable Member that this Parliament and Council Regulation of 30 May 2001 , pursuant to Article 19 , will not enter into force until 3 December 2001 .
Until such time , requests from the public for Council documents will be dealt with as before on the basis of Council Decision 93 / 731 / EC on public access to Council documents .
Each of the three institutions involved will therefore need to make the necessary arrangements to guarantee that the new Regulation is actually in force as of 3 December 2001 .
In accordance with Article 15 , they shall establish an interinstitutional committee to examine best practice , address possible conflicts and discuss future developments on public access to documents .
As far as the Council is concerned , the competent bodies are currently looking into the measures that need to be taken in order to fully implement the rights of citizens which they have acquired on the basis of the new Regulation .
I can add to this that it is this presidency ' s ambition , wherever possible , to be able to conclude all agreements before this Regulation enters into force , but as I have said before , we cannot do this on our own , and I hope we will receive the necessary support .
I must say I think most Members will think that a six-month delay is exceedingly disappointing , but it is nice to hear something positive .
Can you indicate to us what the possible obstacles are ?
Does anybody have a veto on this date of 3 December or can you give us a guarantee that it is actually going to happen ?
You are not going to tell us at the end of the Belgian presidency : I am so sorry it slipped ; somebody got it in the way !
Can you guarantee it is going to happen or does someone have a veto ?
I am afraid I cannot guarantee that .
I would be a fairy if I could .
I can only tell you that we will do our utmost .
We will take up where the work left off to see to it that the directive enters into force on the set date , 3 December 2001 .
Question No 12 by ( H-0550 / 01 ) :
Subject : Equal treatment of Turkey in regard to accession aid The European Council meeting in Helsinki in December 1999 decided that Turkey is a candidate State on the same terms as the other twelve candidate States .
Turkey was therefore promised certain aid during the often long and difficult process entailed by membership negotiations .
The forms of aid currently available to all candidate countries include funds such as ISPA and SAPARD . Turkey , however , has not benefited from those .
The country has been refused the aid promised at Helsinki on the grounds that the EU did not have the financial resources available .
Is it not time for the Council to ensure that the Helsinki summit decisions to treat Turkey on an equal footing with the other twelve candidate countries are now honoured and that the channels are opened for that country to obtain the aid it was promised , particularly in view of the fact that the Commission recently decided to refund 11.6 billion euro to the Member States ?
The European Council in Helsinki , having decided to grant Turkey the status of a candidate for accession , asked the Commission to submit a single framework for European Union financial aid to that country for the pre-accession period .
The Commission submitted its proposal to the Council on 27 April this year .
The main objective of this proposal for a financial framework is to guarantee that financial aid will be granted in accordance with priorities defined by the accession partnership and to bring the existing financial instruments together to form a single instrument , in order to optimise its effectiveness .
The European Council in Gothenburg , which made it quite clear that the accession partnership is the kingpin of the pre-accession strategy , invited the Council to adopt this single financial framework between now and the end of 2001 .
The Council has begun the procedure of consulting the European Parliament , and is encouraging Parliament to give its opinion as soon as possible .
Concerning the funding under the ISPA and SAPAR programmes , to which the honourable Member refers , this is structural aid and aid for agricultural development which is only granted to the candidate countries from Central and Eastern Europe to meet their specific needs as transitional economies .
However , that does not mean that Turkey has missed out on the aid promised in Helsinki , on the contrary .
The financial preaccession aid for Turkey has been doubled in 2000 and 2001 compared to the average annual amounts which were allocated in the 1996-1999 period .
In view of normal budget procedures , we should aim to continue to grant this aid for the remaining part of the current financial perspectives . That is until 2006 , as you know , and applies to all candidate countries .
I should also like to point out that the EU ' s general budget contains a new component , entitled ' Preaccession strategy for Turkey ' , in which the resources are increased in the light of this .
As this budget line comprises different budget resources , the financial aid programmes for Turkey can be completed with greater efficiency .
As you know , the European Parliament has approved this approach in its opinion on the framework regulation for Turkey .
I would like to thank the Belgian presidency for its answer and at the same time welcome Belgium as the country holding the presidency of the Council of Ministers in the European Union after the Swedish presidency .
Many of us , including myself , see Belgium almost as our second home in that we live in Brussels during the week but go home , in my case to Sweden , at weekends .
I would like to address the issue of Turkey .
It is clearly the case that Turkey has not understood the difference between , on the one hand , the Eastern and Central European countries which were considered for the ISPA and SAPARD funds and , on the other hand , Turkey , which was not considered for these .
Is the legislation insufficiently clear with regard to Turkey ?
Turkey also feels that it wants to be treated well and fairly .
I would like to advise you to clarify why Turkey was not considered for these particular funds .
I would like to thank the honourable Member for his kind words and express my appreciation for the Swedish presidency with whom I have enjoyed an extremely pleasant and fruitful partnership over the past six months .
Question No 13 by ( H-0553 / 01 ) :
Subject : Belgian presidency and Afghan women Considering the subhuman conditions in which over 11 million women in Afghanistan are obliged to survive , will the Council consider encouraging the creation of an international Afghanistan committee in coordination with the UN ?
Mrs Izquierdo Rójo , we were fellow members of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs during the previous legislative period .
It is therefore a great pleasure for me to be able to reply to the question that you have so judiciously raised .
As I pointed out in my previous replies to questions on the same subject , the Council entirely shares the honourable Member ' s concern about the disastrous position in which large sections of the Afghan population now find themselves , and in particular the disastrous position of women and children .
In view of the difficulties in Afghanistan at humanitarian and political levels , and in particular in view of the negative attitude which the Taleban persist in taking , both as regards the UN and as regards women , the Council is not entirely convinced that the setting up of an international Afghanistan committee in coordination with the UN , would be likely to really improve the situation of women in Afghanistan .
Nevertheless , the Council will examine closely the advantages and disadvantages to which such a committee might give rise , as soon as this issue is raised within the UN , and provided that the rules for putting such a proposal into practice have been studied in minute detail .
In the meantime , the Council will be continuing the projects which it has decided on with the aim of helping Afghan women .
On that point , the Council would also refer the honourable Member to the replies which it has already given to previous questions on the same subject , and in particular to Questions H-0032 / 01 , H-0052 / 01 , H-0170 / 01 , H-0088 / 01 and , more recently , Question H-0481 / 01 .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I thank you for this reply and , as a supplementary question , I would like to know whether you approve of exerting international pressure both against the Taliban regime and against the States that support it , specifically Saudi Arabia , Pakistan and the United Arab Emirates .
Are you prepared to work during the Belgian presidency so that progress may really be made in relation to this disastrous situation ?
My reply was in response to your specific question about an international committee .
As far as international pressure is concerned , i.e. the sanctions and embargoes which have been ordered in respect of Afghanistan , obviously the Council takes the view that these must be continued , and as far as possible reinforced , because we are dealing here with a regime that is completely inhumane .
Question No 14 by ( H-0555 / 01 ) :
Subject : Including the competent authorities in discussions on the regulation of medicine Taking into account the apparent dissolution of the Advisory Council on Medical Training , will the Council take urgent measures to ensure that the changes planned or under way in relation to the regulation of medicine in Member States , including issues such as the free movement of doctors and training , are open to contribution and comment by the appropriate authorities in the Member States , including the Medical Council of Ireland ?
As you indicated , the discussion on the role of certain advisory committees has been launched .
On 19 July 1999 the Commission submitted a proposal for a decision to the Council with the aim of abolishing the Council advisory committee for medical training , together with some other advisory committees established in conjunction with sectoral directives for doctors , dentists , veterinary surgeons , pharmacists , general care nurses and midwives .
The Commission ' s purpose was to simplify the committee system .
The Council has had some discussions on this proposal , but has not come up with any conclusions yet .
In addition to the examination of this proposal , no further measures of the type indicated in the question are envisaged in the Council .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for her willingness to go over time and take extra questions .
I wish her well during the presidency and hope that her relationship with the Members will be as open and blunt as it has been this afternoon .
Specifically on my supplementary , there is a major concern about the medical councils in the Member States and , in particular , for my own country , Ireland , with regard to ensuring minimum standards of training and qualification for doctors and other people in the medical profession .
As we move towards enlargement of the European Union , with the accession of new Member States , and extend freedom of movement opportunities to countries outside of the accession countries to deal with shortfalls of medical personnel across the European Union , we consider that experts in the field from the existing Member States must be included in any such consultation process .
I have taken note of your remarks .
I am sorry , but I really have to go or I will miss my plane but I will forward them to my colleague who is responsible for this matter .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 15 to 26 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Council .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.40 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Macro-financial assistance to Yugoslavia
The next item is the report ( A5-0244 / 2001 ) by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council decision providing macro-financial assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia [ COM ( 2001 ) 277 - C5-0231 / 2001 - 2001 / 0112 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I wish to recommend that the plenary adopt the proposal for a Council decision providing macro-financial assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the in the version originally put forward by the Commission .
We know that there have been some discussions in budget areas of the Council which are aimed at introducing restrictions , but we take the view that at the present political time , it is right to approve the amounts originally envisaged in the proposal .
There is an obvious reason for this : I think that having made it clear for so long that assistance would be available from the European Union if the people of Serbia and Montenegro threw off the yoke of dictatorship , we should keep our word .
Particularly after the events of recent days , which have culminated in Milosevic ' s extradition to the International Court Tribunal in The Hague , it is important that the European Parliament and the European Union signal that in response to these internal factors , the funds will be released , so that the people in a country like Yugoslavia can see that fostering democracy and human rights is genuinely worthwhile .
For this reason , Commissioner , conditions should be created so that this can happen as quickly as possible , and I know that this is your intention too .
This macro-financial assistance is not directly linked to a specific programme . It is an initial injection which is designed to help set things in motion .
In this context , it should also be made clear that this assistance must not be tied to overly complicated conditions .
We are proposing a number of amendments to you .
These proposed amendments are designed to enhance control and also call for the involvement of other donors , although we do not view this as a condition . I believe that these are all positions which , ultimately , will not lead to obstacles and delay , but will enhance clarity , strengthen the control options , and also make it clear that we want assistance to be provided speedily .
As you know , this House did not create any difficulties when it was a matter of applying for urgent assistance for this area . As I am sure you recall , through the participation of other committees too , such as the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , we signalled our willingness to proceed as quickly as possible and introduce the necessary amendments .
Let me also make one general political point .
In recent years , we have repeatedly engaged in grand theoretical debates about the developments in Yugoslavia . Yet in terms of our commitment , whether in the field of prevention and civil crisis management or , indeed , through threats and the use of military capabilities , we have generally acted too late .
Our policy has always been ' too little , too late ' .
This has led us into the situation which we have witnessed in recent days in Macedonia .
This misguided approach , which ultimately forces us to make even greater sacrifices and provide even more assistance - because we failed to act in time , and because we could not implement the concept of prevention and civil crisis management due to the international community ' s total fragmentation of responsibilities in this region - has resulted in major political failure in key areas .
By providing these resources , we want to make it clear once again that this is not due to us , and that as the European Parliament , we are willing to do everything possible as quickly as possible . However , this is also an appeal to the Commission and the Council to make the necessary political decisions in a different way in future .
I recall that two months ago , I was castigated and accused of being irresponsible when I spoke about the possibility of war in Macedonia . People ignore the facts for as long as they can , because they are too cowardly to tell the truth to the public at home .
Afterwards , it all becomes far too expensive for everyone , and the costs again include human lives .
For this reason , we call urgently once again for rapid assistance to be provided so that peace , democracy and human rights can be restored to this region .
It was indeed an extraordinary gesture on the part of the Serbian Government to hand over Mr Milosevic to the International Court of Justice .
This also required courage .
During an earlier attempt to arrest Mr Milosevic , when he was still living in his own house , it was already evident that the army and the police were in opposite camps .
In a way , therefore , I think we should pay our respects to Mr Djindjic and the way he acted , although his motives may well have been inspired by opportunism .
I am also delighted that we have been able to agree internally on the fact that financial assistance should be subject to the extent to which steps are taken in the direction of rule of law , including cooperation with the Court .
In my opinion , Parliament had a clearer take on this than the Council , which did not want to make this aid too conditional .
In this respect , we share the position of the United States and I believe that that in itself was a very good move .
Mr Milosevic has now been extradited by Serbia and Yugoslavia .
All we need to do now is to wait for the international community itself to cooperate with the International Court of Justice .
The SFOR has to deliver the goods now , for the cooperation of SFOR and the political powers behind it , have so far been lacking .
That is ultimately extremely painful and disgraceful .
There is really no cause for any further complaint if SFOR fails to do what it should do in its own province , namely to arrest Messrs Karadzic and Mladic .
In that connection , I would also appreciate it if the European Parliament ' s message in this respect were driven home to the Council and to all those others who , under the United Nations , carry joint responsibility for the actions of the SFOR , of which we are right to have high expectations .
Thanks to the excellent services of Mr Korakas , we recently found out that we in Europe fail to see eye to eye in this respect .
It appears that a vast majority in the Greek parliament has signed a declaration which states that it is very regrettable that Mr Milosevic has been taken to the so-called Court of Justice in The Hague .
Mr President , there is a great deal to be done before the community of values with that parliament can be restored .
This confirms that there are many differences within our Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to support Mr Brok ' s motion on the approval of macro-financial assistance to Yugoslavia .
I also believe that it is absolutely vital , given the country ' s high level of debt , to provide an above-average level of lost subsidies here , i.e. above-average compared with the usual practice .
I fully support the Commission on this point .
One condition for cooperation , as has been mentioned , is cooperation with The Hague .
This has always been the position of this House and also our group .
There is no question that a great deal has been achieved through Milosevic ' s extradition .
This is a positive development .
Yet positive developments can sometimes leave a stale after-taste .
Firstly , it was all too clear that Milosevic was handed over in exchange for the funds pledged by the donors ' conference , not so much in exchange for direct assistance from the European Union .
It was not a pretty sight . There are two sides responsible : those who demanded this step , but also the government in Belgrade , who was too hesitant at first .
Secondly , it is interesting that particular pressure was applied by the Americans : the Americans , who persist in rejecting the notion that international courts could actually have jurisdiction over their citizens .
This is an interesting point , and the European Union should bring pressure to bear on the Americans to recognise the international courts and their jurisdiction over American citizens at last .
Thirdly , it does not resolve the issue of Yugoslavia ' s critical examination of its own history .
There are many individuals , such as those responsible for the destruction of Vukovar , who are still at large .
This debate must continue in Yugoslavia .
Fourthly , it is conceivable that the fragile balance established in Yugoslavia will undergo hard tests and could even be destroyed .
On this point , I would like to make a comment about the future of the country .
Over recent months and years , we have all witnessed what is often an antagonist mood towards Yugoslavia itself . Yet Yugoslavia has an important role to play in the region ' s reconstruction , and thankfully , it now has responsible and sensible leaders who can set it on the right course .
However , we must be patient here and help Yugoslavia fulfil its tasks in the region .
Together with my group , I identify three key points in this context .
Firstly , the critical debate in Yugoslavia about events in the country over recent decades must continue .
Secondly , there must be reconciliation with its neighbours .
Here , in particular , the extradition of a number of war criminals would undoubtedly help .
Thirdly , and this is my final point , the economy must certainly be reconstructed , and we must give our support to this process .
If we are able to link these three elements together , we will be able to look back in five or ten years ' time on the successful history of EU policy in Yugoslavia .
Mr President , Commissioner , the economic relations between the EU and Yugoslavia are of a special kind .
For a long time , there were no relations .
After October 2000 , the EU promptly made EUR 200 million available to Yugoslavia by way of emergency aid . This just illustrates that even the EU can work quickly and efficiently .
Last week , the EU showed itself in its best light at the donor conference .
We are now discussing here in Parliament macro-financial assistance to the tune of EUR 300 million to cover budget shortages , including a considerable gift in the sum of EUR 120 million .
In my view , the assistance we are discussing this evening is representing the end of a certain era , namely the transition from autocracy to democracy .
This aid is welcome and appropriate at this stage , but in my opinion it also has the feel of a one-off gesture .
It may also be useful to indicate that special conditions apply , of which I should like to mention two .
As Mr Brok has already stated , it is not the case that the approval and spending of these funds are subject to very special conditions , but sound cooperation must be established with the political and safety committee because the EU ' s aid to Yugoslavia must be granted in a politically coherent fashion .
That also applies to the assessment of that aid .
Subsequent to this macro-financial assistance , it will have to be carefully examined , particularly on a political plane , if this form of aid is required in future .
My group has reached the conclusion that it is important for the EU to be quick off the mark , efficient and generous , whenever that is useful and needed politically speaking .
It is about being able to transfer resources quickly and efficiently , not being afraid to take the lead and not being frightened to be dependent on other donors .
But we must also be able to change strategy quickly and efficiently .
That is why , in my view , it is important to support this kind of aid in the anticipation that it will probably be the last time that aid will be granted to Yugoslavia in this form .
Mr President , I can only speak for a majority of my group on this issue .
We support the Commission ' s proposal and the report .
I do not think there is any need to repeat several of Mr Swoboda ' s criticisms which I agree with .
Mr Brok ' s remarks about the need for a preventive peace policy and civil crisis management render my own outline comments superfluous .
Of course , it is quite correct to say that far more rapid and concerted action is required .
However , I believe that there are also very different sides to this policy which have various drawbacks .
Mr Brok , in your proposed Amendment No 2 , you state - quite rightly , in my view - that financial support can be provided to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as far as it proceeds towards a well-functioning legal state , including cooperation with the International Court Tribunal in the Hague .
However , if at the same time a violation of rule-of-law principles is extorted , in effect , above all by the USA but apparently also by the German Chancellor , this policy is more likely to discredit the rule of law and democratic development in the long term .
I see these contradictions in other areas too .
Macedonia has been mentioned .
For many months , we have courted the KLA , without any decommissioning of arms taking place .
KFOR therefore shares the blame for developments in Macedonia and the outbreaks of fresh conflict .
In Kosovo , we pursued a policy which was designed to prevent ethnic cleansing ; today , we witness other completely unacceptable instances of ethnic cleansing in the wake of the NATO campaign .
In my view , this is incompatible with a preventive and sustainable security policy .
I believe that the time has come to move away from a policy which contains the conflicts and limits the damage to which it has itself contributed .
It is time to expect and demand democracy , the rule of law and the protection of minority and human rights not only from our political opponents but also to practise them even when they stand in the way of our own power-political interests .
I think that the positive developments in Yugoslavia have genuinely achieved a great deal , but changes in NATO and EU policy are long overdue .
Mr President , this debate is about assistance for a country which was flattened two years ago by the criminal NATO bombings , which were supported by the European Union .
During our recent visit to Yugoslavia , delegates from the Serbian parliament informed us that material damage alone ran into over USD 100 billion , not counting the livestock lost and the damage to the natural environment , not just in Yugoslavia but in the Balkans as a whole , as a result of the tens of thousands of depleted uranium bombs dropped there .
Then along comes the Council with a proposal to give Yugoslavia macro-financial assistance to the ridiculous tune of a few hundred million - no doubt the thirty pieces of silver for the subordinates in Belgrade who , in the most disgraceful manner and despite a decision to the contrary by the country ' s parliament and supreme constitutional court , handed the former president of Yugoslavia , who was democratically elected in four elections , to a court set up on the orders of the USA and ÍÁÔÏ in order to try anyone who resists the new order .
The basic crime which Milosevic committed was to refuse to kow-tow to ÍÁÔÏ .
The real criminals , such as Tutzman , Izetbegovic etc . , who did kow-tow , were acquitted .
But history will have the last word .
I am certain that it will judge today ' s decision to be one of the ugliest moments in the life of the European Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the increasingly unstable situation in what remains of the Former Republic of Yugoslavia , and , it has to be said , in the Balkans as a whole , makes it necessary for us to extend the aid that we provide to the countries of that region , not only for this year , but no doubt for a long time to come .
It also makes it necessary for us , and this should be a matter of priority , to come face to face with the reality of our failure and to ask ourselves what is the cause of it .
The cause is simple .
The European Union was only pretending to follow the logic of peace .
In reality , it was merely using humanitarian speeches to cover up the real logic , the logic of war , a war which was in the interests of several powers and which was intended to destroy Yugoslavia , which is what happened in just a few years .
We can only understand this if we think along geopolitical lines .
Although this is the only means of understanding the reality of power relationships between nations , in other words diplomacy itself , we are still obstinately refusing to carry out a geopolitical analysis .
Yet this would reveal the truth , a truth which is glaringly obvious , in other words that there are three powers pursuing converging interests in the Balkans .
First there is Germany , which has never got over the fact that , after both the First World War and the Second , it was to some extent against its interests , or at least against the interests of its European expansionism , that the country of Yugoslavia was created as a single entity .
As soon as Germany was reunified in 1990 , it played an important part in breaking the stranglehold of Serbia , its old enemy , so as to be reunited with its Slovenian and Croatian allies , and let us not forget , with two precious Mediterranean coastlines .
In the same way , Turkey easily regained the connivance of Albania , and its military arm , the KLA .

To some extent urged on by the whole of the Muslim world , Turkey has reconquered some very old , very ancient positions in Balkan Europe , and it has obviously done so against the interests of Europe , but in the interests of the United States which , like any empire , knows very well how to divide and rule , and has profited and continues to profit from stirring up very old conflicts and fanning the flames of very old quarrels in what we can only call Greater Turkey , which is in the process of installing itself in the Balkans , to the great detriment , of course , of Greece .

To put it in a nutshell , Europe has worked against itself , and in my view this is a further sign of its failure to conduct a rational diplomacy .
Thank you very much .
I appreciate the passions stirred up by the issue of the Balkans , specifically Yugoslavia .
However , my objective here today is rather more modest .
Of course we must react to the events of recent weeks as a European Community , offering a significant message of support to the Yugoslavian authorities and supporting the stabilisation and economic reform efforts made by that country .
I especially welcome the efforts made by this House , and in particular Mr Brok .
The acceleration of the process has been complex in recent weeks and this makes it difficult for the different committees to express their points of view on the proposal we are discussing today .
As I said before , our objective is limited .
It is important , but it is limited , given the difficult economic and financial situation of Yugoslavia , which requires the international community to offer significant financial support .
The Yugoslavian authorities have implemented important economic reform programmes , which have been welcomed and accepted by the international community .
You have referred to the fundamental issue of the Conference of Donors .
This Conference has shown support for the economic transition and recovery programme , produced in collaboration with the World Bank and also with the European Commission .
The good news has been - and Mr Lange has referred to it - the existence of sufficient funds to finance everything that was intended .
It has even been possible to exceed the USD 1 250 million which was envisaged as aid for Yugoslavia .
What contribution is the European Community making at the moment ?
We are cooperating via two channels .
The first channel is EUR 230 million , in 2001 , which is the Community aid for reconstruction , democracy and stabilisation in the area , the so-called ' CARDS ' aid .
However , as well as this , we have proposed 300 million in macro-financial assistance with a very specific aim , that is the reduction of the balance of payments deficit .
Of course , we intend to extend the mandate which allows Yugoslavia to receive EIB loans .
To this end , the Commission made its proposal , referred to by Mr Brok , of 23 May , trying to react , as he said , quickly and to persuade the Council of Ministers to accept .
As he has also said , there has been a certain change in the Council of Ministers , lending more weight to loans and less to donations , a change which we in the Commission do not agree with .
I would like to expressly thank Mr Brok for his support for the Commission ' s position .
However , we are talking about a proposal for macro-financial assistance .
And every time we have given this sort of aid , we have done so with certain conditions within the European Union and I do not believe that there is any argument for changing that model .
We are talking about aid which is complementary to aid implemented by other international institutions and bilateral donors , aid which is intended to prevent the external financial restrictions suffered by that country .
That means that we are working in conjunction with the Monetary Fund and the World Bank .
We are referring to 2001 , although it may be considered for future years , but , at the moment , we are talking about the restrictions for 2001 and next year .
This type of aid , as you know , is conditional upon certain economic policy demands and is proposed within a stand-by programme of the International Monetary Fund for one year .
As I said before , our proposal was 120 million in donation and 180 in loan , the latter for 15 years under conditions similar to those for other countries .
The basic agreement in the Council has reduced the donation to 75 million , leaving the rest for loans .
We consider that , given Yugoslavia ' s high level of debt and its other difficulties , and coherence with other types of similar modernisations which we have carried out in the past , the Commission ' s proposal is coherent with our practice .
We will therefore continue to insist in the Council that the conditions we have proposed be approved .
Mr Brok ' s report proposes a series of amendments ; I will later provide you with a note which explains our exact position .
Our view of the amendments is as follows , to put it very briefly : first , it is not necessary to include the references to CARDS in this particular case , since we are talking about another type of aid , and not about CARDS aid , which is of a different nature .
Certain amendments do not therefore seem acceptable , such as Amendments Nos 1 , 11 , 15 and 19 .
Secondly , the political conditions .
Macro-financial assistance is not the correct instrument for imposing political conditions .
We can therefore accept Amendment No 2 if its wording can be changed .
We have no problem with the references to the assistance which the Union is already carrying out , the approval of the Fund programmes , the reform of external aid , the margins of the Guarantee Fund and the multiannual financial aid package for Yugoslavia ; Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 8 , 9 and 10 are therefore acceptable .
We have greater difficulty with the problem of the references to the distribution of the burden .
We have no problem with Amendment No 5 , but to make payment conditional upon what other donors do is neither a condition nor a system which is normally introduced in the case of macro-financial assistance .
Amendment No 13 , in its current specific form , would not be acceptable .
One point which you have raised is the reference to its exceptional assistance character .
Of course it is exceptional assistance .
Of course it is of a temporary nature .
And this is already reflected in the text .
Therefore , certain references do not seem necessary to us , such as its not exceeding 2003 .
I do not know if it will be necessary for us to reconsider the issue in 2003 , but to say now that in no event are we going to do anything in 2003 does not seem correct to us .
Neither does it seem necessary for Amendment No 7 to refer doubly to the concessional and temporary issue .
With regard to the obligatory consultations with , shall we say , bodies of a political nature , we believe that the political debate is taking place now and will take place in the Council .
But once the conditions have been basically defined , the Economic and Financial Committee must be the correct body to carry out the control of what in reality we are going to talk about , that is to say , the practical application of the proposals .
We therefore believe that other types of conditions are not reasonable , such as those established in Amendments Nos 12 , 14 and the first part of Amendment No 16 .
You request additional reports to Parliament .
We are thinking of the reports proposed in Amendments Nos 16 , 18 and 19 .
We can accept the one in Amendment No 19 , if it refers to information on the previous year .
It is very difficult to give information on the same year unless it is excessively delayed information , but the production of additional general reports , as well as the one we present every year , on macro-financial assistance , we believe to be an unnecessary bureaucratic burden .
Nevertheless , we do understand that Parliament wishes to control and know what is happening with these issues .
We are therefore at your disposal to provide you with information on the implementation of this aid , whenever Parliament may ask for it .
But we believe that it is much better to react to specific proposals than to establish this type of formal obligation , which does not always have the necessary interest .
I would lastly like to comment on certain precise dates which are laid down in relation to the limits for the first and second payments .
You say that the first payment must be made before 31 December and the second before 30 June .
There are two problems .
One problem is bureaucratic , administrative : will we make it by 31 December ?
This is not the real difficulty .
The real difficulty is that in the system of macro-financial assistance we are working with certain economic policy conditions and these payments can only be made in the event that these conditions are met .
Of course , our objective is the same as yours : to implement aid as soon as possible , to pay it as quickly as possible and in this respect we are going to continue working with Parliament in complete harmony .
Finally , and I will end here , I would like to thank Parliament for its support for the Commission proposal on the granting of macro-financial assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
I hope that at the next Council we can adopt a response which will allow us to quickly confront , as Mr Brok said , this important challenge and be coherent with our own past positions .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
DSABs 3 and 4 / 2001 - EU own resources in 2001-2002 budget ( conciliation procedure )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this evening we are holding the joint debate about the three reports produced . Looking around , we all know already what everyone is going to say , and we have said it all before .
Even the Commissioner has listened to us more than once , so let us just say it one more time for the record .
The Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget is a completely non-contentious issue in the Committee .
The most important points are , firstly , funding for 27 new posts for RTD projects ; secondly , the OLAF establishment plan and the necessary funds in the budget line for the recruitment of new staff ; and , thirdly , an increase in the Commission ' s payment appropriations required for the EU assistance in the Balkans .
In other words , we want an additional 100 million plus .
This was all agreed unanimously in the Committee on Budgets with the support of all our colleagues .
At this point , I would like to thank Herbert Bösch very warmly once again for the solution to the OLAF issue .
He worked very hard to ensure that we reached this compromise .
The fact that the balance from the 2000 budget gives rise to a surplus of EUR 11.6 billion is one reason for this House to underline yet again that the budget management is very frugal , and for the Council it is a cause for rejoicing .
However , what is the report concerning the European Union ' s own resources about , and why has it been drawn up ?
We - Parliament - have taken the initiative and called on the Council to discuss with us , prior to every budget procedure and before the Commission produces its draft budget , the situation concerning the European Union ' s own resources . Please note that I said ' discuss ' , not ' codecision ' .
We thought this was a very cheap option , but far from it , the Council is resisting , and that is what it is doing this evening too .
It is simply not listening !
It refuses even to discuss the European Union ' s revenue with us .
As a result , we looked at the EU ' s own resources without having discussed them with the Council .
What we noted for the 2001 budget year is no different from the trends observed in previous years .
Traditional own resources and VAT resources are becoming less and less significant .
The transfers from the Member States as a GNP resource share have increased steadily .
In total , own resources constitute 98.3 % of revenue for the 2001 EU budget .
This is equivalent to 1.06 % of their GNP , which is far less than the own resources ceiling percentage of 1.27 % laid down in the financial perspective .
This shift towards the GNP resource can undoubtedly be viewed with mixed feelings .
It could lead to a fairer division of burdens between the Member States , as GNP is probably the best indicator to measure the relative wealth of the Member States ' economies ; indeed , if we look more closely , some Member States already cover 22 , 29 or even 33 % of their contributions to the European budget from traditional own resources - in other words , from money which has already belonged to the European Union for some time .
Secondly , it changes the nature of the European Union ' s own resources , transforming them from real own resources into a form of Member States ' contribution .
Thirdly , it simply does not create a visible link between the European Union and its citizens .
When the Belgian President of the EU , Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt , spoke this morning , it warmed my heart . He too is questioning this indirect financing of the European Union .
He too is calling for more transparency .
He too wants citizens to become more familiar with the European Union , and this includes more transparent financial arrangements .
We want financial autonomy at European level , and we want to work towards this now .
We want this financial autonomy to be shared jointly and on an equal basis with the Council , and we want to have co-decision rights in this area .
We want equal rights in all areas ; we want to be one of the two arms of the budgetary authority , in respect of all expenditure and all revenue .
We want complete budgetary autonomy .
A European tax may still be a long way off , but the Belgian presidency , the Belgian President of the European Union himself , has called for this .
The Belgian Finance Minister supports this demand , and even the German Finance Minister no longer rejects it outright .
A European tax may still be " future music " , as the Germans say , but if we do not start playing it now , we will not be dancing to it in future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Jutta Haug ' s co-rapporteur , I had a rather easier task with the Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget .
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur for her outstanding work on the Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget .
The purpose of my report , which I am honoured to present here , is to prolong two temporary posts , 1 A7 and 1 B5 , and create two new temporary posts , 1 A5 and 1 A7 , for the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions .
Naturally , I fully support this proposal in terms of content ; this is a very serious matter as it concerns the refurbishment ...
... of the Belliard building .
After all , it is also in the European Parliament ' s interests to ensure that sensible use can be made of this building in Brussels in the long term .
I would particularly like to stress the fact that the two Committees are making the necessary resources available through savings in the personnel field , which I think is very positive .
This shows that the willingness to make savings , which is something we have demanded from all the institutions , is being implemented very effectively by the two Committees .
I therefore recommend that items VI and VII of Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget no . 3 be adopted .
However , I should also like to make some general comments , as my group has kindly granted me a few minutes so that I can conclude my part as rapporteur .
First of all , I welcome the fact that this House is debating two Draft Supplementary and Amending Budgets simultaneously .
This is a contribution towards saving tax-payers ' money while taking matters forward on a simpler administrative basis .
I think this is also worth mentioning .
I would point out that on the revenue side of the 2000 budget - as Ms Haug has already mentioned - the surplus of EUR 11.5 billion shows that there is still quite a lot of scope here .
I remember the ritual - which we will have the honour of continuing in July - when we fight over every euro , with the Council sinking to its knees and accusing us of supping from a horn of plenty .
Finally , by developing a serious Commission budget policy , but also through Parliament ' s constant monitoring and support to ensure a prudent use of budget resources , we are now managing to generate surpluses which might actually make some of these rituals unnecessary in future .
I should mention in passing that the finance ministers of the Member States are delighted to receive a generous rebate towards the current budget .
I am sure this will be reflected in the Member States ' eternal gratitude to us .
I should also like to make several comments on the issue of own resources .
Ms Haug , according to my information , a separate European tax was already being debated before my time , namely in April 1994 .
It would seem that even then , people were making music that nobody danced to .
I am not sure whether it is useful at this stage to initiate a debate at European level on financing through taxation .
Let me say this quite clearly : we have other priorities first .
The first task which Europe must address is the issue of a more precise delimitation of powers between the European Union and the Member States .
The public would also like to have some answers . What is Europe responsible for , and why does it need money ?
In a second step , we must of course discuss what kind of long-term institutions are required in Europe so that the tasks entrusted to Europe can be performed in a democratic and transparent way .
Finally , at the end of this process , decisions must be taken on how the necessary resources can be made available .
I think that if we approach matters on this basis , we will be on the right track .
By supporting a European tax at this stage , Europe ' s citizens are more likely to be frightened off by what is happening here .
It will not help us to achieve lasting acceptance among citizens in the European Union .
Finally , as he is the next to rise , I should like to express my warm thanks to Mr Costa Neves who had the difficult task of setting out the parameters for the forthcoming deliberations with the Council .
Yet again , there are a number of problems for next year .
The Committee on Budgets can look forward to some lively debates .
However , I think that Mr Costa Neves has carried out his task with the necessary care and wisdom for a serious proposal to be put forward to the tax-payers , whom we - in our role as part of the budgetary authority - are representing here .
I am pleased that the German Social Democrats are also very receptive to the proposals from Bavaria .
This also opens up entirely new perspectives for the coming year .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , we are now completing another phase in the process of attempting to adopt , hopefully in December , the budget for 2002 . This is a lengthy and complex process which , on the basis of the proposals made by the European Commission , seeks to achieve agreement between the Council and the European Parliament , the two branches of the budgetary authority .
Such agreement will require respect for the regulatory framework , for the existing agreements and between the institutions concerned , taking account of the representativeness of each one and the priorities that they legitimately define .
We must , therefore , work on the essence of the positions held by each of the parties involved , otherwise we will not be able to reach any kind of agreement .
I must emphasise that the report we are now discussing is a basis for negotiating with other institutions , which has been defined in accordance with the guidelines that we adopted in April ; it is not the European Parliament ' s final position on the 2002 budget .
As the basis for negotiations , it must not address issues on which Parliament has the final say .
It must lead to a discussion of aspects on which more positions held from more of a remove are required on issues on which the Council has the final say .
This applies to agricultural spending , security policy and international fisheries agreements .
It is the most basic common sense also to address other key issues , such as the level of payments for next year and the pace of the Commission reform .
We are therefore , I repeat , in a negotiating phase .
I must emphasise the essence of Parliament ' s positions , with which you are , of course , all familiar .
In December 2000 , the Council agreed that , by 30 June of this year , the Commission would present a progress report on a raft of matters , with a view to increasing the levels and the quality of budgetary implementation , improving coordination between legislative and budgetary procedures , and ensuring the success of the Commission reform .
This means that one of Parliament ' s priorities is to consider issues of the budget ' s quality , and their impact , and to assess and take account of the budget ' s implementation .
The progress report has already been presented by the Commission , which is cause for satisfaction , and we are sure that it will seen as the crucial instrument that it is and which we are already beginning to study .
Furthermore , in April of this year , the European Parliament adopted guidelines that suggest the perennial matters in the progress report that I have just mentioned as political priorities , as well as food safety and consumer confidence , together with sustainable agriculture , the definition of priorities and , more generally , better implementation of the budget , including very specific aspects such as e-learning , a key aspect of the priority that is always given to issues of employment and social inclusion , and policy development in the field of asylum and immigration .
In this context , it is understandable that there should be concern at the speed at which commitments are met by making payments in due time and , at the same time , effectively reducing the amount of delayed payments and reducing the amount of RAL ( amounts outstanding ) .
We feel , therefore , that we must take maximum advantage of the payment possibilities laid down in the financial perspective and we want to respect the financial perspective for 2002 to a value of 1.14 % of the combined GNP of the Member States .
I must also highlight the following : the need for a precise , rigorous and up-to-date assessment of the implementation of the common agricultural policy reform , specifically taking account of the consequences of the BSE and foot-and-mouth crises .
We also need a timetabled approach to the future , which involves respecting the commitments given by the European Union at successive European Councils , particularly the Lisbon Council on employment and competitiveness , the Tampere Council on asylum and immigration and the Nice Council on the consequences of failing to conclude fisheries agreements with Morocco ; the clarification of costs for external policy and common security , particularly with regard to the division of responsibilities between the Council and the Commission , respect for the financial perspective ' s ceilings in category 4 too , in which attention must be paid to the traditional priorities of the European Parliament , which are well-known ; the precise identification of real expenditure resulting from the enlargement process , with particular emphasis on administrative expenditure in category 5 and lastly , real consideration of the proposals previously made by Parliament , especially those relating to preparatory action and pilot projects .
I shall end here , in the hope that on 20 July - the date scheduled for the conciliation meeting - the positive and constructive spirit that I personally feel , will spread to all of those present .
Mr President , I should in any case like to congratulate Mr Costa Neves on the strategy which he has outlined on behalf of Parliament .
It gives a powerful signal indicating what Parliament does and does not want .
Coming from the Committee on Fisheries , I also notice that , with regard to agriculture , the European Commission has in any case understood that Parliament would like to set aside a large proportion of the budget for food safety and the fight against animal diseases , but as for the fishery guidelines , I have to say that it appears as if the Commission is still on a different planet .
It does not breathe a word about the problem that , after the failure of the fisheries agreement with Morocco , less money is being spent .
Neither does it mention the problems this has caused in vulnerable coastal regions in Spain and Portugal .
Nothing about the problems in the northern regions as a result of the temporary fishing ban due to the worrying cod stocks .
Even the Council is , for the time being , not taking any action further to implement Nice .
Needless to say , it is evident that the transfer of money from one heading to another , from heading 4 ( external actions ) to heading 2 ( structural policy ) is no child ' s play .
Also because the ceiling of Berlin has been determined per heading .
But financial crisis management , such as the fight against the BSE crisis and aid for the Balkans , has shown that decisive politicians are not hindered by strict budget rules .
The EP ' s Committee on Fisheries agrees with rapporteur Costa Neves where he states that both the Commission and the Council may actually be slightly too relaxed in some areas . At the same time , it prompts him to boost the creativity and decisiveness of the Commission and the Council .
Our proposals are as follows . We would earmark the funding that has not been used for fishery agreements under external actions , heading 4 , to alleviate the effects in the coastal regions of South-Eastern Europe .
We would target structural funds to address the crisis in fisheries , which have been left over following the failure of the fishery agreement with Morocco , and further to the measures which have been taken to protect cod and hake stocks . We would , for the time being , set aside any balance in the account in 2001 to restructure the fisheries sector and , if possible , use the instrument of flexibility to fight the fisheries crisis .
Finally , we would also like specific research to be initiated into the use of genetic modification techniques in fish farming .
Europe is lagging far behind the United States and Canada in this respect , and only sound research will provide a basis to keep this technique in European fish farming at bay .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
( ES ) Mr President , in heading 4 , external actions , the cuts in the preliminary draft budget and those which appear to result from the first reading in Council are , in some cases , significant .
Furthermore , as we know , it will not be possible this year to use the flexibility instrument in this chapter .
We have just heard what the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries has said .
We in the Committee on Foreign Affairs wish to point out that the extension of the Union ' s activities in this field , particularly in the field of the CFSP , requires sufficient contributions .
The uncertainty in the allocation of resources compromises the credibility and prestige of an external policy which must be in a position to fulfil its commitments and ambitions .
For all these reasons , the Committee on Foreign Affairs - in the context presented to us by the rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves , of a stage of the budgetary procedure , both in this conciliation procedure and at first reading , and in accordance with the priorities set in its opinion of 20 March , approved unanimously in the Committee on Foreign Affairs - has the purpose of requesting the allocation of sufficient budgetary resources to finance the new priorities .
This of course , Mr President , bearing in mind their healthy , effective and transparent management .
The Commission has included approximately 120 million in relation to the fisheries agreement with Morocco , and we , like the general rapporteur for the budget , ask that the commitments made at the Nice Summit be fulfilled .
Therefore , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we in the Committee on Foreign Affairs wish to say that if the European Union wishes to have influence on the world stage in the economic , commercial , financial and industrial fields , we must be coherent and provide ourselves with the necessary resources to do so .
. ( NL ) Mr President , this is always a slightly awkward moment in the procedure .
On the one hand , we are preparing for the initial contacts with the Council .
We also know , however , that those contacts will never solve everything entirely .
That is also evident from the absence of the representatives of the Council on the other side of the table .
Their curiosity only gets the better of them once the real procedure reaches completion .
That is why we can only make some general comments at this stage .
On behalf of my Committee , I should like to say that generally speaking , we agree to continuing last year ' s policy , although we do have a number of specific concerns .
Our main concern is actually related to the proposals of the European Commission itself .
I have already drawn your attention to it . Particularly the huge cutback which the Commission proposes for the employment chapter gives us great cause for concern .
If you add this to what is happening in the funds , for example in model projects , our concerns only grow .
These concerns are exacerbated even more if one considers other projects which we agreed on last year in the budget , yet which failed to get off the ground .
They do seem to get snarled up in the Commission apparatus , but I do not want to go into that now .
That is worrying because we are making an arrangement here in respect of the budget , namely if the Commission agrees to that arrangement , it is also responsible for the implementation , and it should not try to get out of that responsibility via all kinds of legal or illegal backdoors .
In my opinion , that can be an extremely difficult issue in this procedure .
That is , in actual fact , our main concern at the moment .
It is no longer a matter of money .
It is now simply about appropriately spending the money that is available now and that was allocated in the previous budget .
We know that there are plenty of projects , but ever stricter criteria are being prescribed .
In some cases , the number of countries increases dramatically .
Originally , it was possible for three countries jointly to submit a project . That has now suddenly increased to seven .
We then wonder whether that is how both institutions should deal with each other .
I should like to put this to you now . We will return to the other issues in due course .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we hope that the presidency of the Council can spend more time with us , at least when we hold our mini-sessions in Brussels .
In any event , in this joint debate on Supplementary and Amending Budgets Nos 3 and 4 , the mandate for the budgetary conciliation and the report on the situation concerning the European Union ' s own resources , the PPE-DE Group wishes to state that it is voting unanimously in favour in the first two cases and in favour by a majority in relation to own resources .
Clearly , the most potentially controversial issue in this Haug report relates to Parliament ' s support for the possibility of opening a debate on the establishment of a direct Community tax which would be a source of autonomous funding for the Community budget .
Within all the groups . Mr President , there are differing sensitivities in relation to European integration , and this is all the more obvious when it comes to funding issues .
Therefore , Mrs Haug ' s tendency towards this possible tax is too much for certain national delegations .
However , I believe that the majority of my Group will possibly agree with it .
Of more immediate importance is the mandate for conciliation by Mr Costa Neves , and we publicly thank him for being prepared to hold dialogue and for seeking a consensus .
We are sure that , thanks to this way of proceeding , we will be able to achieve successful results .
We are presenting clear proposals for the conciliation of 20 July , which the Council should not reject , because they represent the majority will of this House elected by the citizens of Europe .
Amongst these concerns I would like to stress our doubts about the reserve in agriculture , the low implementation of appropriations in food safety and the future of rural development .
I would also like to stress the will for the Council to comply with the Nice commitments with regard to overcoming the problems caused by the absence of a fishing agreement with Morocco and the need to safeguard Parliament ' s external priorities , which are always cut at first reading by the Council and , even more , the indispensable consultation procedure which the Council should carry out with Parliament when adopting commitments on external policy .
Lastly , I would like to mention the need to deal with the problems that have already been mentioned in Category 5 , especially the separation of administration expenditure and the identification of the Council ' s expenditure in that category .
Ladies and gentlemen , all of this makes up the hub of Parliament ' s negotiating position for the conciliation of 20 July , with regard to which we ask the Belgian presidency to maintain an open position and hold dialogue so that we can deal with the final part of the budgetary procedure with guarantees of success for all the parties .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am afraid I must begin by informing Markus Ferber from Bavaria that he will not necessarily find commonalities on those points where he hoped to find them . Let me explain why .
He said that we must first establish a different form of institutional development for the European Union before we talk about the EU ' s finances .
I think this is wrong .
This is especially apparent from the issues before us today .
If you ask any member of the public nowadays what the European Union spends its money on , 30 % will say ' to cover its administrative costs ' , and another 30 % will have no idea at all where the money goes .
That means that 60 % do not know what we do with the resources provided by the tax-payer .
However , the tax-payers know that what they see as massive amounts of money are involved .
Enormous sums of money are spent , and I think that today of all days , the general public would be astonished , yet again , by what is happening at European level .
On the one hand , we have a Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget .
In one of them , the European Union , the Commission , shows that it has no intention of complying more than cursorily with the will of Parliament , at least as far as the sections on UCLAF or the new OLAF structure are concerned .
We made a very clear statement on this issue during the year .
We wanted to shape personnel and the staffing structure in such a way as to create a new institution which fulfils modern requirements .
In fact , it is only thanks to our colleague Herbert Bösch , who was willing to grasp the nettle , that no attempt was made to redeploy the staff and reshape this same institution - which , of course , was the focus of intensive debate last time - into another , which cannot develop entirely new structures as its personnel remains the same .
This also deserves criticism here .
My second point is this . We will be returning EUR 11 billion to the Member States .
EUR 11 billion means that we have a budget underspend of around 10 % .
We have an underspend in the field of consumer policy , where just 74.7 % of funds are being used .
Consumer policy - that is a word to savour !
This is the issue we have spent more time and energy discussing over the last few months , if not years , than any other - and yet only 75 % of its budget is actually being spent .
We have allocated funds to address one of the European Union ' s major problems , namely under-employment .
Let me give you the rate of expenditure in the field of employment policy : 39.6 % .
We have millions of unemployed , money has been made available , and yet less than 40 % of these funds is being spent .
Explain that to the European public !
We are handing back billions !
In category IV , i.e. external actions , we see that just under 60 % of the funds allocated to the European initiative for democracy and the protection of human rights - an issue which we spend hours discussing for every resolution , as well as under " urgent business " - is being spent .
The rest is forfeited and goes back to the Member States .
Let me make it very clear : the European public must be told where the money goes .
However , they should also be told where it comes from .
That is being discussed quite specifically today , for it is always implied that the Member States provide the money . That is the case here today as well .
We must ensure that the public understands the situation .
We must make the revenue side and the expenditure side more transparent .
We cannot continue to explain why we battle against the Council in the budget debates to secure an extra 11 billion , only to hand it back in the Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget at the beginning of the following year because it has not been used .
The money then goes back into the relevant national budgets .
We must move away from this situation .
There must be a reliable and accountable source of revenue which is transparent to the public . Whatever form this takes , we must not cobble together a solution - Markus Ferber is quite right on that point .
We must not be tempted , as a knee-jerk reaction , to agree any old solution as quickly as possible , for an uncoordinated , unstructured debate only leads to confusion .
We must be able to manage this .
Once we have set this up on the revenue side , once it is directly linked to citizens , and the expenditure side is then controlled by citizens as well - for they will look very carefully at what we are doing with the money - no further funds will be returned to the Member States . Instead , they will ask us : how have you actually managed the money ?
This is where we draw together the two issues which we are discussing today - the Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget , with massive movements of money on the one hand and own resources on the other . In other words , the issue is this : how much is the public actually paying for Europe ?
In my view , there is no need to be frightened about telling the public what we are doing .
We have good arguments , we have very good policy areas and policies , and we can present them persuasively .
There is no need to be frightened of the public : we simply need to approach them very openly and transparently , and invite them to work with us on building Europe here .
Mr President , the package under discussion concerns the EU ' s accounts for last year , own resources and next year ' s budget .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteurs , Mrs Haug , Mr Ferber and Mr Costa Neves .
Last year ' s accounts are astonishing : they show a surplus of more than eleven billion euros .
This is because revenue was EUR 3.3 billion more than was estimated and expenditure EUR 8.5 billion less than forecast .
The increase in revenue is a good thing .
However , the saving in expenditure is deceptive , based , as it is , mainly on the lamentable under-utilisation of Structural Funds .
A good 20 % of payments were not taken up , amounting to EUR 6.5 billion .
These payments will be carried over to the years following , meaning that no real savings have been made at all .
The main reason for under-utilisation was that new Objective programmes were slow to be approved .
Only half of the EU Objective 1 programmes came to be approved in 2000 , almost two years after the Agenda 2000 decision taken in Berlin .
Just 8 % of the Objective 2 programmes were approved .
No money at all was spent on new Community initiatives for the second year in succession .
Administrative payments are in a pitiful state .
The Commission must improve its ability to pay considerably .
It has to bear the responsibility for seeing to it that matters are dealt with efficiently and on time .
The present omissions will be reflected as backlogs in budgets in the years to come .
The other peculiarity in the accounts is the reduction in the refund made in respect of the United Kingdom ' s contribution .
It is odd that amendments should be made to this supplementary budget that go back to the budgets of two and four years ago .
Why were these amendments not made at the time ?
Mr Costa Neves ' s report provides a good basis for discussions next year .
According to preliminary estimates , administrative expenditure of the institutions under heading 5 will exceed the financial perspectives , which is mainly due to the increase of more than 9 % in the Council ' s expenditure , which , in turn , is the result of a rise in CFSP expenditure .
Parliament must strongly insist on its demand that a separate plan showing a structure of the posts involved in the administration of this policy should be put forward .
This expenditure is not part of a gentleman ' s agreement between Parliament and the Council according to which the institutions do not interfere in one another ' s budgets .
Mr President , I wish to speak about own resources .
The tables appended to Mrs Haug ' s report and dedicated to the subject of own resources do not give a correct picture of the different share of contributions among the Member States .
It has to be said aloud that the United Kingdom is one of the EU members getting a free ride .
It has been given a reduction on contributions .
It should form part of the report ' s conclusions that the United Kingdom should be made to pay its contribution according to the same principles as everyone else .
In addition , the report ' s statistics disguise the real situation with respect to the customs duties the UK collects on behalf of the EU .
But customs duties disguise the share of contributions made by Holland and Belgium still more , as these countries also collect customs duties on goods bound for other countries .
Holland and Belgium are not the large net contributors the figures show them to be .
The report ' s conclusions call for the introduction of a special European tax .
This is no mere accident .
The country holding the presidency , Belgium , has also announced it will pursue the issue .
There are two different opinions on this in our group .
The tax is supported by those who are guided by the spirit of European federalism , while those who wish to preserve their national sovereignty are opposed to the EU having the power to levy and collect taxes .
Federalism is the making of the European Union into a federal state .
If the EU is given the power to levy and collect taxes we will be paving the way for federalism .
As a representative of taxpayers in a small net contributor country I cannot endorse European taxation for the purposes of a federal state .
Mrs Haug ' s conclusion in her report is too radical .
Mr President , I too want to speak about Mrs Haug ' s report on own resources .
Her advice that we should go for a European tax is premature and unnecessary .
She says that the Belgian presidency is expected to put this forward or start a debate .
I have read the notes on the work programme by the Belgian presidency and there is little or no reference to it .
There is only one reference to the tax on flows of speculative capital - the so-called Tobin tax .
That was voted down by Parliament only a few months ago .
At the end of the document there is also reference to direct or indirect funding of the European Union , so that we can once again operate with the European Union ' s own resources .
I put to her that the Prime Minister of Belgium only , in the last few days , said that he does not want to pursue this path towards a European Union tax because " it is sensitive " .
It is very much a sensitive matter and totally unnecessary .
Mrs Haug mentions that the amount of money coming in from the nation-states through gross national product is going to rise .
I accept that .
I sat in the House of Commons in the United Kingdom for 18 years before coming into this Chamber .
I always thought it was marvellous that the percentage of gross national product coming into European spending was declining .
That downward path has continued during the last two years .
I applaud that .
It shows good and effective control of spending and nation-states do not mind passing on that money to the European Union .
I see no reason whatsoever for the European Union to raise its own direct tax .
That is why I have tabled four amendments tomorrow for voting .
Two of those will be on a roll-call vote .
You can see this evening that there is opposition from various countries .
I hope that people will vote in support of my amendments and oppose the European tax .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me first thank the rapporteur , Mr Costa Neves , for his proposal and for such good cooperation .
We on the Committee on Budgets have reached agreement on most areas .
It is my guess that , this year , it will be issues of principle which dominate the budget debate more than individual budget items , issues which will feature increasingly in the debate in the coming years .
I am thinking particularly about enlargement and the development of a common foreign and security policy and its budgetary effects .
I am thinking of the reform of the agricultural and fisheries policies .
In addition , I am thinking of internal reform , especially the Commission ' s ability to actually implement the decisions of the budgetary authority .
The basic conditions are quite worrying .
Popular faith in the EU is waning in many Member States .
At the same time , we are on the threshold of perhaps the most important change ever - eastward enlargement .
In the face of this challenge , the EU ' s ability to carry out its priorities must be strengthened considerably .
It is therefore worrying , even if some finance ministers are rubbing their hands with glee , that the level of budgetary implementation is so low that we now have to pay back EUR 11 billion to Member States .
The problem of promises of aid and assistance being delayed or not being carried out is an obstacle to the whole Union .
It is therefore good that the Commission now wants to increase payments and reform the work in the direction of more modern , efficient and open management .
This is something that the Council must not change .
With regard to the points at issue , I want first to raise the subject of the Common Agricultural Policy .
Although this is a large and complicated issue , we must now increase the pace of change .
Before we adopt the budget for 2002 and , above all , before we fully conclude negotiations with the prospective Member States , we absolutely must be clearer about the future Common Agricultural Policy .
In this context , I would like to point out the view of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
This committee is seeking , in its proposals for amendments , to confirm that agricultural expenditure is to be kept within the framework of the budget , but although there are technical difficulties , especially in the light of enlargement , they are also seeking to redistribute funds in the interest of comprehensive development of the countryside , category 1B . This is to be welcomed , and I believe that we should continue on this path .
Otherwise , we are currently mostly concerned with the reason for the Commission wanting such large reserves for BSE and foot and mouth disease when they still have the opportunity of adjusting the proposed budget themselves .
In this respect , we would like to postpone any further decision on our position until we have received more answers to our questions .
Let me also briefly comment on the breakdown of the fisheries agreement with Morocco .
The fact that this cannot now be implemented will have consequences for the fishing fleets of several countries .
I , for one , am sceptical about the EU ' s major subsidies within the agricultural and fisheries policies , but we must still , of course , take into account the problems of the fishermen who have been counting on new opportunities for earning a living .
We must support proactive restructuring and test the possibility of creating funds for this under budget headings other than category 4 .
In addition , there is a need for developed proposals from the Commission .
Although the conciliation into which we are currently entering primarily concerns headings 1 , 2 and 5 , we would like to take the opportunity to highlight a few other points .
Last year , Parliament promoted an extra focus on employment and small businesses .
Following the development of the Lisbon Process at the Stockholm Summit , there is every reason to keep to this set of priorities .
As such , we must also clear up a number of the problems about which Mr Pronk , for example , spoke earlier .
In addition , we would now also like to focus on the area of e-learning , which we believe must receive resources in order for it to be developed into the key area it must become if we are to be able to increase growth and ensure that this growth is more evenly distributed across Europe .
Finally : we are also concerned about the external undertakings .
They have presented the greatest difficulty in 2000 and 2001 .
These problems have not , of course , gone away .
We have made considerable commitments to Kosovo and Yugoslavia , at the same time as having major and neglected needs to meet in other , even poorer areas of the world .
This is one of our most vital tasks , but we have huge problems which we must be able to solve in order to implement everything we have promised .
Although there are major challenges ahead of us , I nonetheless believe that , with good will , we will be able to solve them together .
Mr President , the agricultural budget is probably typified by strokes of good fortune as well as huge setbacks .
The setbacks are the outbreaks of animal diseases .
The impact of those setbacks for the following year will probably not be fully known to us until the end of October , to be exact .
One thing is certain : the strokes of luck will not last forever .
We can expect setbacks in the form of outbreaks every year .
I am about to repeat what I said last year , the year before that and God knows how long before that .
It is irresponsible , in my opinion , to have EUR 41 million earmarked in the budget for the outbreak of infectious animal diseases .
If we consider how much BSE and swine fever outbreaks have cost , and what foot and mouth is costing now , then those 41 million are a mere pittance .
I therefore believe that the Commission should adopt a structural approach in order to improve the situation .
Is it possible to have insurance cover in place ?
Is it possible to have a specific cattle fund , and does it not amount to distortion of competition if the national portion in one country is to be paid by the farmers , while it is entirely government-funded in other countries ?
Those are the aspects which the Commission , the Member States and the rapporteur need to work on in the short term , for it is quite likely that we will be experiencing setbacks of this kind again in future .
Mr President , this debate on the EU ' s own resources and on EU tax is familiar to us all .
It comes around every year .
The positions are well known , and in a way it seems quite unnecessary to repeat the debate and decisions year after year .
Apart from the questions of pure principle , one might wonder whether higher and new taxes are what EU Member States and EU citizens really need .
We are all highly taxed .
Certain Member States have some of the highest taxation levels in the world - I myself come from one such country .
If we look at them , it is hardly these countries which have experienced the greatest economic growth in the last decade .
Of course the report talks about tax in total not increasing .
However this is a theoretical proposition which has very little to do with practical reality .
I also believe it is the case that if a tax is introduced , particularly a new tax level as in this case , taxation will also increase .
It is almost inevitable .
I would also like to mention the fact that the rapporteur says he is seeking to strengthen the link between the Union and its citizens ' .
This is no doubt admirable and important , but in my view it should happen in a completely different manner .
I am very doubtful indeed whether people would feel any stronger connection with the EU through having to pay higher taxes than they do already .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to jointly debate the system of own resources and the next budget at the point of conciliation reinforces the idea that income and expenditure are two sides of the same coin .
There have been calls here for fiscal autonomy and codecision for income and expenditure , but first we must achieve suitable and fair funding of Community policies and we already know that there are differing opinions about the most efficient system for achieving it .
Sooner or later we will have to reach a permanent agreement , but first we will have to debate and clarify the issues selected at the Nice Council .
It seems a pointless exercise to talk about a new philosophy for own resources without having cleared up the fundamental unknown factors first .
It is not very prudent to begin building a house from the roof .
In any event , to use the argument of the issue of net balances - as has been done - does not move in the right direction , but , for many reasons , contributes to undermining the principles of the Union .
The question today is whether the new decision on own resources effectively makes progress towards greater equity and transparency and takes more account of the Member States ' tax capacity .
It is clear that the gradual reduction of the maximum reference rate for the VAT resource contributes to correcting the regressive aspects of the system in force .
The Member States ' contributions via the fourth resource or VAT must be proportionate with their contribution to the Community GDP as a key element of safeguarding the equity of the system .
Therefore we must keep up our efforts in this direction .
The proposal also has some negative aspects , which are far from negligible .
The maintenance , albeit with a modification of the calculation system , of the so-called correction of budgetary imbalances in favour of the United Kingdom , confirms that this procedure is totally contrary to the desired transparency and simplicity .
With regard to the 2002 budget , I would like to point out that the Costa Neves report - and I congratulate the rapporteur on his work - provides the necessary elements for a good negotiation .
I believe that there is a margin for reaching final agreements with the Council .
I would ask the Commission to fulfil its commitment to propose a suitable instrument and funding to deal with the failure of the fishing agreement with Morocco , which also means that the aid can be used in projects for alternative economic activity in the regions affected .
I really do not know whom I should now be personally congratulating for winning at football !
Mr President , rapporteurs , honourable Members , there is always a lot to do , discuss and decide where budgets are concerned , and today we have just had four important points : the two supplementary budgets for the current financial year , the resolution on financing the budget and the preparations for the first reading of the 2002 budget in the Council .
Amending Budget No 3 / 2001 is concerned solely with personnel matters , in the field of research and in OLAF .
Amending Budget No 4 / 2001 is concerned with the use of the budget surplus from last year .
Both budgets are discussed in the report by Mrs Haug and Mr Ferber . In the matter of the Commission ' s research personnel , they suggest a different establishment plan .
This is acceptable to the Commission .
So far as the change to the OLAF establishment plan is concerned , this is now based on a compromise arrived at in lengthy negotiations and I should like at this point to make a few observations about it .
Firstly , a comment on the fact that the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control which is before us today still speaks of serious irregularities in OLAF , specifically that there are more A grade officials than posts .
In connection with this word " irregularities " I should simply like to point out once again that the budgetary authority authorised a certain number of grade A posts for the year 2000 establishment plan .
Not all of them were actually filled by the Commission or OLAF , but when it came to the 2001 budget the budgetary authority then decided to cut the number of grade A posts to fewer than there were officials in place .
Nothing like that has ever happened before and of course it creates difficulties , but to call it an irregularity and to create the impression that the Commission has filled posts it was not authorised to is simply not correct and I must reject the term irregularities in this connection .
I should also like to point out that the Commission passed the OLAF Director ' s establishment plan proposals on to the budgetary authority unchanged precisely in order to underline OLAF ' s independence .
On the other hand , some of the European Parliament ' s resolutions amount to very detailed micromanagement , which naturally at least raises a few questions as regards independence .
Overall , the fact that posts are being blocked and also that unfortunately not all posts have yet been approved is not exactly making it easy for OLAF to operate , and the authority does now have some really big tasks , and above all a wide range of different tasks , to cope with .
I can at this point only assure you once again that the Commission is doing all it can to create good working conditions for OLAF .
Regarding the second Supplementary and Amending Budget .
The year 2000 budget ended with a surplus of EUR 11.6 billion , as has been mentioned here several times .
This is in part the result of increased revenue , the fruit , for example , of a more favourable trend in gross national product than was initially assumed , but for the greater part it is the result of resources not being implemented on the expenditure side .
I must now say something about structural policy - it is after all the largest chunk , accounting for 6 of these 11 billion - namely that account was already taken of the fact that it would probably be difficult to implement all resources in the first year when the Interinstitutional Agreement was drawn up and signed .
That was more or less taken for granted and it was therefore decided that commitments could be redeployed for subsequent years , and that is what has been done , which ensures that no resources are lost to the Structural Funds because of implementation difficulties in the first year .
The conclusion to be drawn from this is in my opinion that we must start much earlier with preparations and decision making for a future support period .
I should like to point out , for example , that Parliament ' s position on the Community initiatives was adopted in April 2000 .
We can see here that the whole process began too late .
In other words , we must simply set an earlier timetable for the next support period .
That applies to everyone , it applies to the Commission , it applies to Parliament and it also applies , of course , to the Council .
Incidentally , the entire resources of EUR 11.6 bn are not being returned .
EUR 1.6 bn were already deployed in the 2001 budget , among other things to finance the BSE measures decided in Supplementary Budget No 1 .
EUR 2 075 bn are used to finance the budget correction for the United Kingdom , and unlike the previous speakers I am not looking at Mr Wynn here .
We have also proposed using EUR 350 million to top up the resources for reconstruction in the Balkans and to return the other part , namely EUR 7.5 bn , to the Member States by reducing their contributions to the 2001 budget accordingly .
The rapporteurs are now proposing that not just EUR 350 million but 450 million be used to top up the resources for the Balkans .
The Commission actually wanted to fund the difference by making further transfers from other areas , but we now agree to your proposal , especially in the light of the time factor , which is very important .
We really do not want to run the risk of having to suspend payments for measures for Kosovo or Serbia .
We all know how sensitive this area is and I very much hope that Parliament ' s proposal in this connection will meet with the Council ' s agreement so that the entire proposal can be adopted before the summer break .
Now to the present motion for a resolution on own resources .
The subject is becoming increasingly topical because of the question of what is the best way to finance the European budget .
On the one hand , of course , we have the following situation : a new decision has been taken on own resources with a new structure , and this own resources decision naturally applies until something else is decided , with everything that goes with it , including the British rebate .
That is the law as it stands .
So far as the structure of financing is concerned , the Treaty states that the public budget is financed out of own resources .
That is what it says in the Treaty .
The agreement with Parliament in 1975 , for example , also stressed again that they should be genuine own resources .
But instead , the de facto trend has been in quite a different direction , and you showed in detail in your report , Mrs Haug , that it has taken a different direction .
Regarding the financing that we currently have , I simply have to say that it is not transparent for the citizen .
It is one of the most serious points , that hardly any citizen knows how the EU is financed , and what they do not know is all the more unfathomable and leaves room for every kind of speculation .
For my own part , I can only say once more that I very much welcome the fact that the Belgian presidency intends taking up this matter of how the EU budget is financed and , Mr Ferber , I consider it to be a subject forming part of the whole issue of the delimitation of competences between the Member States and the European level .
That is where it really belongs .
I think it is of course also quite important that all who welcome a restructuring on the revenue side should now also find a common vocabulary as soon as possible .
If we talk about introducing an EU tax , that sounds like inventing some new kind of tax that the European Union will be entitled to levy .
That is not what it is about at all .
It is about specifying a tax , some or all of which will flow into the European budget , where responsibility for the amount raised will lie at European level , and it naturally also involves the problems of the European Parliament ' s budgetary powers .
From my own point of view , I can only stress what Mrs Haug said , that the real issue is : will the European Parliament continue to have these reduced budgetary powers on the revenue side as it does on the expenditure side ?
I believe an opportunity has presented itself , and we should in my opinion go with the momentum when the Council presidency raises the issue on its own initiative , because if it is not adopted as a topic for Laeken at this point in time , I fear the matter will be buried again and we shall not be able to debate it for a long time .
Now to Mr Costa Neves ' s report .
This concerns the conciliation procedure before the Council ' s first reading on 20 July , preparations for which take place in the trialogue on 9 July .
I should again like to stress that the 9 July trialogue is of course also an important date , an important point in the whole budgetary procedure .
Since Mrs Theato is here , I should like to make a brief comment . Mrs Theato , you sent me a rather strongly worded letter asking me kindly to come to the Committee on Budgetary Control to debate a periodic report on 9 July instead of going to the trialogue .
I must again point out that I cannot of course be in two places at once and it goes without saying that it is part of the budget Commissioner ' s duties to take part in the trialogue in preparation for the conciliation procedure for the 2002 budget .
But now to the points that will be at the centre of the conciliation .
Mr Costa Neves has described these in detail .
I should like to say the following . Firstly , I consider the Commission ' s proposal to provide a EUR 1 bn reserve in the agriculture budget to be highly appropriate given the uncertainty surrounding the direction agricultural expenditure will take in the forthcoming year .
We now have the first bills for foot and mouth disease on the table and more will come in , and they confirm that a large reserve is really necessary .
We ought to play safe , and we will of course be able to be more precise in the Letter of Amendment in the autumn , including on the question of how much we shall have to pay from the budget for foot and mouth disease .
But for the present I believe the level of reserve proposed is the best way forward and I very much hope that the European Parliament will support this in the conciliation procedure with the Council .
The second point concerns the abortive fisheries agreement with Morocco , which has been mentioned by several speakers here .
It is an important point ; I therefore want to speak about it briefly .
The Commission plans to propose a cofinancing programme to assist with the restructuring of the Spanish and Portuguese fleets concerned by the end of July .
It will be a programme financed in the category of the structural funds . But now you will say the structural funds category is empty or fully committed .
The Commission will for this reason be making a proposal that the flexibility reserve , or part of it , be used to finance this restructuring programme .
It would then be a one-year programme , implementation of which may extend over several years .
How the resources released in category IV by the abortive fisheries agreement should be used will have to be considered weighing up every aspect , including , and I say this expressly , the aspect of budgetary discipline .
In the matter of common foreign and security policy , Parliament takes the view that resources could be cut this year , too .
In fact , the preliminary draft budget is the same as the 2001 budget , and the Commission sees no need for further cuts here , but the Commission will , of course , assist the rapporteur as requested in order to improve the budget commentaries .
Now a word on administrative expenditure . I share the European Parliament ' s concern about the future trend of Category V and I therefore fully support the efforts for greater transparency and ease of planning for any new areas of activity , such as justice and home affairs .
But I also want to make clear that it is not the expenditure on Commission reform that is putting a strain on the financial framework here .
We all have to consider necessary reforms , and I believe it is essential that all institutions try to put forward a medium-term plan so that we can see where changes are necessary in order to get to grips with Category V. We really need to give thought to whether a high level group or similar should be deployed to deal with these issues .
You have drawn attention , Mr Costa Neves , to the report that the European Parliament had called for and which deals , among other things , with matters of budget implementation .
I should like to thank you for the positive comment that it was completed on time and that it is a useful tool for discussing the questions raised in Parliament ' s declaration .
There will also be close cooperation in the field of any actions included in the budget by the European Parliament .
As also agreed , the Commission will be involved in the discussion by the various committees at an early stage in order to ensure that actions and pilot schemes can be implemented .
That , too , is important for us and I should like to highlight in particular the areas of asylum and immigration policy .
A brief word on priorities in e-learning and employment policy as they affect small and medium-sized enterprises .
These are areas where large sums of money are available not only in the budget lines of Heading 3 but also in the structural funds , and the Commission believes that the new instruments introduced in the last budget must first prove their worth before they are substantially increased or expanded .
To conclude , all this shows how much we still have to discuss .
Over the coming months we must work out the year 2000 budget together , and I hope that we shall be able to make good use of the next few weeks and the forthcoming meetings to arrive at common positions so that we shall have a good start to the budget negotiations .
, Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to address Commissioner Schreyer . I am rather surprised to hear her say I wrote her a strongly worded letter .
She quotes me as having written that she should kindly come to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
That cannot be true .
I wrote a businesslike letter in which I asked her to come to us in the Committee for Budgetary Control in accordance with our agreement between the Commission and Parliament .
If Mrs Schreyer has other commitments , I do , however , assume that she is able to send a senior official to give the Committee the information it requires .
The letter has no other meaning .
Mrs Schreyer , I am somewhat astonished that you read the letter in that way .
It was entirely businesslike .
I just wanted to explain that .
Thank you .
Thank you Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Management of Community programmes
Mr President , what we have here , albeit under a somewhat technical title , namely the creation of executive agencies to be entrusted with certain tasks in the management of Community programmes , is a rather important reform , and an element which is by no means peripheral to the administrative reform which is taking place within the Commission .
I must say straightaway that the Committee on Budgetary Control and this House are very much in sympathy with the principle of the agency that has been proposed to us , and our initial impression is a favourable one , because , in creating this agency , the Commission is responding to a matter of fundamental concern to Parliament , a concern which it expressed in the context of the budgetary procedure for the year 2000 .
Parliament was anxious to see the dismantling of the technical assistance offices ( TAOs ) , which were not supervised very well and which did not come under the Commission ' s control , and to have them replaced by establishments which would exhibit both the security which goes with the public nature of the institutions and , at the same time , the flexibility of management and operation which is necessary in order to accomplish a certain number of tasks , in particular the implementation of certain programmes .
In short , what we said was , - ' Let us abolish the TAOs , but let us not replace them with central Commission services , but rather let us invent something new ' .
These agencies are certainly something new .
The Commission ' s proposal forms part of a greater whole , an externalisation policy which comprises three facets .
First , there is the privatisation of certain specific , precisely defined tasks , a privatisation which we are in favour of provided that the private persons who will be responsible for these tasks are not given integrated administrative tasks to do .
Second , there are the executive agencies themselves .
Finally , there is a third aspect about which we are more doubtful , but which we are not about to discuss this evening , and that is the creation of national agencies , which will be responsible for running a certain number of programmes in the territory of the Member States .
The proposed regulation which you have before you is concerned only with the statute of the agencies .
Therefore , Madam Commissioner , in principle you have the support of the rapporteur and the support of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
That does not mean , as I am sure you suspected because you know me , that we agree with everything .
There are a certain number of points on which we agree and a certain number on which we disagree .
As far as the first group is concerned , as I have already said , we agree with the principle of the agency .
We also agree with the detailed rules for the management of that body , part of which will consist of staff seconded from the Commission , because we want this agency to be clearly subordinate , both politically and administratively , to the Commission . The other part of the body will consist of more flexible staff recruited on the basis of temporary contracts tailored to the management flexibility needed for programmes of limited duration .
We also believe , and I think that this is a point on which we agree , that these new bodies must be subject to the same controls , and the same obligations regarding communication , audit and OLAF competency , as the Commission ' s central services .
On this point , I think we see things from the same angle .
On the other hand , there are a certain number of points on which we still have doubts which need to be cleared up .
The first of these concerns the definition of the tasks that are likely to be externalised and entrusted to the executive agencies .
This is an old issue , and one on which the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control are in step , even if some of us are not entirely of the same opinion .
We would like these externalised tasks to be really externalised , because they are of a temporary nature and because they require the use of temporary or specialist staff , but we do not want them to be externalised simply because they would cost less because they would be using less well paid and less qualified staff .
That is not our objective .
Secondly , we believe that the Commission ' s legal responsibility should be complete and direct .
This is a point of law on which we may disagree , but I do not believe that we are fundamentally opposed to one another .
In the same way , and this is quite an important technical point which Mrs Theato , the Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , is particularly keen on , we would like to see discharge being granted to these bodies at the same time as discharge is granted to the Commission .
We do not want them to be separated , and we do not want to have to know about innumerable separate discharges .
We want to be able to decide on discharge with a single vote , for both operating appropriations and administrative appropriations .
I am approaching my conclusion .
There are still two points on which we still differ , and which are causing a problem at the committee stage .
First of all , the rapporteur had proposed that 25 % of the staff of the agency should actually come from the Commission , although the Committee on Budgetary Control did not go along with this proposal and has not , in fact , agreed to it .
On behalf of our group we tabled an amendment which was intended to reinstate this request , but slightly altered , and after negotiations with the Commission we specified that the figure of 25 % would not have to be achieved until after a certain time had elapsed , in this case a period of eighteen months , which would enable the agency to reach cruising speed .
I hope to be able to convince committee members in the Socialist Group to support this proposal .
I have not managed to do so yet , but I have not given up hope .
I now come to my last point , and it is an important one .
It concerns the nature of the typical staff statutes and contracts .
We disagree on this point , and I am concerned because , following the Cocobu vote , I saw proposals for regulations which rather worried me .
We are concerned to note that staff would be subject to non-renewable statutes .
If this is the case , we shall find ourselves with staff of inferior quality , who are less loyal and who will not be in a position to ensure continuity of service on all occasions , thus giving rise to periods of interruption which will be detrimental to the interests of those who benefit from the services and for whom the programmes are intended .
On this point , Madam Commissioner , I want to ask you for a firm commitment .
We want to have continuity of service , and we want the staff who are used by these agencies to have renewable arrangements according to need , and not to have their contracts cut off arbitrarily and automatically while the programme is still going on .
Those , Madam Commissioner , are the feelings of our committee .
I shall stop there , having reached my conclusion , which is that we support your proposal in principle , while waiting to hear from you certain clarifications on the points which I have raised .
Thank you , Mr President , for your patience , and I should also like to thank my fellow committee members for their warm support .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission says it cannot cope with the ever growing number of Community programmes and their implementation with its statutory number of staff .
That may be right .
It means the Commission must delegate and decentralise .
Various models have in the past proved unsuitable or failures .
Either they were not financially transparent , like the minibudgets , or they were conducive to fraud like the TAOs , which is why Parliament demanded their abolition .
Now the Commission is presenting a proposal for a regulation for the statute of so-called executive agencies , which the rapporteur , Mr Bourlanges , has just explained .
I should like to congratulate him on his very detailed treatment of this proposal .
I should like to underline a number of important points in his report .
The Commission must provide a precise list of the tasks to be transferred , whether they are public or non-public and the type of executive agency to which they are to be transferred .
Unfortunately , we do not yet have the promised handbook about that .
But it must be clear that responsibility for the proper and economic execution of the transferred tasks lies with the Commission , which is subject to discharge by Parliament , which means there can be no discharge for the agencies themselves .
Parliament must be provided with all the information and documents it requires for the purpose without delay .
The agencies are also subject to scrutiny by the Court of Auditors and , where appropriate , also by OLAF .
The Commission is also legally liable for the executive agencies , since they are not anchored in the Treaty as institutions in their own right .
The agencies must be evaluated within not more than three years to check they are operating as they should .
Finally , all contracts with outside agencies must be limited in time .
Mr Bourlanges has just mentioned that .
The framework regulation makes no provision for their term to be extended .
But I think there ought to be provision for that .
It is at all events important that at least 25 % of executive agency staff should be seconded Commission officials in order to ensure internal supervision of administrative tasks and to see that the Commission ' s responsibilities are fulfilled .
May I first of all use up a small proportion of my valuable speaking time to congratulate you on the excellent work you have done in the Conciliation Committee with regard to the Takeover Directive ?
I have stood up to the group discipline of my delegation to support you , but to no avail .
I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur on the report that is before us today .
He has adopted a very constructive attitude in the Committee on Budgetary Control and I should also like to congratulate him on the excellent working relationship with the rapporteur of the Committee on Budgets .
It is first-class teamwork , which deserves to be emulated .
Our group gives its unqualified support to the proposal of the European Commission .
We also back the report by Mr Bourlanges .
We are of the opinion that the Commission proposal forms a key component in the reform programme that was set in motion after 1999 .
The proposal aims to externalise certain tasks in a clearly defined framework and end the administrative chaos of the technical assistance offices .
The Committee on Budgetary Control did tighten the proposal of the European Commission on a number of scores , as Mrs Theato has already mentioned .
Firstly , the location of the registered office of the agencies .
The text now refers to opening branch offices for agencies .
According to our amendment , this reference is being deleted .
There is still room for improvement .
Mr Mulder has tabled a sound amendment and I should like you , Mr Bourlanges , to consider adopting Mr Mulder ' s amendment as a supplement to your amendment , so that we do not need to choose between the two .
Secondly , the provisions on financial audit and control are being tightened .
The obligation has been included to produce a report annually .
That is a major improvement in my view .
Thirdly , we call for one Financial Regulation for all agencies , as opposed to a different Financial Regulation for each agency .
If not , we fear that we will no longer see the wood for the trees .
And finally , OLAF ' s powers relating to agencies and relating to the European Commission should be the same in our opinion .
We still beg to differ with the rapporteur on a number of points .
Firstly , his definition of externalisation is rather skimpy .
He would like to restrict externalisation to temporary tasks and tasks of a technical nature .
In practice , it is true that that will often be the nature of those tasks , but we find it too restricted .
A decisive Commission needs flexibility .
The question is what is most efficient , what is most cost-effective ?
That question should be central , and we as European Parliament should not plug that opening .
And secondly , this has already been mentioned , Mr Bourlanges proposes to include a minimum percentage for the number of Commission officials who need to work in such an agency .
Needless to say , a certain percentage of Commission officials will need to work in such an agency , but it appears inappropriate in our view to place a figure on that percentage .
That will differ for each agency according to the nature and work of the agency .
Mr Bourlanges said in the committee : surely the Socialists are in favour of workers ' rights ?
I would say : surely , the PPE is in favour of abolishing unnecessary rules and in favour of freedom ?
And finally , I should like to ask the Commission its opinion on the amendments tabled by Mr Ellis to this report .
- ( NL ) Mr President , I should first of all like to congratulate Mr Bourlanges .
Needless to say , the proposal we are discussing at the moment has become inevitable after the events of a number of years ago .
It is necessary for us to further regulate the task of the executive bodies so as to avoid the mistakes of the past .
What will be the specific task of those bodies ?
We totally agree with Mr Bourlanges that that still needs to be regulated .
One thing is certain : they will need to carry out a specific administrative task for a certain limited time .
What are the salient points for the liberal group ?
Firstly , the Commission will always remain responsible for what happens .
It would be unacceptable if certain tasks were to be delegated to another executive agency on a discretionary basis .
Secondly , the percentage of the number of officials in such a body will need to be determined on a case-by-case basis .
We are opposed to putting a percentage figure on it , for we cannot possibly put a figure on it at the moment .
That will clearly depend on the tasks of the agency .
Concerning the discharge of agencies , the suggestion that this Parliament should look into the discharge of each agency seems unreasonable to us .
If the Commission is responsible , and if it is the case that the Commission is granted discharge by Parliament , that naturally implies that we indirectly grant the agencies discharge .
That is our strong view .
As for the remainder of the proposals , we generally back the amendments which the rapporteur has tabled .
Mr President , honourable Members , the European Parliament has played an important part in the whole discussion about Commission administrative reform .
The Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control have also played a key role in the question of externalisation .
The rapporteur , Mr Bourlanges , in particular provided the initial impulse for the proposal for a regulation that is now before us .
I should like to thank you for your continued cooperation in working out the proposal and also the report .
I have to say that Mr Bourlanges already impressed me when he presented his magnum opus on externalisation in November 1999 .
It is after all very difficult to produce good literature .
Many people would say that creating a literary work on externalisation was an impossible task .
But you really succeeded in presenting something of high literary value with this first report on externalisation .
My warmest congratulations .
It is now recognised that the Commission as a whole must concentrate more on its fundamental tasks .
That is the very reason why the subject of externalisation is being discussed , namely in response to the question of which tasks could be performed in a way other than within the Commission ' s present administrative structures .
The plan envisages three methods and forms of externalisation , namely externalisation in the form of a delegation of tasks to executive agencies , the delegation of tasks to national agencies , i.e. decentralisation , and the assignment of tasks by contract to third parties .
The framework regulation for executive agencies defines a new form of Community institution that operates in the service of the Commission and has the task of managing and implementing Community programmes independently on the Commission ' s behalf , including the associated execution of budget resources .
The regulation therefore provides the framework for the creation of executive agencies that the Commission will set up as and when required .
In this connection I should like to highlight the most important points once again .
An executive agency is an instrument in the hands of and under the control of the Commission .
This also again makes it clear that it is wrong to equate externalisation with privatisation , as often happens in the debate , especially with officials .
You made it very clear , Mr Bourlanges , that such is not the case .
It means that the Commission ' s responsibility for the execution of the budget under Article 274 of the EC Treaty is retained without qualification .
That is a point that has just been emphasised again by the Committee on Budgetary Control and also by you , Mrs Theato .
An executive agency is set up by the Commission .
The agency ' s management bodies are appointed by the Commission .
The Commission exercises control through its own departments .
The operational resources managed by the agency remain in the European Union ' s general budget and are administered by the agency in its capacity as an authorising party by delegation of the Commission .
The prerogatives of the budgetary authority are preserved .
The budgetary authority approves the allocation to the agency ' s administrative resources .
The agency ' s establishment plan is submitted to the budgetary authority as part of the budgetary procedure .
We are unable to go along with the suggestion that a fixed percentage of the agency ' s staff should be Commission officials .
Regarding the duration of the contracts , however , I can point out that setting up executive agencies only makes sense for tasks taking rather longer than one year .
That therefore means that contracts for contract personnel will run correspondingly longer .
I should also like to add that the European Parliament grants the discharge for the execution of the executive agency ' s administrative and operational resources .
To sum up , the Commission is able to accept the following amendments : Nos 1 , 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 , 9 , 12 in part , as well as Amendments Nos 16 , paragraphs 1 and 2 , in part and 17 and 21 in part .
I should like to thank the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control for their critical scrutiny of our proposal .
Their contributions will make our proposal more balanced and bring us a step closer to our goal of increasing administrative efficiency .
Mr President , just a brief word .
I should like to have a very clear explanation from the Commissioner on the third part of Amendment No 25 , in other words on the point about renewable contracts .
I have discussed the matter with your staff , and I wanted a precise undertaking from you .
I have not had it .
This is an issue of fundamental importance to us . If we do not have a clear undertaking on this point by tomorrow , I shall make arrangements to submit to this House a motion to postpone the vote .
I have made it very clear to your staff that we want the people who work for this agency to be subject to contracts which can be renewed .
Obviously the renewal does not have to be obligatory , but it is something that I have been insisting on ever since I became aware of the proposed regulation which had been submitted to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
I should also like to say , by the way , that the proposed regulation in question had not been notified , for reasons of which I am unaware , either to the Committee on Budgetary Control or to the Committee on Budgets .
I therefore made it very clear to those who were responsible that I would be expecting an undertaking from the Commission this evening .
I have not received it .
I would like to think that perhaps the message was not passed on .
You have until tomorrow to think about it , but I shall expect an undertaking from you before the vote takes place .
Regarding Amendment No 25 , Mr Bourlanges , the first part is accepted by the Commission , the second part is rejected .
As regards the third part , I agree to your suggestion of clarifying the matter by tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Safe operation of mining activities
The next item is the report ( A5-0214 / 2001 ) by Mr Sjöstedt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Commission communication on safe operation of mining activities : a follow-up to recent mining accidents [ COM ( 2000 ) 664 - C5-0013 / 2001 - 2001 / 2005 ( COS ) ] .
. ( SV ) Mr President , the background to this report and the Commission communication with which it deals is a number of extremely serious accidents which have happened in the mining industry in recent years .
In 1998 , a dam collapsed at a mine in Spain , with very serious ecological consequences , and a similar accident occurred in Romania in 2000 .
Both these accidents had international environmental consequences .
In recent years , we have also seen similar , but less extensive , accidents involving collapsing mine dams , e.g. in Northern Sweden and in Wales .
This has led to the EU reviewing its legislation with regard to this type of mining operation .
At the same time , we have large amounts of mining waste stored in various places releasing heavy metals and other toxic substances into the environment .
The content of this waste and the extent of the problem are also not entirely clear .
As such , mining waste is one of our major environmental problems .
The safety of mining operations is also a major environmental problem .
In its proposal , the Commission presents its thoughts on possible ways of improving EU legislation in this area .
In the main , we have decided , in our report , that things are moving in the right direction .
However , we have a number of comments on what we believe the more concrete content should be and on what we would like the Commission to propose .
We emphasise that , in the event of an accident , the responsibility should lie exclusively with the company , including responsibility for the environmental consequences , and that the mining industry should be included in the future Directive on environmental liability .
We would like more research in this area .
At the moment , there is a major lack of research into the management of mining waste .
We would , therefore , like the techniques currently found in various countries to be developed .
We would also like the EU to review its own financing of various projects in this field .
With regard to the main proposals , in my report we propose that the study now underway should also take in the candidate countries .
The study means going through old mining waste and identifying cases of serious environmental problems .
We know that the situation may be more serious in many candidate countries than it is in the present Member States .
We also emphasise that we would like a common method to be used so that it will be possible to compare results from different sources .
We believe that , in the cases where it is established that there is a major problem , these must also be followed up with actual action plans .
The most important element of the Commission ' s proposal is the proposal for a new framework directive on mining waste .
I , as rapporteur , and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , believe that this is the right approach .
A special directive is needed , as neither the Directive on Waste nor the Directive on the landfill of waste is especially applicable to the management of mining waste .
We also stress that this directive must deal with both old mining waste and existing production .
This directive should also contain a provision obliging the Member States to have legislation on the restoration of those locations which have been used for mining operations .
Such legislation already exists in a number of Member States but not all , particularly if the candidate countries are included .
We would like specific provisions on dam safety which directly address these accidents .
In addition , we would like a direct ban on the method used in Baia Mare in Romania , where cyanide was used in open dams for metal extraction .
This is an extremely dangerous method which risks seriously damaging the surrounding environment if the dam bursts , as was the case in Romania .
A third element of the proposals is that the Seveso II Directive should be reviewed .
It is a question of broadening the scope of the directive in order to include requirements for contingency plans and information for mining operations .
In this area , there is the one amendment to the report , which comes from the Conservative PPE-DE Group .
The amendment proposes that the obligation set out in the Seveso II Directive should be restricted and only cover mining operations concerned with ore processing , i.e. metal extraction .
I believe it is too early to set such limitations before the Commission ' s proposal has even been tabled .
It would be unwise to do this at this point .
Instead , options should be kept open for all types of mining operation to be covered by this directive .
There was widespread agreement when we discussed this matter in committee .
I would like to thank my fellow Members for their comments and for the support I have received .
We have also enjoyed excellent cooperation with the Commission and now look forward quite soon to receiving the first proposals that have been promised , especially the revision of the Seveso II Directive .
We hope that the Commission will also listen to us regarding the focus of the forthcoming proposals .
Thank you for such excellent cooperation .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like first of all to thank the rapporteur most sincerely for his report and to congratulate him on it .
He had a really very tricky subject to deal with .
My group , at any rate , will be very glad to vote in favour of this report .
As we shall , of course , be voting in favour of your report , Mr Sjöstedt , allow me to give voice to certain misgivings expressed to me by persons affected .
Persons affected are of the opinion that a lot of things are being said here that are not materially justified .
Because of the two tailing ponds disasters with which we are familiar , the mining industry as a whole and the existing rules are being seen in a light that bears no relation to reality .
People have mentioned to me recital A , which says that mining accidents have highlighted the inadequacy of rules and monitoring requirements governing the mining industry in present and future EU states .
Couched in such general terms , that is not correct .
What is correct is that the strictness of the regulations varies within the EU and naturally also in the candidate countries .
But the problem lies not so much in the laws as in how those laws are enforced in certain countries , Romania for example .
On recital D : poor management of mining operations and disposal of mining waste is a global problem .
This , too - according to the people concerned , who feel offended by it - is not exactly true , because most firms in the SME category do not operate on a global scale .
Many large firms that are active worldwide are , on the contrary , pioneers when it comes to strict safety and environmental standards .
Viewed globally , in gold mining , for example , there are more problems with small , under-funded operations that are not in a position even to be properly aware of environmental concerns .
But there are also things that are expressly welcomed , for example the final sentence of point 8 : ' Furthermore [ Parliament ] believes that the landfill of waste Directive does not constitute an appropriate framework for regulating mining waste and therefore urges the Commission to put forward a proposal for a specific Directive on mining waste . '
That can only be fully and entirely welcomed and underlined .
I believe the European mining industry is very much aware of its responsibilities and is therefore calling for a specific directive for mining waste .
There must , then , be adequate rules for waste , and environmental and technical standards must be laid down .
I believe we are all aware that the specific nature of mining is such that the Landfill Directive cannot be applied and would not bring about any improvement in the ecological and economic situation of mining companies .
I have taken the liberty , Mr Sjöstedt , of tabling an amendment to paragraph 9 .
This is concerned with extending the Seveso II Directive to also cover risks arising from storage and processing activities in metal ore mining .
I hope you will be able to agree to this amendment and I congratulate you once again on your report .
On behalf of my Group , I welcome the Commission ' s report and the rapporteur ' s report .
The incidents which precipitated the study and the subsequent reports in Spain and in Hungary have made us aware of the problems posed by mines and mine-workings , both old and new .
The potential problems - particularly the problems of water pollution - are cross-boundary problems and therefore worthy of European-wide legislation .
After consideration of existing legislation , be it on IPPC , landfill or Seveso , and in each case I have acted as the rapporteur at different stages of development of that legislation , it is clear that none of them can provide a comfortable solution to the range of problems presented by mining operations .
So I would concur with the rapporteur that a new piece of legislation - some kind of new initiative - is required to regulate the mining industry in particular .
I would raise two points with the rapporteur .
Firstly , old sites do not necessarily need to be cleaned up .
Many old sites are literally centuries old and have developed in such a way that they are now sites of scientific interest and contain particular flora and fauna .
I would urge that we should consider preserving sites and using sites in that way rather than simply clearing them off the face of the earth at great expense .
Secondly , I would say that classifying mining waste as waste is very difficult when you consider that large amounts of it are simply crushed rock and quite similar to products that you would get from any quarry in the Union .
Therefore I would say that we have to look more particularly at processed waste from mines which often contains high levels of toxic chemicals .
That does require regulation .
I would say that the amendment from the EPP Group is not particularly helpful , since it tries to reduce the scope of this directive to the mining of metal ores .
From my own experience , the first tailings dams I ever saw were in Derbyshire in the north of England , and they were the result of the mining of fluorospa , not a metal as any chemistry teacher will tell you .
But they present exactly the same problems as tailings dams resulting from mining operations .
I would recommend a positive vote tomorrow and , I hope , rapid action by the Commission to implement the recommendations .
I would like to say that our Group very much supports this report .
We think it is excellent .
The mining sector ' s track-record leaves a lot to be desired , not just in Europe , but in eastern Europe and worldwide .
One of the very important things in this report is the need for a future directive on mining waste .
It should cover both operational and abandoned sites and disposal and contain provisions for mining waste action programmes as well as provisions to facilitate more sustainable extraction : site cleaning , waste reduction , and dry-tailing disposal in the case of metal mining waste .
Mining companies need to establish decommissioning plans for new and existing mines and tailing ponds .
I just have to look at it in my own country where mining companies have come in and basically taken what they want .
They then leave the mess behind to be cleaned up .
As Mr Bowe said , there may be " historical " mining sites of interest , but we are really talking about tailing ponds which contain many dangerous substances .
Local communities have to live with that and , in some areas , even farming has been affected because the mining companies leave their mess behind , affecting not just the water supplies but also the land in general .
We really have to take into account all sectors in the community .
The mining industry has got away with it for far too long .
We really need an extremely tight clampdown on how mining industries operate and a future directive on mining waste is extremely important .
I would just like to finish by saying that the report itself is excellent and I hope that it gets full support .
I would also like to confirm that our group would be reluctant to support the amendment proposed by the PPE Group for the reasons just mentioned by other speakers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this evening I am standing in for Margot Wallström on this topic because Mrs Wallström had to leave today for the international climate talks in Japan and Australia .
I think the Committee will be fully in agreement with Mrs Wallström representing the European side at this High Level Group because climate protection policy is one of our most pressing concerns .
I should like , on behalf of the Commission , to thank the European Parliament and especially you , Mr Sjöstedt , but also the committees involved , for your constructive cooperation and outstanding report .
The background to the Commission ' s communication was the serious environmental damage caused by cyanide following the dam breaches in Spain in 1998 and in Baia Mare , Romania , in January 2000 .
The communication mentions the three key actions planned by the Commission after the most recent mining accidents : first , amendment of the Seveso II Directive , then the presentation of the proposal for a new directive on the treatment of mining waste and , thirdly , the creation of a reference document on best available technologies following the procedure laid down in the IPPC Directive , with a description of the best available technologies for reducing everyday pollution and preventing or reducing mining accidents .
The Baia Mare Task Force ' s final report reaffirmed the need for these measures .
It was Mrs Wallström who set up this Task Force to obtain more information about the Baia Mare accident and , on that basis , to devise measures to reduce or prevent such hazards in the future .
In their report they welcome this communication and support the Commission ' s general approach of creating a transparent and coherent framework for greater safety in mining by making appropriate amendments to environmental law and the instruments .
This refers not only to the three key actions just mentioned but also to legislation that is not specific to mining , such as the proposed directive on environmental liability .
I should like to stress at this point that the three key actions mentioned now have different time frames .
The proposal for a directive amending the Seveso II Directive has already completed a public consultation and , according to the Commission ' s work programme for 2001 , is likely to be adopted in the course of this year .
The directive will not only cover mining but also , following the tragic accident in Enschede in the Netherlands in May last year , the safe storage of fireworks .
In the light of the amendment that is now before us and of what Mrs Flemming has said , I should like to add that both the mining accidents mentioned in the Commission communication occurred during activities connected with the extraction of metallic ores .
The Commission therefore understands the reasons for wanting to confine the scope of the directive to this field .
But I would ask you to consider that a gradual extension of the scope of the directive - when and only when accidents have happened - is not consistent with the precautionary principle .
Aristotle himself said the improbable will probably happen .
Even tomorrow , there could be an accident in an industrial plant not covered by the Seveso II Directive , in which case we would make corrections retrospectively and wait for the next area , so to speak .
I would therefore be pleased if Parliament would support the Commission in its efforts to be proactive rather than reactive in its proposed legislation .
A comment on the time frame for the second key action .
Work on the proposal for a new directive on the treatment of mining waste is progressing well .
The study of mining hot spots will soon be completed and consultation with the interest groups concerned has already begun .
The proposal will probably be adopted by the Commission in 2002 .
Work on the document on best available technologies began with an opening session at the European IPPC Bureau at the end of June .
From past experience , however , producing such a detailed document describing the best available technologies takes two years on average .
Finally , the report calls on the Commission to intensify dialogue with the European mining industry .
This dialogue is already taking place .
It will play a central role in implementing Community strategy for safety in mining .
Your support shows the Commission that we are on the right road .
The report motivates us to continue to work hard for a swift implementation of our strategy for the prevention of mining accidents in the European Union and also in the candidate countries .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Coastal zone management in Europe
Mr President , the principles of integrated coastal zone management are accepted worldwide as a mechanism to enable sustainable management of coastal areas .
Europe is currently well behind other developed nations in implementing them .
For instance , the US , Canada , Australia and New Zealand have all implemented major legislation to progress integrated management of coastal and marine areas .
Chapter 17 of Agenda 21 commits coastal signatories to integrated management and sustainable development of coastal areas .
The EU ' s demonstration programme on integrated management of coastal zones , funded by LIFE , has proved that implementation of integrated coastal zone management results in both economic and environmental benefits .
The EU should be taking advantage of these benefits .
The coastal zone requires special management .
There is an urgent need to integrate planning and management and promote collaborative working of marine and terrestrial assistance at local , regional and national levels .
Through good practices of coastal zone management , we should work towards sustainable management of the coastal zone .
Europe should provide specific leadership to ensure good management of the coast .
This will only be possible if the integrated coastal zone management process is backed up with appropriate legislation .
The EU must establish a legal framework to enable action at other levels .
This recommendation should be seen as a first stage in the development of that framework .
I am astonished at some of the opposition to the idea of binding legislation because it is essential to secure adequate funding for integrated coastal zone management initiatives across Europe .
Integrated coastal zone management initiatives usually focus on a central coordinating mechanism which requires comparatively low levels of core funding .
Yet the integrated coastal zone initiatives already in existence are floundering , due mainly to lack of financial support .
For instance , the EU-funded integrated coastal zone management projects such as the Atlantic Living Coastline in the UK and others have since ceased .
The UK initiative and the Severn Estuary strategy , involving 12 local authorities , have only secured funding for the next six months .
Member States should adopt binding measures to ensure good coastal zone management .
This should happen not later than three years after the adoption of the current recommendation on integrated coastal zone management .
This would be preceded by a national stock-taking to analyse which actors , laws and institutions influence the planning and management of the coastal zone in order to ensure convergence of public bodies and local initiatives , to be completed by the end of December 2002 .
In my own country , the Bantry Bay coastal zone chart is the only agreed integrated coastal zone management plan in the whole of the country at the present time .
Even in countries such as the UK , where the EU programmes have funded some of the most important coastal zone management and regeneration projects , local authorities are unable to give priority to funding integrated coastal zone management actions because of the absence of a national policy framework , statutory duties , responsibilities or adequate funding .
For this reason local authorities strongly support EU leadership to ensure cross-European commitment by national governments to give funding and legislative support in this field .
Some people have criticised me for saying that I want to give the EU more power in this area .
My colleague , Mr Davies - who is not here tonight - has criticised me in committee .
I was beginning to wonder if I was the Euro-sceptic or was he ?
In relation to environmental protection , it is extremely important that the EU is given some sort of control .
In my own country the government failed to take recommendations and even directives seriously and implement them in a way that actually achieves their original aim .
A recommendation is basically non-binding .
So you will have the situation where Member States do not take seriously the management of a coast .
We cannot say that if we manage our own coasts , that is sufficient .
It has a knock-on effect in other areas , especially where there are shared coastlines .
It is completely unacceptable that some Member States have a very good integrated coastal zone management strategy and plans , whereas other countries do not .
That is completely unfair .
When it comes to environmental issues we need an international approach .
There is no point in trying to tackle it at only a national level .
As everyone knows , environmental issues cross all boundaries .
There is no such thing as national borders .
In this area we are not saying that we want to hand over total control to Europe but we need binding legislation .
Otherwise governments just ignore it .
Recommendations are just something that they comply with if it suits them , but not if they do not .
In relation to coastal zones it is extremely important .
Europe has experienced a great increase in pressures on coastal resources .
From 1960 to 1990 it has been estimated that one kilometre of unspoilt coastline has been developed every day and 30 hectares of dune habitat have disappeared every day .
Coastal populations have also further increased and , at present , about 50 % of the EU ' s population lives within 50 kilometres of the coast .
So there really is an urgent need to tackle coastal zone management .
The draft recommendation leaves out a very important issue in that it fails to identify the threatened biodiversity of our coastal zones .
The coastal zone is one of the most dynamic areas of the earth ' s surface with an abundance of unique flora and fauna which need to be protected .
This has to be addressed .
Another issue is climate change .
We can no longer ignore threats from climate change on coastal erosion .
This has to be taken into account .
Everyone , at this stage , will recognise that climate change is having a major impact on our coastal areas .
In the interests of all industries that rely on the coast we have to take action , and take it now .
We can see the quick destruction of our coasts .
This involves the destruction of industries that rely on our coasts such as tourism , fishing industries and others .
It is important that something happens as a result of this recommendation , that there is some sort of legal framework .
Member States who are reluctant to do this do not want to face up to the fact that our coasts have to be protected .
They want to " cop-out " of their responsibilities .
This should not be allowed .
Mr President , integrated coastal zone management is a necessity , but unfortunately many still do not know what it is .
Be it the Irish Cliffs of Moher , the Algarve in Portugal or the Watt mud flats on the German coast , Europe ' s coasts have tremendous economic , ecological , social and cultural importance .
Coasts are not conurbation areas , but nevertheless around one third of the EU population live in coastal regions today .
This presents dangers for the fragile ecosystems that coasts represent .
However , the socio-economic problems have grown too , because coastal regions are far removed from the heartbeat of the conurbations and are neglected by politics .
I need mention only the coastal regions ' lack of infrastructure links .
So we must do something for the coasts in Europe .
In view of the growing problems , we urgently need to find a system of planning and management that includes everyone connected with the coasts .
We must create an integrated management to ensure sustainable development and preserve the coasts as habitat .
In Germany we have a saying : too many cooks spoil the broth .
I hear the voices of critics raising their fingers in warning and quoting this proverb . But I say to them , the proverb may apply to broth but not to our coasts .
The problem areas differ a great deal , and a wide variety of sectors are affected , but the links between them are obvious .
Tourists come to my coast , for example , for the crabs .
The artificial deepening of rivers or the discharge of harmful substances threatens the stock of crabs .
No crabs , no tourists , no money !
And there are no alternative job opportunities , certainly not in the fisheries sector .
We are faced with wide-ranging problems that cannot be solved , at least not adequately , by the Member States alone .
What we need is a joining of forces on the coast , and clearly that will not happen without friction .
But it will benefit our environment in the long term .
We will not get very far or make much progress in Europe if we all keep ploughing our own furrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should almost like to say that the quality of our coastal zones here in Europe forms part of our heritage .
Although it is rather late in the evening to talk about coastal zone management in Europe , I believe that it is a subject of particular importance which really needs a legal framework .
Why a legal framework ?
Quite simply because the development of our coastal zones is sometimes carried out in such a way as to cause the degradation of those zones , despite the fact that , as a fellow Member has pointed out , the habitat of the coastal zones is sometimes a long way away from the major centres of population .
This is not the case in every country , however .
I come from a country where there are major population centres alongside coastal zones , and those population centres have finally destroyed the quality of the coastal zones , resulting in numerous cases of degradation caused by human activity .
This degradation has very serious consequences for biodiversity , for the conservation of species , whether of fauna or of flora , serious consequences for the quality of the landscape , and very serious consequences for water quality .
On that point , we have the framework directive on water , the one on bathing water , and you know , especially at this time of the year when the tourists start to invade our beaches , how important the quality of bathing water is .
All this is very important , and it is also important for the quality of our fishery resources .
We are aware that it is necessary to have a real political will , on the part of all the countries of the European Union and within the candidate countries , because among those countries which will shortly be joining us within the European Union there are coastal countries and islands which are facing the same problems , the problems that arise between economic development and the protection of our coastal zones .
Economic development and protection are not actually opposed to one another , but there has to be a real desire to develop carefully , at the same time fully respecting the need to protect the landscape , biodiversity and so on .
This will certainly require a legal framework .
On that point I agree with other Members .
However , we must have a legal framework which respects the disparities between our countries , because the coasts of the Scandinavian countries do not have the same problems as those of the countries of southern Europe , whether that means France , Spain , Italy or Greece .
We must give a little more responsibility to local authorities and ask each State to set up a legal framework which is appropriate to the regional and local scale .
In France , a coastline conservation authority was set up 25 years ago .
It has resources to acquire coastal zones which have to be protected , and resources to ensure that , afterwards , land-use plans comply with legal regulations .
This is what we should be doing .
I believe that our coastal zones represent environmental and economic wealth which we absolutely must protect in the spirit of a sustainable development policy .
The issue of integrated coastal zone management is of crucial importance to my constituents in Scotland .
As the Commission highlights in its proposal , this is not just a local problem , but is of critical importance for all Europeans .
As Mrs Langenhagen said , one third of EU citizens live close to , if not on , these areas .
Research has revealed a worrying deterioration in the environmental , socio-economic and cultural resources of our coastal zones .
We see aggressive competition between users of these resources .
The environmental problems include habitat destruction , water contamination , coastal erosion and resource depletion and these are all very serious .
These environmental problems have a knock-on effect beyond coastal regions to inland regions .
The roots of the problem include a lack of knowledge , a failure to involve stake-holders and , therefore , a lack of cooperation between the relevant administrative bodies .
At a recent videoconference in Scotland House , that is the home of the Scottish Executive in Brussels , it was interesting to see how the different local authorities in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland were already working within local partnerships with stake-holders to protect the coastal zone .
It gave me great encouragement that action was being taken and that the coastal zone was being given the importance it rightly deserved .
It is , after all , at local level that a real difference will be made .
In conclusion , we need to encourage strong action at a local level which we are seeing already in Scotland , and we need to exchange best practice across the EU in order that our coastal zones can be enjoyed as much by this generation as by the next .
Mr President , in my country fisherwomen represent all that is strongest and most courageous .
I also think that this evening ' s debate , once again involving almost exclusively women , shows that we who are taking part in this discussion may well be descended from these brave and strong women of the coasts .
Ladies and gentlemen , political movements which have long supported the very principles found in this document have been mocked in many contexts .
The movement which I represent nationally has long stood for the principles about which we are now speaking , but we have had to suffer a great deal of ridicule .
It is important that we support the binding recommendations that there is a wish to introduce for Member States , so that we can get away from a situation in which the left hand does not know what the right hand is doing and in which fishermen are perhaps in even more danger of extinction than many animal species .
We have an unequal situation with unequal protection of what is to be found in the coastal areas .
We also have a situation whereby we want more sea traffic without wanting to provide protection .
The rapporteur asked why our group opposes a binding legal framework , but the explanations she has given have not convinced us .
We need a legal basis for the matter , but not binding legislation .
We must rely on local action and joint local planning .
Mr President , coastal management which is not only integrated but planned , both in Europe and in every continent , is one of the paramount necessities for the future of humanity .
It is impossible to deal with this issue within the narrow context of the existing Member States .
This is an area in which decisions could be necessary and legitimate at the level of a whole continent , or even of the entire planet .
However , this is also an area in which the European institutions have least power , although they are very fond of finicky regulations in other areas where centralisation is not required .
In this way they demonstrate that they do not represent an authority which imposes its will on national States , each with its particularisms and selfish interests , but rather that they are the result of those interests .
The European institutions , like the national States , are in the service of the private interests of the major industrial and financial groups .
They are incapable of imposing on those groups the policies which are of utmost importance to society as a whole , and there is a real risk that future generations will die as a result .
The solving of major ecological problems is totally incompatible with the private ownership of the major means of production and the use of those means with the exclusive aim of making a profit .
The cases involving the Erika and the Ievoli Sun were a good illustration of the extent to which private interests are opposed to collective interests .
In these circumstances , to vote in favour of a strategy for integrated coastal zone management would be pure hypocrisy .
We shall be abstaining from the vote .
Mr President , everyone agrees that it is necessary to protect natural areas in general and the coastline in particular , especially since our coasts are deteriorating as a result of demographic and economic expansion .
We have yet to decide how to provide this vital protection .
Will it respect local populations and their activities , or are we going to put nature in a glass case , as the Natural 2000 network intends to do ?
It will , of course , be necessary to have rules and regulations in order to keep the situation under control and to avoid anarchic development .
In France we did this with our Coastlines Act , which has produced some good results , even if our Green Minister for the Environment , Mrs Voynet , has just allowed an exception to get through in the form of the Corsica Act .
However , these essential regional planning measures have to be the subject of debate with the elected representatives and citizens concerned , because they are the ones who have to live with the coastline on a day-to-day basis , and it is absolutely essential to involve them in this protection if we want it to be admired and respected .
Let us not forget that they are the ones who , when the Erika was shipwrecked , organised and took part in the operation to clean up the beaches and coastlines .
In my opinion , it is better to convince than to constrain .
That way we gain more support , and therefore more effectiveness and more local democracy .
Restrictions from Brussels are always suspect and often unsuitable , because they have been drafted far away from the local area and the local mentality .
This local approach is essential if we want to see common-sense measures negotiated and accepted .
We must also respect traditional local practices , because they express the economic , social and cultural reality .
They are an integral part of the coastline , and are often the best guarantee that our natural areas will be respected .
In practical terms , we must apply the rules of subsidiarity and decentralisation , although consistency remains essential .
Responsibility for management should remain at national level and should include a large degree of local consensus .
This is why we shall be voting against this report , which we believe is too restrictive .
Mr President , as Mrs Stihler has already said , this proposal is of major importance for Scotland .
For example , there is one of our local authority areas that has 26 inhabited islands and a coastline as long as that of France .
Scotland , as a whole , has 462 different coastal plans in place , almost three quarters of them locally based .
Whilst management of coastal zones must remain predominantly local , national strategies to support and coordinate action are vital .
We are fortunate in having a Scottish coastal forum to perform this role .
But such good work can be undermined .
As the Firth of Clyde forum recently explained , we lack any measure of security , political or financial , which would give us a strong footing for pursuing longer-term management .
That is why the Commission proposal is so welcome .
I congratulate Mrs McKenna on the extent to which her report has amplified and clarified the text .
Mr President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , as I have taken over the speech from my colleague , Mrs Wallström , I will speak in English .
The coastal zone is very important for Europe , as other speakers have said .
Its resources provide us with food , energy and homes and create opportunities .
However , according to the reports of the European Environmental Agency , conditions in the coastal zone and its resources continue to decline .
Conditions in the coastal zone can only be improved through a concentrated effort involving all levels of the relevant sectors of government based on the principles of integrated coastal zone management .
I would like to stress that this integrated coastal zone management is not a procedure for land-use planning per se .
It is more a methodology for introducing a coherent approach to the management and use of coastal resources with the informed involvement of all the relevant stakeholders .
In order to encourage Member States to assume their full responsibility in promoting integrated coastal zone management , the Commission has introduced the proposed recommendation .
This calls on Member States to develop national strategies for coastal zone management based on an inventory of the actors , laws and institutions involved in the management and planning of the coastal zones .
This strategy aims to introduce a coherent approach to the coastal zones across Europe but the recommendation intentionally leaves the choice of the format of the national strategies to the Member States to ensure that each national strategy is tailor-made to the institutional , physical and social conditions within each Member State .
At the same time , the recommendation presents a list of features which the Member States are encouraged to address through their national strategies , such as the need for coherence between the many plans , policies and programmes for management of the coasts and the need for coordination between the actors that use and manage the coast , particularly those with responsibility for the sea and the land which forms part of the coastal zone .
Let me turn to the key issues raised in the amendments proposed .
I would like to start by noting that the Commission can accept many of the proposed amendments .
Indeed , many of the proposed amendments strengthen the text by clarifying concepts and introducing further information .
We thank Parliament for putting forward these amendments .
There are , however , certain amendments which the Commission cannot accept .
Several of the amendments proposed , namely Amendments Nos 11 , 12 , 16 , 18 , 29 , 32 , 43 and 49 , introduce references to a future Community legislative framework .
These amendments are unacceptable to the Commission for the obvious reason that they prejudge the issue of whether a legislative approach is required .
In addition , a reference to a Community legislative framework would not be appropriate in view of the wide diversity of conditions in the Member States and the Commission ' s philosophy of coastal zone management .
The Commission ' s present decision to propose a recommendation was based on a thorough assessment of the needs for action at the European level through the demonstration programme on integrated coastal zone management and on a broad public consultation .
In the same spirit , the Commission cannot accept amendments which introduce compulsory language .
" Shall " is not the right word in a non-binding instrument , such as a recommendation and therefore the use of this word in Amendments Nos 29 , 32 and 34 cannot be accepted by the Commission .
Similarly , the references in Amendments Nos 17 , 20 , 33 and 45 indicating the need for binding instruments within the Member States ignore the fact that integrated coastal zone management may be best introduced through voluntary measures in some Member States .
These parts of these amendments are therefore not acceptable either .
Otherwise , the six amendments are acceptable in principle or in part .
The Commission is concerned that Amendments Nos 16 and 42 might give an incorrect , narrow impression of the breadth of the integrated coastal zone management approach .
In particular , in Amendments Nos 25 and 47 , while the Commission accepts the need to involve all the parties concerned , this text should not be limited to the special planning process , but should make broader reference to all of the actors involved in the planning and management of the coastal zones and its resources .
The Commission would also note that it cannot accept two amendments , which make inappropriate reference to other Community policies which are better discussed in a different context .
The reference to the INTERREG Programme in Amendment No 16 is inappropriate as the guidelines for INTERREG have been set out elsewhere .
Similarly , the reference in Amendment No 35 to the common fisheries policy and the 12-mile derogation is not acceptable as it prejudges the debate on the revision of this policy .
In addition , Amendments Nos 47 and 48 are not acceptable , at least in part , because they could lead to the endorsement of unsustainable traditional practices including those relating to hunting and fishing .
Concerning the remaining amendments - and this list is longer than the non-acceptable amendments - the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 3 to 10 , 13 , 15 , 19 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 and 46 ; and in addition , it can accept Amendments Nos 2 , 14 , 24 , 36 , and 44 in principle .
As a result , two thirds of the amendments can be accepted by the Commission .
In conclusion , Parliament has significantly contributed to improving this proposal .
I would , therefore , like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs McKenna , and the draftsmen from the other committees for their efforts .
I am sure that the final text will be an important step in encouraging the application of integrated coastal zone management in Europe .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12.10 a.m. )
Madam President , I saw a few boats landing at Parliament this week and notified the security service .
Not only were there language difficulties ; the telephone line was so poor that it was almost impossible to communicate .
I would be most obliged if the number on which the security service can be reached could also be clearly displayed in the House , so that if anyone wants to report an incident , they can do so quickly and efficiently .
Mr Rübig , we will be very happy to give you that number .
Since you raise the subject , I should tell you that we were faced with some very difficult incidents yesterday .
Demonstrators , they cannot be called visitors , caused a lot of problems .
I must say that our security service really reacted very rapidly and very efficiently , and that efficiency meant everything was soon under control .
I wanted to say that in this House .
Madam President , I understand that over the next few days , the Bureau will be discussing the question of languages and interpretation following the accession of the candidate countries .
Because , as you know , we are all a little touchy on this subject which is , above all , a political issue and cannot be resolved by purely administrative measures , I should like to ask you to tell us what the Bureau 's thoughts are on this and how you think we can all take part in this debate , which is absolutely vital .
Mrs Zorba , the guidelines you refer to will be adopted by the Bureau in September and between now and then the groups will have plenty of time to discuss them .
I think it is very important that they should be able to do so .
Madam President , one comment perhaps , as the question of language has already been raised twice .
I should like to point out that the question of language is regulated in the Rules of Procedure , which state that Parliament itself makes the final decision on how languages are to be regulated in the House .
Any concerns - including about decisions by the Bureau - are therefore totally unfounded .
G8 Summit
The next item is the Commission statement on the G8 Summit .
I shall give Commissioner Patten the floor straight away .
Madam President , I am pleased to have this opportunity to talk about the G8 Summit .
At the suggestion of the Italian G8 Presidency the forthcoming summit in Genoa will focus on the one hand on global development issues , and on the other hand on some key related areas of concern such as the environment and food safety .
The Commission fully supports this focus for the summit .
Indeed , it is the G8 leaders ' intention that Genoa should send a strong signal that the G8 countries are taking the concerns of their own citizens extremely seriously , as well as those of the developing world .
Following on from Okinawa last year , the G8 will be looking at development issues in a much more serious fashion .
From the Commission 's point of view the summit needs to address the following key questions in this area .
First , the fight against communicable diseases . The European Union has taken a strong lead .
The action plan on fighting communicable diseases was adopted by the Council earlier this year .
Following Kofi Annan 's call for the establishment of a global health fund , which was endorsed , I am pleased to say , by the UN General Assembly last week , it is expected that G8 members will provide their political and financial backing for the proposed fund .
Mr Annan 's presence in Genoa to take part in an ' outreach ' meeting between the G8 and other leaders will help to focus attention on the global health fund issue .
Many issues remain , and we must make sure that the fund 's focus and management is in line with the objectives of the European Union action plan .
But a strong signal of European support in this area will be both natural and expected in Genoa .
Secondly , there is the issue of Third World debt .
The G8 took an early lead on the debt of the poorest countries - the HIPC initiative - and we should now seek to go further .
Mr Prodi and Prime Minister Verhofstadt will refer to the Council decision in May this year calling for the total alleviation of all remaining special loans granted to the least-developed countries under the first , second and third Lomé Conventions .
Thirdly , there is the question of market access for the least-developed countries .
We strongly support the efforts of the Italian G8 Presidency to broaden the debate on poverty reduction beyond debt relief .
In particular , the links between poverty reduction and trade should be highlighted .
In this context the ' everything but arms ' initiative will of course be mentioned , and the Commission will insist that other G8 members should follow suit by providing duty-free and quota-free access for all products originating from the least-developed countries .
Turning now to the environment , G8 leaders will have a discussion on climate change .
This will be President Bush 's first G8 summit .
The Commission will be keen , as will no doubt the other European participants , to discuss our concerns about the United States ' present stance on climate change and on the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol .
We will work to ensure that the communiqué makes a clear reference to the scientific evidence to back up the urgency of international measures to mitigate climate change .
We , for our part , will reiterate our determination to press ahead with ratification of the Kyoto Protocol , and our hope that the reconvened 6th Conference of the Parties to the climate change convention , scheduled for Bonn , can find a means which allows the United States to stick with the process .
As regards food safety , the Commission is keen that the G8 conclusions include a reference to the precautionary principle .
We remain committed to making systems responsive to the growing public awareness of food safety issues , the potential risks associated with food and the accelerating pace of change of developments in biotechnology .
These are not the only issues on the agenda of the three-day meeting .
Beyond the principal themes of development , environment and food safety , there will be a discussion on regional issues focusing on the Middle East and the Balkans , as well as on conflicts in Africa .
Those subjects will be discussed by the Foreign Ministers ' meeting , at which I will be present just before the main leaders meeting .
As usual the G8 summit will also be preceded by a G7 session , that is , without Russia , where the main topics of discussion will be the world economy , including oil prices and financial architecture .
Prime Minister Koizumi of Japan will announce his plan for structural reforms in the run-up to the elections in his country .
Leaders will also discuss trade with the aim of sending a clear unambiguous message on the launch of a new round at the fourth WTO ministerial meeting in Dohar in November .
Also in the context of the G7 , nuclear safety issues will be discussed in relation both to the situation in Russia and to the need to maintain loan commitments to Ukraine , following the closure of the Chernobyl plant , for the construction of the K2R4 reactors there .
It has become G8 practice to arrange an outreach meeting with some Heads of State and Government from developing countries .
In this vein , the Italian hosts have invited leaders from South Africa , Nigeria , Mali , Algeria , Bangladesh and El Salvador to attend a working session and a dinner which should focus mainly on the poverty reduction strategy and the global health fund .
As I said earlier , this part of the summit will also be attended by the UN Secretary-General , as well as by the President of the World Bank and the heads of the World Trade Organisation , the World Health Organisation and the Food and Agriculture Organisation .
The G8 is not an organisation or an institution .
It is not based on a treaty , it does not have a secretariat .
The Group of 8 is an annual gathering of democratically elected leaders of the leading nations of the world .
The European Commission is invited to participate , not least in view of its trade and other responsibilities on behalf of the whole Union .
As in the past , Mr Prodi intends to make full use of this opportunity to convey the views and positions of the European Union .
It is not enough that world leaders meet and discuss these issues between themselves , however .
They must listen to the concerns of third countries and civil society and then enter into dialogue with them .
That is why the G8 is increasingly organising side events and meetings with third countries and civil society alongside the summit .
I have already mentioned the outreach meetings with other leaders .
The Japanese last year added an NGO centre in Okinawa .
The Italians continue this year with a number of meetings that have already taken place and others set to take place on the eve of the summit .
The Commission has extensive experience in its own relations and consultations with civil society - we have been keen to share our knowledge with G8 members , and we hope the encouragement of this type of dialogue will continue and will be developed further .
I will just make one final point .
However much one agrees or disagrees with some representatives of civil society on issues such as globalisation , it seems to me exceptionally important to have an open dialogue which is not disfigured by street violence .
Some of the scenes we have seen surrounding recent summits and meetings have , I think , sadly made it more difficult for legitimate representatives of civil society to get their point across to the leaders who are present .
I feel that is a tragedy .
It very unfairly devalues the case which those legitimate NGOs have to make , and I very much hope that they will make that point and that those who have been guilty of violence in the past will get the message .
Madam President , I would like to thank Commissioner Patten for his words , but I cannot fail to express my deep regret at the fact that Parliament has not dedicated a wide debate , which could maybe have ended with a joint motion , to a matter which is so important and so affects our societies and public opinion .
It is strange that a summit with an agenda which is so sensitive to global governance issues should receive such severe , groundless criticism .
Clearly , there has been a problem and there still is , not just of communication but also of democratic participation , not the participation envisaged by the violent antiglobalisation protesters but the participation that we see in national parliaments .
The market will not be the only subject of discussion at Genoa , then .
Quite the contrary : in actual fact , the agenda is wholly centred around the fight against poverty .
Fighting against poverty means , first and foremost , employment and the fair redistribution of the wealth derived from the process of globalisation .
As an economist , I would remind the antiglobalisation protestors that wealth has to be created before it can be distributed .
However , if Europe 's goal of full employment is to be more than just the egotistic vision of a wealthy Community , it must be translated into a global objective of accompanying the process of liberalisation of free trade with active employment policies which will help to produce active societies and thus lead to social inclusion : by overcoming what is known as the digital divide , by building up human capital , by promoting self-employment .
Making employment a priority must lead to the widespread introduction of minimum levels of protection for all people .
Fighting against poverty means improving cooperation between the World Bank , the International Monetary Fund , the ILO and the WTO in order to integrate macro-economic stability and development policies with social policies .
As you can see , a great deal has changed since the summits of the mid- ' 70s .
As Commissioner Patten pointed out , on the first day of the Genoa Summit , the Heads of State and Government , who will be the guests of the Italian President , will meet with the UN Secretary-General , Kofi Annan , the President of the European Commission , Mr Prodi , the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Verhofstadt , the Director-General of the FAO , the Director-General of the WTO , the Director-General of the WHO and the President of the World Bank , and also with the Presidents of Nigeria , South Africa and Algeria , who launched the support and development plan for Africa .
The G8 Summit is certainly an exercise in global governance which can and must be fine-tuned but , already today , its foundations are much wider than those of the summits held during the seventies and eighties .
Madam President , at Genoa on 20 July next , the eight major economic powers will be in full view of the world , tackling a full agenda which includes poverty , the environment and the fight against AIDS .
I hope that the resources used to make the G8 possible will be matched by the capacity to find suitable solutions to current tragedies .
Italy has endeavoured to prepare the ground on these topics as well as possible ; the new government appears to want to continue in the same vein as the previous one : I refer to the 20 % of the world 's population who consume 83 % of the planet 's resources , to the 1.3 billion human beings who live on one dollar a day , to the planet 's changing climate .

The legitimacy of these summits is not in question but , quite apart from the fact that they have no real influence , they do suffer from a terrible deficit of representation - and by that I mean not just the representation of the poorest countries - which is a very serious problem - but , for example , the way the European Union itself is represented .
Therefore , all this must not detract from the urgent need to make international institutions such as the United Nations and its Economic and Social Committee and the World Trade Organisation , not to mention the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , credible , effective and democratic , with a view to creating institutions which are able to reestablish a connection between politics and economics , between government and market in terms of global trends which , hitherto , have favoured the liberalisation of the movement of capital and speculative investment over direct investment .
With regard to the agenda , it is right to tackle the issue of the external debt of the poorest countries , but we must do more than that through the ' Everything but arms ' proposal ; we must support the International Labour Organisation strategy ; we must work towards higher-quality employment to avoid condemning the poorest countries to gaining access to markets primarily on the basis of social dumping ; we must ratify the Kyoto Protocol ; we must support the strategy of the African countries such as South Africa in the fight against AIDS through the global health fund mentioned by Commission Patten .


Will these decisions be taken at Genoa ?
We hope so and we feel that pressure from this great , diverse movement is important in this sense .
I too feel , however , that , in addition to being an unacceptable medium for political expression , violence , whatever form it takes and whoever it is perpetrated by , is ultimately intended to divert attention away from the real issues - Commissioner Patten is right in that respect - and to exploit the media coverage of these events for subversive purposes which have nothing to do with the resolution of the issues at hand .
Madam President , last week I took part in a conference in Stockholm , during which , at the request of his African friends , the African chairman of the plenary session , to which I contributed , began the session with the following words : ' I was asked to bring back to Africa the cure for AIDS , the cure for poverty , the cure for political conflict and the cure for non-availability of information technology - the four diseases that are increasing the already wide gap between North and South ' .
It was not of course without reason that he said this .
In 1960 , the richest 20 % of the world ' s population had an income 30 times greater than that of the poorest 20 % .
In 1990 , the figure was 60 % and in 1997 it was 74 % , and there is no doubt that it has increased since 1997 .
According to statistics in ' The Economist ' of 16 June , the world has more rich people than ever before .
The unfortunate conclusion he drew following the meeting was , ' So it seems that I have to return to Africa without the cure for our four ongoing major crises ' .
We have a problem with many of our meetings .
How much real success is there in changing things ?
We can hope that the G8 meeting , at which the individual EU countries , the Commission and the presidency are represented , can perhaps play its part in moving things on a little .
If these meetings do not succeed in producing more striking results , there is of course the risk that the fear of globalisation will become greater and that we shall therefore see still larger demonstrations , for part of the problem is , of course , that people in general simply think that globalisation is a bad thing , while we politicians are of the opinion that it should , in a way , be a good thing and we know that it could , in fact , be so .
However , we fail to see the results , and the documents we obtain indicate greater and greater differences .
I therefore hope that we get to tackle some of the real problems .
I would therefore urge the Commission - and not , therefore , Mr Patten but obviously Mr Prodi - really to focus upon the desperation of the developing countries , for this is of course the world ' s greatest problem today .
When the discussion turns to setting up a fund , providing debt relief etc . , one must also remember to talk about ' additional money ' so that we leave behind the situation in which it is the same money that circulates through the system and is never paid out .
Madam President , I warmly welcome Commissioner Patten 's reassurance that poverty reduction will be a key issue on the G8 agenda .
Theoretically , the G8 governments are committed to achieving the UN development targets by 2015 , including universal primary education .
Over a year ago , at the World Education Forum in Dakar , those same governments promised that no country serious about achieving education for all should fail for lack of resources .
Those are fine words , but where are the resources and where is the debt relief ?
The G8 should cancel now all IMF and World Bank debts for countries committed to those 2015 development targets .
Those same objectives are shared by hundreds of civil society groups across the European Union , and many thousands of individuals care so much about those issues that they will travel to Genoa to take part in peaceful demonstrations to draw the world 's attention to the need for urgent action on these issues .
May I end with the hope that the world 's media will listen to them and will report their concerns and give far less attention to those tiny numbers of people who may be involved in violence , but who all too often drown out the legitimate concerns of the many thousands of peaceful , but passionate protestors .
Madam President , in our opinion , the new development at Genoa will not be the G8 Summit but , on the contrary , the meeting of the opposition movement .
Many social and political organisations , including ourselves , see the G8 as illegitimate , as an expression of a serious tendency to take important decisions away from the sovereign powers .
We are not the only ones to feel this : the entire Catholic episcopacy of the host region has declared itself to be of the same opinion .
After the Gothenburg tragedy , it would have been wise to suspend the G8 meeting .
Sometimes , it is a sign of wisdom not to resort to a display of strength ; there is the risk that Europe will be catapulted backwards in time to when the forces of the law used to fire on the demonstrations held at the time by the workers ' movement .
This G8 Summit has become a futile display of power , an exaltation of the participants ' own authority , but there are many who have lost confidence in it .
They have lost confidence in it because globalisation cannot hide the damage it is doing in the world : it inevitably provokes crises , it is exacerbating injustices between north and south , it is not resolving the problems of poverty and illness but generating deep , widespread uncertainty regarding man 's future and the future of the environment .
As a result , it is those who are against the G8 , the movements of civil society who are now speaking to the world ; the young people from wealthy countries are speaking out on behalf of the poor countries of the world and their people .
They are finding that demands for democracy and participation are not being met . They see the demands of individuals , the environment and groups calling for social justice .
The watchword of the demonstrators is : ' Another world is possible ' .
This slogan is adopted by workers fighting for employment and proper salaries and by peasant farmers fighting for a different type of farming and for a response to the problems of hunger in the world alike , by all those fighting for a better future .
Where is Europe ?
Europe remains silent .
I feel that we have a lot to learn from the lesson that , while Europe is silent , a great religious force such as the Catholic Church succeeds in expressing more effectively and interpreting the requirements of the civil society of this great continent , expressing all the criticism of the illegitimacy of this summit and of the inability to manage the great processes of world modernisation .
Madam President , in recent weeks , surveys of public opinion have been carried out , and it is with great surprise that I have to say that one result that has emerged is that the majority of Italians share the concerns of the G8 protesters .
This certainly does not mean that the majority of Italians support the violence we have witnessed on other occasions and which we fear will be displayed this time as well .
Of course , I am not among those who advocate violence , nor are most Italians , but this does mean that , in Italy - and , I would argue , in many other countries in the world - there is a real , deep-rooted concern at a type of world globalisation which is not what a large part of the population wished to see .
It would be a great mistake to see this as a question of right- or left-wing politics .
This is a question which concerns basic problems faced by man . Indeed , it is an issue of great relevance precisely to those such as myself who have liberal tendencies , for one of our greatest concerns is that globalisation of the economy might come to pass without there being any rules to govern the process , which might well have worse consequences .
This brings great opportunities for Europe , but also great responsibility .
Great opportunities because , in actual fact , trends and ideas are currently developing in Europe which could provide at least a partial response to the problems of globalisation .
In the field of human rights , with regard to protection of the environment , with regard to minorities and the establishment of the citizens , with regard to diversity and the acceptance of differences , Europe is spontaneously largely in agreement .
This is shown by the almost unanimous position adopted on the Kyoto Protocol , by the battle to abolish the death penalty and to uphold respect for human rights and by the cohesion policy - as yet maybe not sufficient but still important - that we are developing .
At the same time , this highlights our responsibility as well , for these results are not political results now ; as yet we do not have a Europe which upholds these ideals before the world , just individual countries .
Indeed , the image which will emerge from the Genoa Summit is a picture in which Europe does not appear , a picture , that is , which is in danger of being dominated by the one great superpower .
That is not the fault of the superpower , mind you : it is due precisely to the absence of what could have been a continent which takes a different line but is willing to do something about the concerns of such a large part of the human race .
Well then , there are two things we must do : one is to explore this idea , this debate in detail .
I believe that there are some extremely important things we could do ourselves : for example , the idea of going to the forthcoming summit on the environment with a united voice , with one single voice , the voice of Europe ; the possibility of developing the idea of internal cohesion .
There is also a problem enlarging funds : a Europe which dedicated more of its resources to a policy - which has already had partial success - of improving certain economically deprived areas , would have great influence .
However , in addition to this , we need comprehensive political action .
If the voices remain the voices of individual countries , as they have been thus far , they will carry even less weight at the world summit .
If , however , we succeed in making progress on the road to European integration and we succeed in ensuring that it is not just some European countries which go to important world summits but Europe , acting with one voice , we will have contributed to resolving not just the problems of Europe but the problems of the world as well .
The Italian government is making progress in seeking dialogue with all the social players .
However , at this point , something further is necessary : there needs to be great drive from the European Union towards integrating the other countries so that these ideas , these hopes , which we are rightly striving to fulfil , are expressed by an entity which is powerful enough to be influential .
That entity cannot be any individual State ; Europe must act as a whole .
Commissioner , as far as possible , globalisation must mean globalisation of rights and freedoms .
Therefore , I welcome , first and foremost , the ' Everything but arms ' proposal , the Commission 's initiative seeking to abolish customs duties for the poorest countries unilaterally .
This is a response of economic freedom which we must pursue to the end , apart from anything else because , in this way , we will be better able to respond to those who blame globalisation for the wretchedness and exploitation of entire peoples and areas of our planet , peoples who are exploited by their tyrant rulers , peoples who are exploited by economies which are , more often than not , closed and autarkic .
It is not true , therefore , that economic freedom and the opening-up of the markets are sending peoples to their ruin : in this respect , the initiative of unilateral abolishment of customs barriers is politically fundamental .
However , the globalisation of rights is also fundamental , and someone participating in the summit should make that clear not just to the States taking part but the whole world .
Abolition of the death penalty and a universal moratorium on executions throughout the world ; 60 ratifications for the International Criminal Court ; a global fight against female genital mutilation : there you are ; this is the kind of globalisation that the citizens would welcome .
Thus , the problem arises not so much of illegitimacy but of lack of rules or procedures .
It is not enough for the non-governmental organisations alone to participate and the so-called representatives of civil society ; this is a problem affecting all the citizens .
Why then should the G8 Summit not be broadcast on-line , where all the citizens could connect and see the agenda , the debates , what is being decided and who is making the decisions ?
They have a right to know what is going on .
The G8 is not an institution but it is still bound to be transparent in its work and decisions and to make them public .
Madam President , Commissioner Patten , our world leaders will be meeting in Genoa in just over two weeks ' time .
The topic of debate will be globalisation and , specifically , the fight against poverty , the environment and conflict prevention .
The streets of Genoa will once again be teeming with demonstrators .
Unfortunately , the images of the rioting and stone-throwing minority will again attract a great deal of TV and media attention .
I condemn this minority , for a stone is neither right nor left-wing , it is simply destructive .
I do support , however , the protest of the minority of peaceful campaigners who oppose a world trade system which leads to the unequal distribution of wealth .
World trade has never flourished more than it has now .
It remains therefore shocking that the 20 richest countries earn , on average , 37 times more than the 20 poorest countries .
A divide which , forty years ago , was only half that size .
Poor countries , and particularly the poor population of those countries , do not benefit from worldwide prosperity .
Nearly half of the world population has to survive on less than USD 2 a day , and one fifth of the world population lives under the internationally recognised , absolute poverty line of USD 1 per day .
In the light of this , it is , and remains , entirely unacceptable for the developing countries to be forced to open their markets to our products , while all kinds of trade barriers in the West appear to constitute an impossible hurdle for the developing countries to negotiate .
The European Union has taken an initial step with the exemplary ' Everything but arms ' initiative .
Europe must now keep the momentum going .
I would especially call on all other Western industrial superpowers , including the United States , that are now grossly neglecting their duty to follow in the footsteps of this European initiative .
Similarly , a fresh WTO round is only credible if it actually becomes a development round .
World trade with the intention of fighting poverty .
That would be a powerful incentive on the road to the fair distribution of wealth .
We need much more than that , however .
Due to a lack of political commitment , the international agreements , such as universal access to primary education and basic health care by 2015 , will not be achieved .
Even in 2001 , 130 million children never attend school and another 150 million children start primary education only to stop it before they can read and write .
The AIDS epidemic is causing an unheard of social breakdown in the developing countries .
Financial pledges in Genoa for an international fund for poverty-related illnesses are , of course , laudable and particularly newsworthy , but they remain the proverbial drop in the ocean if those same donors do not even meet the international agreements : 0.7 % of the gross national product for development aid .
That also applies to Member States such as England and Germany , but mainly to the United States which trails behind with 0.1 % .
The topic of instability within the financial world markets will also be discussed in Genoa .
In my opinion , it would be useful if the combined world leaders were to back the intention of the Belgian Presidency to study the scope of a Tobin tax on international high-speed capital .
It is precisely this form of tax levy , much maligned by , inter alia , the United States that can prevent financial crises , and the profit from this could subsequently be invested in development projects .
I shall be assessing the G8 Summit on the basis of actual political commitment to fight poverty .
That requires decisive measures , compliance with existing international agreements and the will to put global interests above the sometimes very narrowly formulated , national , economic or industrial interests .
Madam President , G8 summits looked like becoming a routine sort of affair .
That has now changed and more and more people are recognising that they are moving away from economic and financial issues and beginning to take on the role of a sort of world government .
That generates mistrust and encourages rejection .
We may bemoan the weaknesses of the UN , but it is accredited by the international community , as is UNCTAD , although UNCTAD appears to be in a state of enforced inertia .
By contrast , the G7 or G8 have devised their own mandate , acting purely on the strength of their economic clout or clout in general , in their bid to rule the world .
The neoliberal policy promoted as a result widens rather than narrows the gulf between north and south and speeds up the rate at which developing countries fall into poverty and debt .
Anyone who criminalises resistance on the part of those who oppose globalisation in general - as has already happened , not that I condone violence - is guilty of hushing things up and confusing cause and effect .
We should be looking for alternatives to neoliberal policies , not deploying riot police and cancelling agreements on tourism .
What we need is for attention to be paid to our citizens ' interests - that is what the European Union should be committing to . We should be safeguarding these interests and making sure there is no room for what is currently happening .
Madam President , in an article in an Italian newspaper today , President Prodi refers to the conclusions of the Gothenburg Summit on sustainable development as an example of directing globalisation towards objectives of world redistribution of wealth and protection of the environment .
I will focus on this last aspect .
It is true that Gothenburg incorporated the environmental dimension into the economic and social dimension .
Protecting the environment is no longer merely a moral matter but an opportunity for a new wave of innovation that will generate growth and employment .
The political importance is clear : this is a point of no return for the Member States but also for the candidate countries and third countries .
Following the announcement that the United States wishes to oppose the Kyoto Protocol , this is a genuine declaration of intent with a view to the forthcoming international events : Genoa , of course , but then , more specifically , Bonn and , after that , Johannesburg in 2002 .
However , the point is this : even when they produce such major results , the great international summits do not succeed in communicating with what are known as the Seattle movements and , above all , do not connect with that much deeper , much more widespread , silent demand for security on the lips of the citizens , the submerged base of an iceberg whose tip is represented by the raft of different types of protests .
Why ?
Why then is dialogue so difficult , not to say impossible ?
Of course , there is an element of parading before the media at these summits which is no longer tolerable .
However , I also feel that confidence in the ability of politicians to implement these types of commitments has crumbled .
There are many reasons why and we too bear some responsibility .
Even at Gothenburg , when we needed to move on from words to action it was put off to a later date .
There was no Sustainability Council , no time frame , no tangible reference to the implementation of environmentally friendly rules .
When will these things happen ?
Madam President , the economy needs to be managed differently from the way it is now ; it must not just be controlled by a few but at least be subject to democratic supervision .
Like all economic processes , globalisation is not a natural phenomenon but a worldwide process we have to contend with , taking all the factors at all levels into consideration .
For this reason , we need to influence the way globalisation is managed , working to achieve a democratic perspective , giving the people and governments back a role of supervision and management .
To this end , we will be at Genoa demonstrating peacefully against the G8 , and nobody can take away our right to demonstrate .
However , we do warn you of the serious danger represented by organised groups who will be there with the declared objective of starting fights and creating violence on the streets , and we therefore request all those who are going to take part in the demonstrations to publicly disassociate themselves unambiguously , from this moment onwards , from action by irresponsible groups , and to make a commitment as of now to isolating and neutralising the troublemakers .
Madam President , G8 summits are in fact an attempt to find global political answers to the globalisation of the markets , which is now a fact of life .
We need these political answers .
What would make me very happy , however , would be if we could take stock of the G8 summits and find out if their agreements had brought in any results .
I need only quote the very specific problem of children in armed conflicts and protection for these children to illustrate that , unfortunately , we have not made much headway at all here , despite the fact that the G8 has already passed an agreement on this subject .
Apart from the very important question of how we can help the poorest developing countries , the question of an improved world trade order as a means of improving the situation in the developing countries is also quite rightly on the agenda .
I would also like to see the G8 summit express a desire to create an international competitive order within the world trade order , and not just confined to specific regions of the world .
This is all the more important now that a summit issue which has never yet been on the agenda , is also set to become the subject of discussion and consultation , namely the gloomy prospects for growth in the world economy .
I really hope that the optimism of the Heads of Government at the summit will help to kick start the economy again because we are in dire need of sustainable growth both in the USA and in other regions of the world ; even Europe is not immune to developments in other regions of the world .
In this context I should like to call once again for the Heads of State and Government to put the subject of a new financial architecture on the agenda .
We need financial stability on the markets .
If there is no financial stability on the markets , this adversely affects the world economy and our own economies .
The Heads of State and Government also need to express a desire and call for the private sector to be involved in managing crises on the financial markets .
I really cannot stress enough that stability on the financial markets is a public asset which is most definitely in the common good .
I would like to make two brief responses to this debate .
Two points which should be obvious to all of us , as democrats concerned about issues such as global social equity , but nevertheless important to make .
First of all , most speakers in this short but interesting debate , with one unfortunate exception , have drawn a clear distinction between violence and open discussion of the serious issues which will be on the agenda at Genoa .
There is a real danger in occasionally implying that there is a moral equivalence between people who go to these conferences with a balaclava helmet in their back pocket , prepared for violence against police officers and against property they do not like , and the democratically elected leaders of the governments who are meeting in the city where the demonstrations are taking place .
Once you blur that distinction , it seems to me that you are on a very slippery slope indeed .
At Göteborg , I do not believe that a government could have made a greater effort to involve civil society in the discussion of what was happening .
We still saw those scenes of violence on the streets of that otherwise peaceful city , however .
So I think it is very important that the message from a democratically elected assembly like this is very clear : that there is no moral equivalence between violent demonstrators and those who are elected .
Secondly , I will not trouble the Chamber with a detailed exposé of my views on globalisation , but I want to make one obvious point .
While it is true that most people have done better out of globalisation this time round , with the combination of opening markets and technology . It is also the case that too many poor people in rich countries have been left behind and too many poor countries have been left behind .
Too many poor people face not the opportunities of globalisation but the challenges of globalisation ; the dark side of globalisation .
The transmittable diseases ; the drug trafficking ; the illegal trafficking in human beings ; the transnational crime ; the environmental degradation ; and the sheer grinding poverty .
The only way you can address issues , such as the decline in aid flows during the 1990s , is through multilateral efforts .
Now how you make multilateral efforts without world leaders coming together as they will in Genoa later this month beats me !
You need the democratic leaders of the world to get together to focus on these problems and then to try to give some impetus to solving them .
The problem is not that we have these summits , though I wish the media would focus rather more on what is actually discussed at them rather than what happens on the fringes .
The problem is not the holding of these summits , the problem is ensuring that the institutions which then try to follow up the summits have the maximum legitimacy and credibility with the world 's citizens .
They will only achieve that if we are more successful in making multilateral solutions stick .
Therefore , when we talk about the Kyoto Protocol at Genoa , it is very important that we are able to do so in a way which leads to action on climate change and not the collapse of what has been an extremely important effort by the international community to address a major change .
I do not understand those who say that we should not have G8 meetings .
I would have responded as well to what Mr Bertonotti had to say about the role of the churches .
As a member of the church he referred to , I have some views about the way it could contribute rather more to the debate about universal human rights as well to the debate about social equity , but since Mr Bertonotti was unfortunately not able to stay until the end of this debate , I will sit down .
The debate is closed .
Recreational craft
The next item is the report ( A5-0218 / 2001 ) by Mr Callanan , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to recreational craft .
It is interesting how , in this House we move seamlessly from global economic policy and world summits to the technical regulations of exhaust and sound level emissions from recreational craft in Europe : such is the broad sweep of politics dealt with in this place .
I believe strongly that we must always be extremely wary in Europe of over-regulation , of using ' a sledge-hammer to crack a nut ' , of introducing unnecessary , cumbersome and bureaucratic regulations .
To put this directive into perspective , recreational craft in the EU are responsible for less than half of 1 % of all exhaust emissions in the Union and if it is the case that this regulation turns out to have severe impacts on small boat owners , driving them unnecessarily off the waterways , then sadly this will merely increase disenchantment with Europe among many of our citizens .
In my own country we have a very thriving small canal boat industry to which Commissioner Patten has just referred .
As a former Member of Parliament in the West Country , he will know that industry extremely well .
It is composed of many historic craft , the potential for tourism is extremely great and we must be careful to ensure that they are not regulated out of existence .
It consists of many small enterprises and enthusiasts .
The object of this proposal is to complete the internal market and to protect the health of users and third parties in Europe : those are indeed laudable aims .
However , as I intimated , I do have a number of concerns about the way these regulations have been framed .
First of all , on the issue of retrospectivity .
In my view , retrospective laws are often extremely bad laws - they are grossly unfair to existing users and industries which have grown up under an existing regulatory framework .
Secondly , they very often act as a perverse incentive .
For instance , under the regulations being framed in this directive , if you have an old boat with an old polluting engine , it is perfectly legal provided you do not replace it with a slightly newer possibly even cleaner engine of a greater power rating .
If you do that , obviously improving the environment in the process , then you are subject to the full force of these regulations and would possibly be faced with extremely expensive compliance costs for your craft .
I cannot see that regulations framed in this way benefit anybody .
Furthermore , it is of course extremely difficult to see how they could possibly be policed in practice without having inspectors in every boatyard , every harbour , every port , every river and every canal in Europe , which we are clearly not going to do .
Can I also move on and say a couple of words about some of the amendments which have been proposed .
I will not mention all of them ( the House will be pleased to know ) .
The Socialists have tabled a proposal by Mr Lange which was passed by the Environment Committee ( No 30 ) seeking to impose an additional second table of stricter limits for boats on drinking water lakes .
I understand the raison d 'être behind that proposal , but I believe that it would prove extremely problematical .
Very difficult to implement in practice , it would be a barrier to trade and it would completely contradict the Commission 's intention to harmonise the internal market which will be further fragmented .
I hope the House will think very closely before supporting that amendment .
The proposed limits in Mr Lange 's amendments are extremely strict , particularly for two and four-stroke engines .
They are technically very difficult to implement and the prospective benefits that are produced are not very great .
I am sure that the problems presented in one or two lakes in Germany and Austria could be solved , but imposing these limits throughout the whole of Europe where they are often unnecessary will not do that .
It will result in manufacturers producing engines only for their own local markets in their own country and I would urge Parliament to reject those amendments .
Can I also say a word about Mr Lange 's other proposed Amendment No 48 on sound level measurements .
Without going into the technicalities of it , the new method that he proposes would cause many problems particularly if you had an instantaneous difficulty , particularly say wave-slap , resulting in a one-off sound level measurement which would be very difficult to repeat day after day and therefore very difficult to implement in practice .
This proposal could produce modest environmental benefits , but we must make sure that those modest environmental benefits do not come about at the expense at the loss of hundreds of jobs in many small enterprises across Europe and the pricing of many European citizens off the waterways which they have enjoyed for many hundreds of years .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , throughout the European Union recreational craft are used mainly for leisure activities and I do not think this will change in the next few years .
This leisure activity has become extremely popular over recent years .
There are now over 3.5 million motor boats in the European Union and the number is rising .
If you include sailing boats and rowing boats , there is one boat for every 70 citizens .
The use of recreational craft - and here I must disagree somewhat with our rapporteur - is not totally without its problems .
Certainly , exhaust emissions compared with overall exhaust emissions from other engines in the European Union are tiny .
We have brought about a great many improvements with cars and lorries over recent years and we should seek to achieve fundamental improvements in the recreational craft sector .
More importantly , people living on the banks of highly frequented inland waters live with the impression that the noise from motor boats is a constant source of disturbance , even at quiet times .
The point here , I think , is that we need to reduce the level of noise generated by these recreational craft .
People trying to relax at the weekend and local residents in particular sometimes have to put up with a great deal of disturbance , precisely because of the increase in the number of recreational craft .
Nor must we underestimate the noise generated when the water is displaced by boats travelling at high speed .
Implementing the directive will reduce noise and exhaust emission levels .
I too think that the derogations proposed in committee are right .
More importantly , I think the derogations for historic craft and self-build craft are justified .
Building these craft often takes a long time and is a leisure activity in itself .
We need to retain this .
However , as I have already mentioned , recreational craft are used in areas in which there are large numbers of people trying to relax , which is why it is especially important to keep on reducing noise pollution and why I think it would be wrong to allow any further derogations .
However , I think it is right that , even with the need for harmonisation , Member States should still be able to issue stricter requirements for inland waters used for drinking water supplies .
This has nothing to do with making inland waters off limits ; it is a move towards reducing costs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
I think Mr Schnellhardt has highlighted the main point .
The equipment at issue here - recreational craft and , more importantly , jet skis - is used solely for leisure activities .
In other words , it is something our society can do without .
If we are to pollute the environment not because society needs to but merely in the pursuit of leisure , then this equipment should be as clean and quiet as possible .
It is therefore right and proper that we should want to improve on one or two points in this directive .
With all due respect to our rapporteur , this is not about canal boats in Great Britain , it is not about self-build craft which are not marketed .
That is not where the problem lies and we have allowed derogations for these craft .
The main problem is with sports craft and - I repeat - jet skis in particular , which are produced in large numbers and used on sensitive inland waters , including waters used for relaxation and drinking water supplies .
In this respect , we need very strict provisions for these areas in order to transfer the technology which we have already adapted and introduced for other mobile engines - in cars and lorries - to engines for recreational craft .
This cannot be done from one day to the next .
That much is obvious .
We need a certain transitional period here , we are all pragmatists here , and we shall give manufacturers a transitional period .
We need to apply the technology , however , so that leisure activities cause the minimum possible exhaust emissions and the minimum possible noise .
Mr President , Commissioners , this is a directive which the Finnish recreational craft industry , for example , has been looking for because it believes it is important that we have uniform rules .
It is important that we take into account current developments , for example with four-stroke engines , which the Commission ' s proposal does .
I believe that the Commission ' s proposal , along with the improvements which we are adding here , will reduce emissions considerably .
It is said that exhaust gases will be cut by half .
In this way , we will be able to contribute to improvements in sensitive water environments .
As a Finn , and not necessarily as a representative of the ELDR Group , I must say , however , that I am worried about the two-tier system which the rapporteur proposes .
Otherwise , I believe that on many points he has drawn up a realistic proposal which corrects certain errors in the Commission ' s proposal and which takes into account the costs and classic boats .
I , myself , have a boat over 30 years old in my boat house which would not meet these standards ; I believe it is a classic boat .
In this respect it is a good proposal , but a division whereby different rules apply for inland waterways and seas is not good .
For example , in the country which the Commissioner responsible for and I know best , it is possible to use the same boat on inland waterways and on the sea in the same day .
When a boat is manufactured , it is not known which conditions it will be used for .
I therefore think that Amendment No 15 is unworkable , and that is also the point made by the rapporteur .
There is much to be done if we are to be able to engage with the recreational craft sector .
In this context , I would also like to have seen us dealing with septic tank requirements , as I believe that this , at least with regard to the situation in the Baltic Sea , is one of the most problematic environmental issues associated with the boat industry .
I would thank the rapporteur for a good proposal .
We have been greatly interested in the fact that the Commission has now tabled this .
It is important in order to ensure that the water environment will be improved .
However , I believe that the issues which Mr Lange addressed with regard to groundwater should be solved at their respective locations , and that is something for which we have other legal instruments .
Mr President , pleasure boats generate a great deal of noise and pollution .
In my city , Amsterdam , the dozens of boats create far more stench than the tens of thousands of cars .
I therefore welcome the fact that the European Commission , at the instigation of the Scandinavian and German boat industry , want to improve that situation .
The modest Commission proposals , however , have been watered down by a majority of the Christian-Democrats and the Liberals in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
The Group of the Greens has tabled one correction amendment .
We are counting on the Christian-Democrats and the Liberals , who care about the environment , to wake up and no longer to tag along behind the Conservative rapporteur , Mr Callanan .
If they were to continue to back him , that would be a blot on the European Parliament ' s green escutcheon .
What is worse , we in Amsterdam , as elsewhere in Europe , would continue to be faced with the noise and stench of the pleasure boats on and around the water .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank Mr Callanan and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for this comprehensive report .
It is very well timed for European citizens , who are now preparing for their holidays and may experience the problem daily .
Engine noise , air and water pollution are becoming an increasingly common irritant in recreational activities .
I recently read in the press that , in the past , no attention was paid to research and technology on noise pollution and that is the reason for the delays in development .
While exhaust emissions from recreational craft are relatively small in comparison to the total amount of pollution in the environment , the effect of pollution is amplified by the way recreational craft are used .
Noise pollution has been targeted , because motor boats are often used in areas where people go to relax .
Recreational areas free of unpleasant noise are an important but scarce national resource that should be protected .
This has led to the introduction of different emission requirements in the different Member States .
The proposed legislation therefore seeks to avoid fragmentation of the internal market and at the same time to ensure a high level of health , safety , and environmental consumer protection .
The Commission proposal is a good example of synergy between environment and industrial policies contributing to sustainable development .
Comparable legislation exists in the United States on exhaust emissions from recreational out-board engines .
The environmental protection agency is currently preparing legislation to cover recreational in-board and stern drive engines . These cases are under discussion under the auspices of the transatlantic business dialogue , in which I am also participating .
Mr Callanan and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy are to be congratulated for the amendments which aim to simplify the noise-testing procedures , produce the conformity assessment costs for SMEs and clarify requirements in the case of replacement engines .
The Commission can accept the amendments which aim to clarify and improve the wording of the initial text in relation to partly completed craft and weather conditions , as well as those concerning the simplification of the noise-testing procedures .
The amendments concerning the distinction of stern drive engines , the formulas to be used for the noise-testing procedures and clarification of the coverage of replacement engines can be accepted in principle .
While we have no problem with the general direction of the proposals , we need to analyse further the values and definitions proposed .
As regards the institutional aspects , the proposal envisages , in conformity with the rules governing comitology , a regulatory committee to deal with a number of standard issues relating to the adaptation of technical provisions to technical progress , including measures concerning the evolution of exhaust and noise emission limits .
A regulatory committee is thus essential for the efficient implementation and the regular update of a specific range of technical elements of the proposed directive .
It would be contrary to the simplifying aims of the comitology decision to initiate a formal modification procedure in the case of non-essential provisions subject to regular review .
Consequently , the amendments requiring the rescission of this provision relating to comitology cannot be accepted by the Commission , as they are contrary to its executive powers under Article 202 of Treaty .
Nevertheless , in order to meet concerns expressed by some Members of Parliament , like Mr Lange , as regards further steps in the case of emission limit values , it may be possible to arrive at an acceptable formula in the light of subsequent negotiations .
The Commission will consider the most appropriate ways to take into account the evolution of exhaust and noise emission limits .
For example , the question of possible further reductions in emission limit values could be dealt with in the report to be presented to the European Parliament and to the Council under Article 2 of the Commission proposal .
I am convinced that further work in close cooperation with the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , will lead to a balanced solution offering a clear benefit for the environment and the internal market , while minimising additional burdens to SMEs .
In conclusion , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 6 , 14 , 18 , 19 , 22 , 27 to 29 , 37 , 39 , 41 and 44 .
Furthermore , the Commission can accept in principle Amendments Nos 3 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 12 , 13 , 21 , 23 , 35 and 36 .
In addition , the Commission can accept in part Amendments Nos 10 , 43 and 45 .
On the contrary , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 9 , 11 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 20 , 24 to 26 , 30 to 34 , 38 , 40 , 42 and 46 to 50 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Aid to uprooted people in developing countries
The next item is the report ( A5-0228 / 2001 ) by Mrs Carrilho , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on measures in the field of aid to uprooted people in developing countries in Latin America and Asia .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the issue now under our consideration is one of the most tragic facing mankind at the beginning of this new century : the phenomenon of populations uprooted as a result of violent conflicts .
The text of my report contains some figures that are by themselves striking enough . Nevertheless , recent estimates show that the situation is growing worse .
In the last two years , more than five million people have been forced to leave their homes . According to current estimates , more than thirty million people are displaced , some as refugees seeking shelter in foreign countries , others forced to seek refuge in safer areas within their own countries .
The continent that has been worst affected is Africa , but the situation in Asia has also deteriorated .
We only need to look at Afghanistan and the refugee camps in Pakistan . Problems also remain in Timor , for example , although East Timor is making considerable progress in building on its independence and democracy .
With regard to Latin America , the situation in Colombia has become practically intolerable . We could mention other tragic examples , but the essence of the problem speaks for itself .
What have we done in the face of this situation ?
Since 1984 , the European Parliament has promoted the creation of a budget heading designed for refugees in Asia and Latin America . It was only in 1997 , however , that this heading was given a legal basis .
What are the substance and the grounds for such aid ?
We all know that there are budgetary headings for emergency aid , such as the ECHO programme and other forms of what we could call ' horizontal ' aid .
These aid packages only cover the first six months , however . They are an attempt to provide a period of basic survival .
The line of aid discussed in this report seeks to fill the gap that exists between emergency aid and development aid .
In fact , in many cases , once populations have passed through the initial survival phase , they still lack the organisational ability needed to obtain development aid - sometimes also because their countries themselves lack the necessary political structures .
There is broad consensus in Parliament on the importance of this aid line , and the proof of this is the 1996 adoption of the Howitt report .
Nevertheless , the 1997 regulation expired in 1999 .
What did Parliament receive more than a year later ?
A proposal for a regulation that was very similar to the previous one .
At the same time , and with regard to the past , it should also be noted that , due to the shortcomings of the Commission ' s planning , the timescale for Parliament ' s work was exceptionally tight .
It is only now that we have finished , due to the cooperation of many NGOs , and those who have worked on the process on behalf of the Commission and the Council .
Parliament not only strove to provide greater flexibility , clearer coordination and greater rigour in the assessment and implementation of aid but also fought to include greater coherence between cooperation and development policies in the regulation , bearing in mind the European Union ' s political commitments .
It is precisely in order to ensure coherence that we must make more appropriations available : we must increase them from EUR 36 million in 2001 to around EUR 55 million per year over the next three years .
We cannot claim to consider this to be sufficient , but it is important to emphasise that this is a political message which is positive and meaningful at international level and which is also an incentive for the work of the NGOs and the United Nations High Commission for Refugees .
I should also like to draw your attention to the urgent need within the European Union to address the refugee issue in a united way .
Our strategic objectives must be to prevent further occurrences of this phenomenon .
We must invest in conflict prevention and in establishing conditions that save local populations from the tragedy of major large-scale displacement .
We must give priority to cooperation and development policy throughout the European Union ' s external policy , not least as an important source of legitimacy for the common foreign and security policy .
In raising the question of Africa as one of its priorities , the Belgian Presidency is working towards this goal and we are very pleased with this development .
We therefore hope that we will have the support of the Commission and the Council , especially because this type of action gives more credibility to the common European project .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur .
As she said , this report is important because it aims to help uprooted people , in other words , refugees , displaced persons and returnees in Asia and Latin America .
Speaking on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , I would like to emphasise the need to approve this programme immediately so that we do not lose the appropriations for this year .
Parliament has always been in favour of having a separate action for uprooted people on the basis of the unique circumstances facing them , as outlined by the rapporteur .
I have some reservations about the function performed by the management committee .
My opinion includes an amendment replacing the management committee with a consultative committee in order to enable the Commission to exercise more adequately its responsibility for implementing the budget .
One of my main concerns is that the legal base for these actions expired at the end of December 2000 .
I do not know why the Commission left this new proposal so late , especially when we only had a one-year extension granted in 1999 .
I have yet to find an adequate response to that .
If we want to improve the spending on this appropriation , it is not acceptable for the Commission to submit each and every project to a committee .
It is important that the committee should concentrate more on annual work plans and look at ex-post evaluation .
Finally , in these particular lines , the Commission has not included a reference amount in the legislation .
This is wholly justifiable as the nature of the programme dictates that any attempt to anticipate future needs will prove futile .
I recommend we approve this report .
Mr President , I am a strong supporter of a programme to help the many refugees in both Asia and Latin America .
In the main , the programme is a success .
I should like to commend the rapporteur for having tackled all the most important problems and thank her for having adopted all my amendments .
One of the greatest human catastrophes of our time is taking place in Afghanistan .
I am therefore pleased to see that most resources go to uprooted people from that country .
More than 50 % of the aid at present goes to refugees from Afghanistan .
There are between 500 000 and a million displaced persons in Afghanistan , almost 2.6 million of whom live in the neighbouring countries of Iran and Pakistan .
These people are some of the most disadvantaged in the world , and that applies especially to the women .
We are all familiar with the depressing pictures of veiled , ghost-like women who are shot if they show the slightest signs of rebellion .
Nonetheless , there is a need for increased supervision of programmes such as this .
I have added that OLAF must have the opportunity of exercising supervision on the spot .
I have also asked the Commission to answer the question of whether EU aid to , for example , Afghanistan has been chanelled through an illegal money network by the name of Havela .
Havela is a closed , secretive and worldwide network which , within twenty-four hours , can transfer large amounts of money to anywhere in the world .
The transfers take place without documentation and can therefore never be traced .
The network is considered to be a dominant factor in global money laundering .
To a certain degree , the end justifies the means when we are dealing with as serious and catastrophic a situation as that in Afghanistan , but the methods used must be open and above board , and I have therefore asked the Commission if it thinks it is in order for EU aid to be used to conceal money laundering and funds from drug smuggling and the trafficking in human beings .
Mr President , I am very pleased as shadow rapporteur to commend this report to Parliament and to congratulate Mrs Carrilho on an excellent report .
Last year I was the rapporteur for this report when we extended the budget line for a few more months .
I am also pleased that the Commissioner is here this morning to reply to the debate because I want to talk to him about a big idea .
Are we not in a rather curious position ?
On the one hand we have asylum-seekers coming to Europe and seeking help , shelter and aid and , on the other , we have displaced people living in camps in countries such as Afghanistan and right throughout the world .
These are the same people and we need to make that connection : the people who come here are actually the same sort of people who are living in camps .
If we can help them to be resettled , then we are not only helping them fundamentally but we are also helping to alleviate a problem that is growing in Europe .
My big idea is nothing to do with this , however .
It is about the Montevideo Convention .
I would like to ask the Commissioner whether he could envisage a new approach ?
After the Helsinki and Harare meetings we now give aid to countries on the basis of human rights , good governance and so on .
Yet there are 59 civil conflicts around the world creating uprooted people and many of these conflicts are about looting natural resources , greed and dictators wanting to run their show their own way .
Yet we all recognise each country as an equal sovereign nation .
I find it very curious that on the one hand when we give aid , we treat people with a certain measure of circumspection , but when we recognise the national sovereignty of a country we apply the Montevideo Convention and say they are all sovereign .
When the British ran the British Empire , particularly The Raj , they had a habit of giving gun salutes to different Maharajas and Rajas depending on how they behaved .
It is time that we looked at how we recognise what we call national sovereignty and how we treat so-called independent nations .
We need to differentiate between countries and presidents and governments that are democratic and behave in a civilised way and countries that are dictatorial or brutal .
Then we can give different levels of ' gun salutes ' to the latter countries so that we do not treat everybody in the same way .
I warmly thank Mrs Carrilho , my friend and colleague .
I did this report in the last parliament .
But she has more than ably taken on and developed the work that I and Mr Deva have been involved in the past and I warmly thank and congratulate her on her work .
I have three points that I want to make .
Firstly , it is important to say to the Commission that we in Parliament , having established this budget line , have adopted some important principles that we want to see adhered to in the way that it is implemented , strengthening our commitment to non-refoulement .
There have been instances in the past where we could have been accused of complicity with forced return : it is absolutely illegal in international law and the Commission must be vigilant on that .
We want to ensure that this budget line is used creatively , including not just visible support for camps , clean water and so on , but the less visible help that is so critical in refugee situations including psycho-social support and counselling , support on reproductive health issues and indeed , support for refugees with disabilities .
I should like to associate myself with the points made by Mrs Gill on comitology where that is particularly damaging to the delivery of this budget line .
I suspect Commissioner Patten will agree with that point .
Secondly , I should like to reiterate to Commissioner Patten that the fact that the Commission brought forward no money for Latin America in their preliminary budget is bizarre particularly when 2.1 million displaced people exist in Colombia .
He is doing a lot of very good work in terms of emergency assistance there , but the safe and protected return of internally displaced people in that country is crucial and it is bizarre that they do not include that in their plans .
Finally , Commissioner Patten himself told us in Parliament when he brought forward the 12-month extension that it would not be late again ; he listened to our views and yet the situation has arisen again .
It is important that we be seen to ensure that the reform is on track , and that means these issues being dealt with much further in advance than we are now once again seeing .
I guess he is a little embarrassed by having to come at this late stage once again here today .
Mr President , from G8 to recreational craft , and from recreational craft to uprooted people .
That is what you might call a range of subjects .
There are certainly sound reasons for having such a range , without my explaining in more detail what I mean .
Until I heard Commissioner Liikanen commenting on recreational craft , I was quite convinced that it was these that would win the debate in the press .
After hearing his contribution , however , I am , in spite of everything , a little less certain of that .
He did in fact manage to talk the subject down .
In the previous debate on the G8 Summit , we of course discussed the usefulness of the global meetings .
As Commissioner Patten strongly emphasised , these are important , but it is just as important that these meetings should be followed up , and the present debate might well be said to be an example of such follow-up .
It is also an example of how - one might almost say - tediously practical the work of democracy also is and of how it is therefore difficult for democracy to compete with the more violent and spectacular global demonstrations .
Nonetheless , this work is absolutely essential .
The proposal no doubt also emphasises very clearly , however , that the only really effective method we have in this context is effective prevention , and I should like to have seen this emphasised a little more .
The proposal also shows - and I think this is a good thing - the need to involve the NGOs in the work .
Without them , success will elude us .
I shall therefore just conclude by saying that - like the previous speaker , Mr Blak - I too think it is heart-breaking to see the developments in Afghanistan .
I can clearly remember the first time I heard about them on the radio .
Developments there increasingly cause one to despair , as does the fact that the international community has so few opportunities for intervening in time .
Mr President , the Greens / EFA Group would , of course , like to congratulate the rapporteur .
I would like to say that we agree entirely with her stance and proposal in this report .
I do not intend to go into detail at all but would just like to say that we are all waiting for the Commission ' s overall proposal for Asia and Latin America to arrive soon - after the summer , if I have understood correctly .
More generally , I would like to criticise the Commission and the Council for having shown themselves to have been extremely ill-prepared for the legislative process , which has led to payment of the limited funds available for development aid being delayed for an extremely long time .
Now , many aid organisations and non-governmental organisations are desperately waiting to receive money .
This really is not the way it should be .
I would also like to remind the Commission that , at the Gothenburg summit , an undertaking was given to contribute to sustainable development on a global basis , for example , by ensuring that the UN targets for aid , amounting to 0.7 per cent of GNP , are achieved .
I would like to ask the Commission whether there are any plans regarding how this is to happen , bearing in mind that Germany is now down to 0.25 per cent of GNP and that only Sweden , Denmark and Luxembourg have achieved the target or exceeded it .
What plans are there for achieving this in practice ?
I think it is shameful that Germany is now down to around the same level as the US .
Mr President , the topicality and the importance of the matter we are now debating ; uprooted populations in the developing countries of Latin America and Asia , are clear . I wish to express my total support for the concerns of the rapporteur in general and , in particular , for rapidly reaching agreement with the Council , in order to objectively follow up specific support measures .
Nevertheless , I should like to state my disappointment at the Council ' s insistence on introducing a time limit and a tight one at that , for this regulation .
The problem of refugees and uprooted populations is a structural and global problem , which will not be resolved by means of one-off and short-term measures .
By being so unwilling to compromise on this issue , the Council is preventing us from developing a strategic approach , which , incidentally , was present in the Commission ' s initial proposal .
We can only censure the Council for this attitude .
Mr President , I should first of all like to echo the appreciation for Mrs Carrilho ' s report and also , of course , for the input from our first speaker , Mr Deva .
In fact , I completely concur with the views he has outlined .
The reason why I have taken the floor is to draw your attention to a specific situation , namely that in Indonesia , and the Moluccas , to be more precise .
I am also doing this because it appears from the reports that most of the Union ' s funding for refugees and displaced persons in Indonesia has been allocated to Timor .
Needless to say , I fully understand why that was done , given the recent tragedies there and the huge amount of work that still needs to be done there .
Meanwhile , however , the situation on the Moluccas has become far more serious .
More than 300 000 people have fled from island to island due to aggression , especially from Muslim fundamentalists of the Laskar Jihad and disloyal sections of the Indonesian army and police .
On 20 May , another nine people were killed and seventeen wounded in Belakang Soya and Karan Pajang , and even after that incident , violence simply carried on .
People from the Christian communities are also fleeing because they are forced to convert to Islam .
There have even been forced incidents of circumcision .
Similar atrocities are taking place in Irian Jaya .
I would therefore ask the Commission to use the aid for Indonesia not only for Timor , but also for the displaced and refugees on the Moluccas and in Irian Jaya .
I should welcome a reaction from the Commission to this request .
I should also like to highlight how important it is for the European Union to cooperate with the UNHCR and the NGOs .
I could not agree more with Mrs Dybkjær , for they end up doing the practical work anyway .
In this connection , I should like to know from the Commission whether the problems with the UNHCR have now been solved , that is to say whether the UNHCR is now obtaining more funding from the Commission .
For while the number of refugees and displaced persons is increasing , the budget of the UNHCR is being cut back .
That is , surely , not justifiable .
Mr President , I should like to concur with Mrs Maij-Weggen regarding the Moluccas .
I should now like to turn to the report by Mrs Carrilho .
In her report , she made a number of essential observations further to the Commission proposal .
With the criticism about a lack of coherence in European policy fresh in my memory , I consider Amendments Nos 3 and 4 to be of particular importance .
Emergency aid also forms part of that development policy and must fit within the general objectives of the European Union ' s development policy .
Organisations involved in development activities in the grey area between emergency aid and development aid sometimes threaten to fall between two stools .
I was faced with exactly that situation involving a Dutch development aid organisation .
Furthermore , there are often distressing situations among the target groups of this aid .
That is precisely why I should like to join the rapporteur in her plea for maintaining this budget line .
Mr President , I should like to invite the House to support the report by my colleague , Maria Carrilho , which aims at improving a regulation which we consider important .
Europe must do all it can to help displaced people , in this case in Latin America and Asia .
We must help those who are forced to leave their places of origin for reasons of extreme poverty , wars , various situations of repression and force , and internal conflicts in which civil power crumbles and democracy as the normal way of coexisting is scorned .
The European Union must make a political effort at an international level to encourage countries to adopt a flexible interpretation of the Geneva Conventions and also to promote new instruments of international law to protect these internal refugees .
In our capacity as donors , the European Union Member States and the European Union itself must not hesitate to use every possible means to ensure that the countries with which we cooperate guarantee the safety of their nationals and respect for their human rights .
Of course , taking on the responsibilities of the Union in the field that we are concerned with here must be matched by a consistent financial effort , which should already be reflected in the budgets for 2002 .
Alongside the immediate , urgent need for political and financial action to help the uprooted victims , however , we must not lose sight of the need to attack the very roots of the problem .
Our medium and long-term efforts must be directed at the eradication of poverty and the consolidation of the rule of law and democracy everywhere , which can foster development and social justice .
In other words , prosperity and stability so that all can live with dignity in their own lands .
This has been an interesting if short debate .
I would like to comment on a couple of the points that were raised , though I am sure we will have opportunities on other occasions to follow up the speech on sovereignty that was made by Mr Deva .
Mrs Schörling , asked what we were doing in order to oblige Member States to meet the UN target for development assistance .
Had Mrs Schörling been able to be present for the debate we had earlier today on the G8 , she would have heard how much I sympathise with the objective which she has , but it is an argument that one has to put to the governments of Members States and to their parliaments , which vote on this public spending of those governments .
I sympathise , particularly against the background of declining aid flows in the 1990s .
Mrs Maij-Weggen knows that I share her concern about the situation in Indonesia , not least the situation in the Moluccas and some of the other islands and provinces and I assure Mrs Maij-Weggen that we will be allocating EUR 3 million to the Moluccas next year and for future years , if that is required .
I would like , however , to begin the substantive part of my speech by congratulating Mrs Carrilho , for the quality of this report .
I am very well aware of the difficult work conditions and the time pressure .
The analysis , conclusions and amendments contained in her report are , in the Commission 's judgment , of the highest quality and contribute to improving significantly the original Commission proposal .
I say that without any qualification .
We share all the concerns and the recommendations contained in the honourable Member 's report .
I would also like to thank the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control for their contributions to this debate .
On 21 June , the international community celebrated the 50th anniversary of the 1951 Geneva Convention on the status of refugees .
Unfortunately , there was not much to celebrate .
Today , there are more 22 million uprooted people in the world and that figure is increasing .
Every day from Afghanistan- and I will certainly look into the points raised by Mr Blak - to Colombia , from the Balkans to the region of the Great Lakes , thousands of families are displaced by war , famine and poverty .
We know that the international community is affected by donor fatigue .
The UNHCR is struggling to find the resources to cope with these human tragedies and has recently downsized its operations .
Again , in response to the honourable lady , we are involved in discussion not only with the UNHCR , but with other UN organisations to try to put our financial relationship with them on a more sensible footing .
It is a good time to state clearly that the European Community will continue to earmark financial and human resources to help uprooted people to go back to their homes , to start a new life and live in peace and security .
Parliament has decided to send a political signal in this respect by proposing an increase in the financial resources available and we welcome this proposal .
Since 1997 , more than EUR 200 million have been committed to finance projects throughout Asia and Latin America in favour of uprooted people .
Money has been used to help refugees to live a decent in camps , to return to their home country , or to resettle in a third one and to become self-sufficient .
The budget line has financed projects to protect uprooted populations in the host countries on their way home and at their final destination .
It has helped host communities to accept and integrate uprooted families .
Most of all it has ensured the presence of the international community in the delicate transition from humanitarian aid to long-term development - a point raised by Mr Deva - by rebuilding homes and schools , ensuring access to drinking water and irrigation , improving health and education services , setting up credit facilities and restoring economic activity .
Indeed , the evaluation carried out in 2000 , though indicating a series of management weaknesses that the Commission has addressed with its reform of external aid , confirmed that the budget line is highly relevant and should be continued .
Coming to the specific amendments proposed by Parliament , the Commission agrees with all the changes proposed .
First , we appreciate the strengthening of the human rights of the regulation ; second , the clarification of the role of the regulation in the continuum of relief , rehabilitation and development ; third , the reinforcement of control monitoring and reporting functions and finally , the strengthening of peace- building and conflict management dimensions of the regulation along the lines of the recently adopted Commission communication on conflict prevention .
Concerning the duration of the regulation , the Commission originally proposed that the regulation should be valid for an indefinite period of time to avoid periodic discussion on a question which seems , sadly , unlikely to go away or change in nature in a significant way .
However , we consider that December 2004 is a very reasonable compromise , particularly in the light of our intention to revise the Asia and Latin America regulation , and will examine the possibility of incorporating the question of uprooted people into a single geographical instrument .
Finally , we take note of the desire of the Parliament to earmark , for the operations to be financed under this regulations , financial resources beyond the amount already programmed .
Once again , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the excellent job which she has done and I hope that as a result our programmes in this very important sector will be both generous and better focused and managed .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11 : 50 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )
Mr President , I move that any member should be able to use the travel office to visit groups of visitors within a radius of 25 kilometres of the European Parliament at any time .
At the moment we are only allowed to travel 20 kilometres , which equates to a 15 kilometre radius .
That is too short , given the hundreds of kilometres which many groups travel in order to come here .
Please could you take suitable action here .
Mr Meyer , we talked about this matter yesterday .
However , I would ask you to express your concern in writing for the Quaestors .
Mr President , yesterday afternoon there was a demonstration in front of Parliament .
The demonstrators used powerful public address systems , that is , loudspeakers .
This unbearably noisy spectacle hampered both me and other members in the exercise of our mandate .
Please ensure that , first , demonstrators have no cause to enter the grounds of Parliament , as happened yesterday and , secondly , that they are prohibited from using public address systems in the vicinity of the European Parliament .
So as to avoid any misunderstanding , may I point out that I am an advocate of the right to demonstrate and am delighted when groups of musicians visiting members entertain us in Parliament and the inner courtyard with their musical renditions .
We have taken note of your comment , Mr Knolle .
Mr President , we are about to undertake a series of very important roll-call votes .
Can you confirm that Mr Brienza has been registered in the voting system today ?
The competent services confirm that he has , Mr Dell 'Alba .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
VOTE
The rapporteur asked the Commission to take a position on the part of Amendment No 25 concerning Article 18 ( 2 ) of the proposal .
This part concerns Community officials seconded to the agency , and other servants recruited by the executive agency .
Mrs Schreyer stated in yesterday 's debate that the Commission could not fix the minimum percentage of Commission officials on secondment to the agency , and therefore could not accept the rapporteur 's suggested 25 % .
Sufficient Commission officials will be seconded to the agency to meet job requirements .
Mrs Schreyer , however , can confirm that other servants will be recruited on renewable contracts .
The final part of that amendment on the nature of the contracts and the obligations and criteria required is also acceptable .
I hope that this statement will allow Mr Bourlanges to support the adoption of his report so that the proposal can conclude its passage through the Council as soon as possible .
I thank him for his excellent work on this matter .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for his statement which settles an extremely important issue , giving the assurance that the staff of the agencies will not suffer from job insecurity or be of insufficient quality .
I think that is a very important point .
I take this opportunity to add that we had a very late discussion with Mr van Hulten , the representative of the Group of the Party of European Socialists and - he has authorised me to say this -- contrary to what was envisaged previously , his group could agree to support both Amendment No 13 , which was passed by the Committee on Budgets , and also parts 3 and 4 , just referred to by the Commissioner , of Amendment No 25 .
I am saying this so that there is no misunderstanding , and if I have not expressed Mr van Hulten ' s thinking correctly he can put it differently , but it will mean we have a much more united vote in this House .
Mr President , I wanted to take the floor because , today , in the relative confusion of the votes , partly due to the fact that we were voting on important issues , the European Parliament has given , given back or , to be more accurate , has agreed to give EUR 12 billion - to be exact , EUR 11.6 billion - back to the Member States because it was left over from the budget for 2000 .
Now , I consider all this to be ridiculous : we have been following this practice for years with the result that , not only are we not in control of the amount of income we receive but , in addition , we are allowing the Member States to take back all this money or to deduct it from their contributions for the year in progress .
I feel that , at a time when enlargement is pending , when we have budgetary problems and we need to be constantly seeking new resources , this system is wholly inappropriate : the Member States not only deny us those expenditure ceilings which were laid down in Edinburgh and confirmed in the Financial Perspective but they also want to take back funds which could be redirected and used to good effect , as happens in any other State budgetary system , where funds are not returned to the citizens , I regret to say , but put to another use .
Therefore , with this protest , I am explaining why we voted against the report .
Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget No 3 , submitted to us in Mrs Haug ' s report , is essentially about changes to OLAF and European Commission staff .
As regards the Anti-Fraud Office , the amendment tabled by the Committee on Budgets , in agreement with the Committee on Budgetary Control , changes the distribution between permanent posts and temporary posts in a way we find commendable and , as a whole , this Draft Supplementary and Amending Budget does not call for any special comment .
Supplementary and Amending Budget No 4 deals primarily with the balance for the financial year 2000 , and also provides for a strengthening of the supplementary payment appropriations for the Western Balkans from the 2000 balance , raising them from EUR 350 million to EUR 450 million , or EUR 70 million more for the Balkans and an additional EUR 30 million for supplementary financial assistance for FRY .
The rapporteur agrees to the ' revenue ' side of this Supplementary and Amending Budget , in other words the reimbursement , which we support , of EUR 7.5 billion arising from the 2000 surplus to the Member States .
However , the Union for Europe of the Nations Group cannot join the rapporteur in condemning the fact that the European Parliament has no say in the ' revenue ' section of the budget .
Mrs Haug ' s other report , on the situation concerning the European Union 's own resources in 2001 , also reopens the debate on increasing revenue , taking the view that the European Union should depend less and less on payments from the Member States , and that the own resources system should be changed so as to achieve financial autonomy .
The resolution therefore states that the purpose of the reform should be to provide Europe with an ' autonomous source of revenue ' , and it supports the establishment of a direct European tax , at the same time demanding full association of the European Parliament in the budgetary procedure , in particular as regards revenue .
The French delegation of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group is opposed to all these inappropriate proposals , which in any case infringe the Treaty .
( Explanation of vote shortened pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
In relation to Supplementary and Amending Budget Number 3 of this year , I would like to refer to an amendment which I tabled on behalf of my group , UEN , at the Budget Committee but which unfortunately was not accepted .
The amendment related to Budget line A-3015 which is used to finance the European Bureau of Lesser Used Languages .
I am glad to have the opportunity to explain my amendment .
Many colleagues will be aware of the excellent work carried out by the Bureau in promoting protection for lesser used and minority languages .
This becomes all the more important in the context of enlargement with the cultural and linguistic diversity in many of the applicant states .
As many colleagues will be aware , the Commission is attempting to impose conditions on the Bureau which would have the effect of closing its office in Dublin .
The Bureau was set up some years ago on an initiative of the Irish government and is still co-financed by the Irish government .
The secretariat was originally all in Dublin , though in recent years an antenna was opened in Brussels to carry out relations with the EU institutions .
I have been in contact with the Irish Minister responsible for language matters and I believe that it would be very difficult to sustain the same level of interest in the Bureau among Irish government circles , should the Bureau be forced to close its Dublin office .
Concern over this was also expressed from northern circles because the Bureau is active with regard to the language aspects of the Good Friday agreement .
I believe that the Commission is acting to subvert the will of parliament in imposing such conditions on the grant and consequently , I proposed including a direct reference to the secretariats in Dublin and Brussels in the footnote .
Once the new budgetary procedure begins next September , I will be seeking support once again for such a move .
On this occasion I simply want to draw the attention of colleagues to the machinations of the Commission which I believe could have damaging consequences .
Haug report ( A5-0238 / 2001 )
Mr President , on the subject of the use of the European Parliament 's own resources , I would like to say , both on behalf of the Pensioners ' Party which I represent and on behalf of the associated French , Dutch , Spanish , Swedish , Slovenian , Bulgarian and Lithuanian Pensioners ' Parties , who have authorised me to speak on their behalf , that I openly support the proposal that the European Union should levy its own taxes and that this should not mean an increase in taxation for the citizens but , on the contrary , a reduction in the taxes that the citizens pay in their own States .
Only in this way will the citizens see Europe in a positive light .
We have today voted against all calls to introduce a direct EU tax .
We do not think that a tax specific to the EU would be a good idea at all .
It is very doubtful whether such an EU tax would strengthen people ' s attachment to , and enthusiasm for , EU cooperation .
Any EU tax would become part of a complex interplay involving national taxes , and there would be cause to fear that it would become difficult for national governments to supervise the combined tax burden .
It is therefore impossible to guarantee that the introduction of an EU tax would not involve further burdens for tax payers .
The introduction of an EU tax also looks like a step in the direction of a more federal EU , which is something neither we nor the majority of Europeans support .
My group , like many Members of this House as well as various experts , takes the view that the EU resources budgeted in the financial perspectives for 2000-2006 are insufficient , especially in view of the enlargement of the EU and the work which needs to be done to stabilise the situation in the Balkans , solve the problems of unemployment and stabilise social systems , to name but a few .
There is therefore good cause to put the question of additional sources of revenue for the European Union on the agenda .
Mrs Haug proposes in her report to abolish the previous system of transfers from Member States and to modify the own resources system so that the European Union can achieve financial autonomy .
She calls for a European tax to be introduced as a direct revenue .
My group cannot subscribe to this approach .
The system of transferring a proportion of gross national product used in the past is based on a principle which is conducive to economic and social cohesion in the Union - the solidarity principle .
To abolish this principle is to rob the European Union of its basis and , for us , this is unacceptable .
We take a constructive view of the idea of supplementing the present system of financing the EU with further sources of revenue in the form of European taxes which do not minimise taxes in the Member States of the European Union .
Our thoughts turn in this context , for example , to the introduction of a Tobin tax to cream off profits from financial transactions or the introduction of a pan-European CO2 tax on companies , which would also help us to implement a forward-looking environmental policy by applying pressure for more environmentally-friendly ways of generating energy and helping to safeguard the Kyoto agreement .
We also take the view that the present financial regulation should be amended so that resources not called up by the Member States stay in the European budget , rather than being channelled back to the Member States .
At the same time , we need to apply stricter budgetary discipline ; for example , commitment appropriations not disbursed because they have not been called up by the recipient , should lapse after no more than 3 years , meaning that the allocation notice will need to be altered .
That is why my group rejects this report .
By multiplying free trade areas , abandoning customs duties in a system of generalised unilateral preferences , making gifts of customs duties to the 49 least advanced countries , under the pretext of welcoming everything ' except weapons ' and above all submitting to the demands of the masters of the empire , from the GATT to the WTO , the European Commission has sawn off the financial branch the European budget used to hang upon - customs duties , which represented over 55 % of Community resources in the 1960s , and only represent 14 % of them now .
In addition , with the abandonment of Community agricultural preference , the common agricultural levy on imports of agricultural products from the Commonwealth , Central America and elsewhere , which protected it , is on the way out .
It only produces about 2 % of Community resources now .
So much so that only 17 % of the European budget ' s resources now comes from customs duties and that agricultural levy .
As these two first historical resources are the only ones specifically belonging to the Community and able to make it financially independent of the Member States , their decline means the Community budget depends on payments from the Member States .
That is illustrated by the size of the GNP levy , the fourth historical resource of the European budget , which has only been in existence since 1988 .
This constantly increasing levy already provides more than 45 % of Community resources and in fact boils down to classic contributions by governments to finance an international organisation .
We have thus arrived at the astonishing situation where the European Commission , the beating heart of federal integration , has pursued a world customs policy which has reduced the Union to financing itself like any other intergovernmental organisation under entirely intergovernmental international law .
( The speaker was cut off pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
I have voted against the proposal .
Sweden ' s Christian Democrats do not support items 5 and 11 , which propose that the European Union should be given its own powers of taxation .
We do not want to increase the number of tax levels in society for our citizens .
Swedish tax payers pay tax to the municipality , the county council and the state .
Creating another level of taxation , a European one , means an inevitable increase in taxation in the long term .
This is a development which we do not want to support .
If the EU receives what the report calls ' financial autonomy ' , this will also lead to political autonomy from Member States and their governments , with all the dangers and the lack of control which this brings with it .
We do not wish to support such a development .
Costa Neves report ( A5-0241 / 2001 )
This preliminary draft budget by the Commission , which represents less than 1.06 % of the Community ' s GNP , is truly the lowest that has ever been drawn up and is , therefore , unacceptable , not least because it represents a reduction in spending , especially in the area of cooperation with least-developed third countries . Not even East Timor has escaped this downward trend in spending .
The report ' s conciliatory tone is , therefore , surprising , as is its lack of strategy and priorities . These absences are also surprising in the face of an oft-heralded enlargement , not to mention social issues , which are all but ignored .
The European Parliament needs to be more audacious and should not simply accept what it is presented with , as is happening once again .
As a matter of fact , the presentation of the fourth ( ! ) amending budget in the current year is an example of the budgetary chaos in which the Community operates and also proves us right for having tabled a motion refusing to discharge the budget last year .
In the meantime and if we are to believe the Haug report , the solution to all of these problems would be to create a Community tax !
We consider this kind of proposal to be a red herring .
Apart from issues of principle raised by such a proposal , it must be emphasised that the reduction in the Community budget is primarily a result of the restrictive guidelines laid down in the Stability Pact .
This is where the appropriate answers can be found .
Furthermore , it is a matter of priority to ensure that the participation of the Member States takes place according to their relative wealth - on the basis of their GNP - and that the contribution by the citizens is fair and balanced .
Solidarity is a fundamental issue , which must be addressed together with the Community budgetary revenues .
Niebler report ( A5-0232 / 2001 )
Mr President , it is the year 2005 .
One pensioner asks another : " What sort of things do you watch on television ? "
" I watch dance shows , entertainment shows and programmes with beautiful girls in " .
" You 've got it all wrong , " replied the other . " I don 't have time to watch that sort of thing .
Every evening , I watch Fatuzzo 's European Show .
It is a show presented by Mr Fatuzzo , an expert on pensions , who talks to pensioners about how to increase the size of their pensions .
I advise you to watch Fatuzzo 's European Show too . "
This has all been made possible by Mr Niebler 's report , which allocates radio spectra which , I hope , will be used to broadcast informative material for all the citizens , especially pensioners .
McKenna report ( A5-0219 / 2001 )
Mr President , we have just adopted the report by my colleague , Patricia McKenna , and I must certainly recognise that it has turned out to be a good document , covering in detail all the circumstances and problems affecting our coastal areas , both on the geographical , climatic , environmental and biodiversity side and as regards their economic , social , cultural , and leisure and recreational aspects .
I just wish there were a clearer and more committed reference to tourist developments and especially the numerous illegal buildings that have been put up in a speculative manner along many parts of the coast in Spain - and other countries too . They are clearly an assault on proper town planning and a threat to the environmental balance .
I believe the governments involved should act firmly and put a stop to the consequences of their lack of control over these illegal building projects .
Lastly , I must express my dissatisfaction that my proposal was not accepted to give this document , which we have just adopted as a simple recommendation , the rank of a Community directive , which would make it mandatory for the Member States to comply with it and make it part of their own national law .
Mr President , as a representative of the Pensioners ' Party I welcome this European Parliament proposal .
I welcome this proposal not just as a representative of the Pensioners ' Party but also as a native of Genoa , a person born in Genoa .
In Italy , in Genoa and all along the Ligurian coast , unfortunately , when it rains rather more than usual , all the street level houses , flats , shops and bars are flooded .
I hope and pray that this will be the beginning of a European policy for coastal areas which is genuinely effective and benefits the European citizens who live on the European coasts .
This report makes a critical analysis of the proposal for a recommendation on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council recommendation concerning the implementation of Integrated Coastal Zone Management in Europe and tables various amendments which , for the most part , deserve our support .
They deserve our support for highlighting the importance of our coastal areas , the causes of degradation and destruction that we are now seeing in various areas and the new dangers resulting from global warming and climate change , which pose perhaps the greatest threat to Europe ' s coastal areas .
Nevertheless , it must also be emphasised that the decline in fishing and in related industries , which are fundamental factors for socio-economic cohesion in many of these areas that depend on fishing , are making them highly vulnerable .
Therefore , although the report is , as the rapporteur states , a first , crucial step in protecting Europe ' s coastal areas , the Member States must also be committed to achieving this and to ensuring a degree of coordination between the various instruments to be used .
Nevertheless , we have some reservations about the measures described by the rapporteur , specifically those concerning a binding common strategy , since the Member States ' role and capacity for action in this entire process are far from clear .
There is little difference in height between shallow areas of the sea along the coasts , the so-called continental shelf , and low-lying coastal areas .
Many of those areas have over the years turned from land into sea or from sea into land , with or without specific human intervention .
Thanks to the US President , Mr Bush , and the large oil concerns , these land areas threaten to be turned into sea once again , for as long as artificial global warming persists , the ice caps will continue to melt and sea levels will continue to rise .
It is precisely in those low-lying coastal areas that a large proportion of the world population is concentrated and key economic centres located .
Not only do eight million Dutch people and two million Flemings stand to lose their residential areas , but so do the people living in the Po plain in Italy , Les Landes in south-western France , and parts of cities including Helsinki , Copenhagen , London , Hamburg , Barcelona , Lisbon and Thessaloniki .
In addition to population pockets , coastal areas also boast areas of special natural beauty , such as the étangs on the French coast and the Wadden Sea in the Netherlands , Germany and Denmark , which is under continuous threat of being encroached upon by ports and industrial areas .
I share the opinion of Mrs McKenna entirely that coastal areas require far better protection than the European Commission proposes .
The social fabric of many coastal zones has been altered over recent years by the restructuring of the fisheries and traditional agriculture sectors .
Although certain regions have been faced with an exodus of their endogenous population , most of the coastal zones are experiencing an increase in overall demographic pressure , as well as significant seasonal variations in employment , essentially linked to tourism .
Major works required for urbanisation and development can threaten the coastal environment if carried out without sufficient knowledge of the coastal dynamic , by accelerating the erosion of the seashore .
Furthermore , pollution of marine or terrestrial origin is increasingly contaminating soil and drinking water resources .
The coastal territories are the focus of constant antagonism and conflict .
Lack of integrated management of maritime and terrestrial resources causes serious tension between the various sectors of activity , namely fisheries , agriculture and services , with the consequence that the sustainable development of the coastal areas is put on hold .
The strategy proposed by the Commission is an interesting approach intended to resolve the fundamental problems facing the coast : lack of information , insufficient participation by the population in projects , weak coordination between the various planning authorities and absence of real partnership which involves the economic sectors concerned , the regional and local authorities and the interregional organisations , in decision-making .
However , it is essential for the strategy for coastal zones to constitute one of the first examples of implementation of the guidelines developed under the European Spatial Development Perspective , because the principles set out in it are obviously valuable for the Union ' s coastal zones .
This could even be an excellent occasion to restore vigour to a particularly inert ESDP , whose true impact still remains very limited .
Finally , I would like to express my agreement with those who regret that the Commission ' s proposal does not take account of climate change , when that appears to have an influence on rising sea levels and increasing storm frequency , contributing decisively to risks of flooding , coastal erosion and loss of seashore .
Although we are only now beginning to recognise the new challenges that will face the coastal regions in the decades to come , the integrated coastal zone management strategy cannot decently ignore them .
Callanan report ( A5-0218 / 2001 )
Mr President , a few days ago , I was on holiday by the sea , sunbathing on a yacht .
I was not alone : amongst my companions was a beautiful , tanned , very nice , attractive girl who was sunbathing on the deck .
She was called Marilyn .
At one point , she said to me : " But you are an MEP !
Can you tell me , then , why yachts and pleasure craft do not fly the European flag as well as the national flag ? "
I could only reassure her that I was going to vote for this measure and recommend that it be laid down that pleasure craft must fly the European flag too .
Brok report ( A5-0244 / 2001 )
I should like to use the opportunity provided by the resolution on macro-financial assistance to Yugoslavia to express my support for the assistance measures , even though they are minimal in comparison with the destruction wreaked in Yugoslavia by the NATO attacks .
At the same time , however , I wish to express my categorical condemnation of the manner in which assistance from donors has been used to circumvent and disregard constitutional procedures in Yugoslavia in order to bring Milosevic to the Hague tribunal .
It is financial blackmail and it offends every aspect of international law .
Of course Milosevic bears a huge responsibility for the crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia and he must be brought to justice , but to link financial assistance with anti-constitutional action within the interior of the country in receipt of the assistance , without the knowledge of its democratically elected president , perverts and undermines the very nature of the European Union 's aid programmes .
We are obviously in favour of the assistance to the reconstruction and development of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
This report , however , totally conceals the destruction caused by the NATO bombing of FRY .
Worse still , in an astonishing and utterly cynical reversal of perspective , the French version of the justification refers to the deterioration in the Yugoslav economy due to the ' war against NATO in 1999 ' .
We cannot support a policy which uses financial assistance to force the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to behave like a banana republic politically and economically , while helping neither Serbian awareness of the crimes committed , notably by Milosevic , in the name of the Serbian people , nor the emergence of a state of law , nor indeed the credibility of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia as a judicial authority independent of the political powers , nor yet the reconstruction of the country with a minimum of social cohesion and peaceful relations between neighbouring peoples .
For all these reasons we have abstained .
The fact that I agree that we are making funds available for Yugoslavia does not in the least mean that I condone predictable attempts to draft that country into NATO , to subject its economy to foreign interests and to subordinate the rights of Montenegrins and Kosovars to relations with the Serbian government , which appears surprisingly cooperative .
Yugoslavia , impoverished and razed to the ground , requires a great deal of funding , and the former President deserves to be punished for suppression , war and undemocratic government .
Following a judicial procedure at home , an international trial was therefore inevitable .
What is happening now bears little relation to justice , and more to the trading of a political rival by the President of a federal state , in contravention of the federal government and the Supreme Court .
Only when last Thursday , Mr Milosevic was brought to The Hague , did a huge amount of money become available on Friday .
Evidently , one has to lose a war and governing power , and bankrupt one ' s own economy , to be condemned a war criminal .
It is never the winners who are condemned , only the losers .
Funding is desperately needed to pay for the damages incurred in war in 1999 , but now , it mainly appears to be a means to reward agreeable leaders and punish others .
I fear that the ignorance and nationalism of many of the people involved will only grow .
Resolution ( B5-0480 / 2001 ) on the COM in fruit and vegetables
Even though this resolution is a generalisation , we agree with it in principle and shall vote in favour of it because it expresses the view that support for locust beans and nuts , which come under fruit and vegetables , should be reinforced .
However , we must register our disagreement with the items at which the resolution becomes more specific .
The first point on which we disagree concerns producer organisations , which we oppose because they undermine cooperatives .
Even where cooperatives are converted into producer organisations , numerous problems arise because cooperatives in Greece are multisectoral , as are farmers , while producer organisations deal with one specific product .
As a result , several producer organisations end up working within the same cooperative and , if they work properly , that is , in accordance with the relevant regulation then , in practice , the cooperative is fragmented into as many parts as there are products handled by it .
The problem could have been resolved if Member States had been given the right to recognise these farmers ' organisations and if the regulations had referred to cooperatives and producer organisations as being equivalent .
This is not the case , however , and the European Union only recognises producer organisations with an anti-democratic legislative framework as producer groups .
The second point concerns the emphasis in the resolution on the operational programmes of producer organisations .
We do not disagree with these programmes , we just consider them to be of secondary or tertiary importance .
When we talk of more efficient support for products , we mean better intervention prices , more subsidies and protection from mass imports .
The operational programme limiting environmental pollution is good but it alone will not improve income support for farmers .
Wuori report ( A5-0193 / 2001 )
Mr President , I have no intention of joining the regulars who give an explanation of vote ; yesterday my timetable simply overran , and , unfortunately , I was too late for the deliberation on Mr Wuori ' s report .
The importance of that report is only highlighted by the fact that the EU human rights policy is clearly now at the development stage .
It is based on an unshakeable view of human worth , because without human worth there are no human rights either .
It is important that the EU ' s internal problems are reported at least as effectively and transparently as those of non-member countries .
As , eighteen months ago , I raised the issue of police violence as being a human rights problem within the EU , I cannot now help but raise it once again , alongside the matter of freedom of speech that the committee regards as the main point of focus .
There is every reason to analyse the reports of violence that occurred when the Gothenburg Summit was taking place just as seriously as the events themselves .
It was with an equal feeling of sorrow that I read not only about the injuries but also the fairly uncritical attitude of the journalists as they reported the events .
It is difficult to defend freedom of speech of the people and the press in a credible way if this freedom is increasingly being used irresponsibly .
If the EU is to be a globally important human rights player , its citizens will also serve as important models for the administrations of other countries of what the implementation of freedoms might mean in practice .
Mr President , I naturally support the Wuori report on human rights in the European Union but I feel - I am convinced - that the European Union needs to do much more .
We often discuss human rights throughout the world in this hemicycle in Strasbourg , but we , the European Union , continue to provide economic aid in the form of funding to countries in which there is no respect for human rights .
I call upon Parliament and our institutions not to give another euro to countries which do not respect human rights in the world .
It can never be repeated often enough that the European Union must actively promote human rights and democracy in all its activities throughout the world .
Respect for human rights must be a priority in all EU activities , including conflict prevention .
Indeed we must ' export ' , as the saying goes , our common values like liberty , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , and the rule of law - the EU ' s founding principles .
However , it is essential to respect national sovereignty and not lapse into interference .
The European institutions must put their heads together and come up with more effective methods .
The rapporteur is proposing that the Council and the Commission elaborate more focused common strategies on human rights .
The EU Presidency is invited to ensure that the working programmes systematically include sections on well-defined policies and actions aimed at promoting human rights and democracy .
Specific annual priorities should be established , matched with measures for implementation .
These strategies must be subject to annual review and ensure consistency between the various Community policies involved .
I think it is important for the European Parliament to improve its own structures for dealing with human rights issues .
I welcome the suggestion to appoint a special representative , possibly a vice-chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
This person would deal with all human rights issues and would also ensure that individual cases of violation of human rights are followed up .
( Explanation of vote shortened pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
The European Union is poorly placed to give lessons on human rights .
Amongst others , it invokes the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , but it does not respect them .
What has it done to put an end to the scandalous haemorrhage that repayment of debt represents for the countries of the south ?
The Member States do not pay the WHO the money it needs to combat AIDS or tuberculosis , because the Maastricht criteria require reductions in public deficits .
' A more consistent crisis prevention policy ' presupposes removing the oil multinationals from positions where they can do damage , like Total Fina Elf , whose war-mongering role in southern Sudan and Congo is increasingly apparent .
Furthermore , the European Union must respect the right of asylum and the 1951 Convention by getting rid of waiting areas and detention centres , and not by ' stricter visa requirements ' as the report recommends . That is urgent .
Nor is it enough to ' regret ' that the Roma are victims of serious discrimination .
They must be granted asylum and collective expulsions , carried out , for example and in particular , by Belgium , must be condemned .
The right to asylum can only be respected and human traffic effectively combated through freedom of movement and a policy to regularise the position of all those without papers .
As for freedom of the press and the battle against excessive media concentration , a populist predator in charge of Italy provides an instructive image of liberal Europe ' s doublespeak .
I voted in favour of the Wuori report on European Union human rights policy .
I welcome the call for a better EU human rights strategy towards third countries and candidate countries .
Economic questions take centre stage during accession negotiations , while human rights issues are granted nowhere near the same importance .
I voted against the rapporteur 's Amendment No 10 because it deletes the passage calling for the Turkish government to guarantee the return of more than 3 million refugees .
I have visited a number of refugee camps in south-east Turkey and seen the human misery for myself .
Even human rights reports should not ignore refugees .
I should also like to add , à propos the Wuori report , that there are not just Christian minorities in Turkey , as stated in Article 90 , there are also the Yezidi , a religious community which is not recognised .
On official documents such as birth certificates , instead of Yezidi , a cross is entered or they are left blank as a sign of non-recognition .
Everyone has the right to worship freely and I therefore call for all religious communities in Turkey to be recognised .
British Conservatives are strong supporters of genuine human rights and , accordingly , have voted in overall support of the Wuori resolution .
However , there are a number of elements in the resolution with which many of us disagree , such as : the redefinition of human rights ( paragraphs 50 , 51 and 72 ) ; the unbalanced condemnations of Turkey ( paragraphs 88 and 89 ) ; the misunderstanding of the nature and status of caste in India ( paragraph 106 etc . ) ; the call for legally-binding criteria for arms exports ( paragraph 113 ) .
Cornillet report ( A5-0223 / 2001 )
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Cornillet , even though he is absent because , in his report , he has presented us with rich and varied information on the state of human rights in the European Union and has sent the governments and nations of Europe a clear message saying that the European Union insists on being an area of freedom , justice and social cohesion in which the Charter of Fundamental Rights is respected .
However , my group , the Greek MEPs in the European People 's Party , and I personally have a number of objections to the final text , which is why we each went our own way , some voting against and others , like myself , abstaining .
These objections have to do with relations with political and electoral rights , with immigrants and with the fact that we believe that political will comes first , with the European institutions adopting , drawing up and applying a common immigration policy and the Member States endeavouring to create the conditions needed for immigrants to integrate into society , wherever they may come from .
Electoral and political rights may be a natural and historic development , but we need a period of consultation and understanding with the citizens , we need dialogue before we can reach a creditable solution .
Another point to which we object is the official recognition of homosexual marriage because we believe that this does not only have to do with sexual freedom , it also has to do with the institution of the family and this touches on sensitive issues for European citizens which are protected in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .



Mr President , I voted against the Cornillet report on citizens ' rights in Europe because I feel that the rights of elderly people are not respected in Europe , at least in many of the 15 States of the European Union .
The rights of the elderly are not respected when we become ill , completely incapacitated and lose our self-sufficiency : if we are lucky we are cared for by our families at home but , if not , we have to go into care homes which do what they can but , in any case , we have to pay for the care out of our own pockets with our own savings , if we have enough , and that is after we have given our work and paid taxes and contributions to the State all our lives .
Europe must take effective , practical action to uphold the rights of the most incapacitated elderly people too .
Mr President , I have taken the floor to express my satisfaction at the historic decision by which the European Parliament has adopted two extremely important amendments which confirm a principle of freedom , calling upon the Italian government and parliament to abolish the thirteenth provision of the Italian Constitution on the exile of the male descendants of the House of Savoy .
I would like to express my personal delight and satisfaction as a native of Piedmont too : this is an important , well-founded decision , for we are dealing with the last case of members of a royal family being forced to remain in exile and it is 50 years since the measure was adopted .
Their history , from Emanuele Filiberto to Mafalda of Savoy , is an integral part of the history of Europe ; this rule abolition we are calling for , is in conflict with the fundamental values of freedom shared by all the countries of the European Union and affects European citizens of which one , the younger , was not even born when the thirteenth provision was adopted .
Since we are talking about human rights , I shall raise once again the violations of the rights of intellectuals of all specialisms who dare to express independent opinions on history , leading them , for example , to re-examine certain aspects of the Second World War and the tragedy of the concentration camps .
A tragedy which , unfortunately , is currently exploited relentlessly on a daily basis to profit political or financial interests which have little to do with the memory of the victims .
In fact , at the present time , there are thousands of historians , sociologists , researchers , academics or just plain citizens being persecuted in Europe when their only crime is wanting to make a free examination of the dogmas - changing dogmas moreover - that the official authors impose .
As I did in 1999 , I shall give just one example , taken from our rapporteur ' s own region of Rhône-Alpes .
A penniless young historian , a person I did not know , Mr Plantin , was condemned just for the crime of mentioning , in a bibliography in the scholarly review he edits , works that correct historical errors to which no serious historian now adheres .
He was arrested .
His personal computer was confiscated .
Each of the usual funded associations suing him obtained heavy damages against him and his printer , a rural craftsman .
The magistrates of the Lyon Court of Appeal , Dominique Fournier , Jean-Luc Gouverneur and Marie-Odile Théolleyre , also banned publication of the review with a ruling worthy of Stalin ' s court .
The counsellors at the Court of Cassation , Bruno Cotte , Christine Chanet and Guy Joly , failed in their duty by not censuring the manifestly abusive use in the case of a law on publications intended for young people .
What is more , under pressure and quite unlawfully , Professors Régis Ladous and Claude Prudhomme made themselves look ridiculous and odious by revoking , eleven years on , Mr Plantin ' s master ' s degree which they had marked ' Very Good ' in full knowledge of the facts .
All this is going on in the twenty-first century , in France and in other European countries !
Such persecution obviously only strengthens the doubt surrounding the official dogmas .
It is unworthy and intolerable .
It must end as soon as possible .
I am very satisfied that the amendments connected with the recognition of relationships between people of the same sex were added to Mr Cornillet ' s otherwise excellent report .
Regarding some other questions , I would like the report to have had more far-reaching views in the area of , for example , the adoption rights of gay and lesbian couples .
Human rights problems that affect sexual minorities are still regrettably common today in the Member States .
I think the references to legislation in applicant countries and to the fact that the equal treatment of citizens with regard to different relationships and family models should be taken into consideration in enlargement negotiations are important .
Some of the Cornillet report ' s recommendations are undeniably positive .
We support extending voting rights to residents from non-Community countries , deletion of the Aznar Protocol - a veritable denial of the right of asylum , non-restrictive recognition of refugee status extending , for example to all the persecuted Algerians , measures against the discrimination suffered by the Roma , and recognition of the rights of homosexuals .
All the same , the good intentions sometimes stop halfway : detention centres and waiting areas are actually prisons in all but name , where living conditions are inhuman .
Limiting detention to ' exceptional cases ' or ' a maximum period ' are inadequate recommendations which maintain the criminalisation of asylum seekers and people without papers .
Article 32 proposes to ' humanise ' detention for minors , but they should not have to suffer that degradation at all .
There must be standardised rules across Europe to allow victims of the traffic in human beings and domestic slavery to escape their persecutors .
Long-term residence permits would be much more effective against the exploiters than ' temporary residence permits ... for the duration of the inquiry and the judicial procedure ' .
If the recitals and amendments on the right to vote and the rights of homosexuals are maintained , we will vote in favour of this report .
Otherwise we will abstain .
I abstained on the situation as regards fundamental rights in the European Union because certain forces in this House have again exploited this report to give credence to the argument that a Member State would not be respecting fundamental rights in the European Union if it did not amend its legislation to permit homosexual marriages and grant homosexual couples the same rights as married heterosexual couples .
That is going too far .
There should be provision for unmarried heterosexual couples and homosexual couples to settle certain difficulties connected with their position , for instance by concluding an agreement .
However , there can be no question of granting them the rights of a surviving spouse in terms of social security , or , for example , the same rights as a married couple , with or without children , in terms of taxation and adoption .
Unmarried couples can separate far more easily and cheaply , while divorce proceedings are always complicated , expensive and painful .
A regulation like that advocated in the report would end up discriminating against married heterosexual couples .
That cannot be allowed to happen .
In a chapter on European citizenship , there is an attempt to get it accepted that a Member State is violating fundamental rights if it does not grant the right to vote and to stand for the European Parliament and local elections to nationals of third countries legally resident in their territory for at least three years .
The right to vote is acquired on the basis of reciprocity by citizens of Member States of the Union living in another Member State .
The Portuguese can vote and stand for election in Luxembourg and I could do the same if I lived in Portugal .
However , why grant an Algerian , for example , the right to vote in a Member State if a national of that Member State does not have the right to vote in Algeria ?
I cannot agree with these demands , quite apart from the fact that we are talking about areas of civil and political rights that come under national sovereignty .
Each Member State is free to grant such rights to nationals of third countries and offer such solutions to its residents .
There can be no question of this Parliament condemning Member States which decide not to do so .
As a Swedish Christian Democrat , I have voted against the items ( 78 and 82-84 ) which seek to control Member States ' legislation in the area of family policy .
This is a national issue , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , which has no place in a report on human rights in Europe .
I have also voted against items 119 and 120 on giving people without citizenship in a Member State of the EU the right to vote in European Parliament elections .
Responsibility and duties must be linked to rights and eligibility .
This should be an obvious principle and fact of life .
Wuori report ( A5-0193 / 2001 ) and Cornillet report ( A5-0223 / 2001 )
Two reports , one on human rights in the world ( the Wuori report ) and one on fundamental rights in the European Union ( the Cornillet report ) , were debated by the House today .
These are two provocative texts , both in what they say ( mainly in the Wuori report ) and in what they fail to say ( mainly in the Cornillet report ) .
The Wuori report supports the imperialist aspect of the European Union right from the outset saying , just so there can be no doubt , that " the principle of national sovereignty should not deny the ÅU the right to seek to exert influence - and possibly to intervene - with a view to halting gross and systematic violations of human rights " .
The peoples of the Balkans and of other regions in the world have paid and are still paying dearly for this ' welcome ' mission by the ÅU .
Thousands dead , even more poisoned by depleted uranium bombs , the FYROM hostage to ' invincible ' Albanian extremists and protectorates across which European monopolies and their political backers are scattered .
The disgraceful manner in which former President Milosevic was recently abducted , in direct defiance both of the constitutional jurisdiction of his country and its president , and handed over to the opportunistic International Criminal Tribunal in the Hague are eloquent examples of how the EU thinks human rights should be defended .
However , the report goes further still , calling for new international criminal tribunals to be set up on Chechnya , East Timor and Iraq .
The ' rapid-reaction mechanism ' for conflict prevention , that is , the euro-army , is seen as a basic tool within the framework of EU strategy and ' smart sanctions ' rather than ' blind sanctions ' are advocated .
Without making any reference to the criminal consequences for the people of Iraq of the embargo to which the EU made a decisive contribution , it proposes in an excess of indifference that embargoes be imposed on other countries , using existing offences against human dignity as a pretext .
Despite busying itself with absolutely everything , the report does not conceal its preferences or selectiveness .
For example , although it is directly critical of the Socialist government of Cuba for repressing ' free ' journalism , it is particularly polite and cautious in the case of Turkey and Ukraine , even though it is a well-known fact that dozens of journalists are in prison in Turkey and that a journalist was murdered during the last round of elections in Ukraine .
Finally , the report 's extended reference to Turkey does not contain a single word on the continuing hunger strike in Turkish jails or on the victims of Turkey 's intransigence .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 2.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent subjects of major importance
The next item is the debate on topical , urgent and important questions .
Death penalty in the world
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0486 / 2001 by Mr Méndez de Vigo and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ;
B5-0497 / 2001 by Mr van den Berg and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ;
B5-0504 / 2001 by Mrs Malmström and Mr Rutelli , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party ;
B5-0484 / 2001 by Mrs Frassoni and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ;
B5-0512 / 2001 by Mr Manisco and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ;
B5-0527 / 2001 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the Technical Group of Independent Members
on the death penalty in the world and on the introduction of a ' European Day against Capital Punishment ' .
Mr President , it would appear that , considering that there are very few subjects on which the entire European Union is united and the abolition of the death penalty is one of them , we must , first and foremost , welcome and take pride in the initiative taken by Parliament and the Council of Europe together to hold the Congress on the death penalty , which took place on 22 June .
Secondly , we must make it clear that it is time to move on to the next stage , which is to prepare for the General Assembly of the United Nations and the possibility of adopting a resolution on a moratorium on executions .
I feel that this must be our task in the coming months and I hope that the Belgian Presidency will live up to the commitment it made yesterday before this House and support us .
Mr President , Mrs Frassoni is right when she says that today we are united on this matter , but twenty years ago we certainly were not .
We have therefore made progress .
Today the European Union is united against the death penalty , and this is reflected in the European Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights in Article 2 , where it mentions the right to life .
I recall that , when we were discussing this Charter , many in the Convention used to say to us : ' It is inconsistent to say that this Charter is directed to the institutions of the Union , ' and you , Mr President , will no doubt remember this , ' and at the same time demand the abolition of the death penalty , when the European Union cannot condemn anybody to death . '
It is true : there was an inconsistency there .
We accepted it , however , because we believed that the Charter had to embody the values and principles that underpin the construction of Europe .
I must also tell you that recently , Mr President , when I was on a flight here , I was reading the news that the Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs had said that the Constitution of that country would have to be rewritten because , in order to join the European Union , it was necessary to abolish the death penalty , as laid down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I remembered the title of that Oscar-winning film , ' Life is Beautiful ' , and realised that our work does occasionally bear fruit .
Therefore , Mr President , I believe not only that we Europeans should proclaim our desire that the death penalty should be abolished , but that we have a right and a duty to interfere in the affairs of other countries so that they do the same .
For that reason , complying with a resolution of a conference held two weeks ago in Strasbourg , we have asked in this resolution - which I am sure will gain the unanimous support of this House - for a special day against the death penalty to be set up : a European day , which I hope will soon be a world day , since I believe there is room for hope .
My good friend , Mrs Ana Palacio , who reads everything that is published , has today given me the editorial from the Herald Tribune , in which a Supreme Court judge , Mrs O ' Connor , who has always been in favour of the death penalty , is today saying the opposite .
Mr President , I believe that , if intelligent people change their minds , we shall be able to win this battle throughout the world .
Mr President , the death penalty is unethical because it is wrong to take someone else ' s life .
Too often , innocent people are given the death penalty . The penalty is irrevocable , and a subsequent appeal , even if fresh evidence is submitted , is no longer possible .
The death penalty is downgrading and is in contravention of the universal principle of justice .
Joaquín José Martínez was recently acquitted in the United States . He came to visit us here in Parliament after he had been in prison for quite a few years .
It became apparent that in his case , everything that could have gone wrong , did go wrong .
According to Amnesty International , at least 1 475 prisoners were executed and more than 3 000 death penalties given in 2000 .
China , Iran , Saudi-Arabia and the United States account for approximately 88 % of those .
The first world congress against the death penalty took place here in Strasbourg between 21 and 23 June : 87 countries in the world uphold the death penalty , to which the under-aged and also mentally handicapped people often fall victim .
We very much regret the fact that countries which often boast a very high standard in terms of human rights still elect to use this penalty , and execute - what often later appears - innocent people , while it is often clear from statistics - this is especially pronounced in the US - that social and racial aspects play a major role .
We are also extremely concerned about the fact that the organs of those involved are subsequently offered for sale .
I agree with Mr Méndez de Vigo that a European day against the death penalty would be extremely useful .
Allow me to draw your attention to point 4 of the resolution which states that we urge the Belgian Presidency now to try to organise another vote in the sitting of the General Assembly of the United Nations in September on a resolution to abolish the death penalty .
We hope that the Presidency , on behalf of all EU countries , will be able to count on sufficient support so that this time the resolution can be adopted .
Mr President , Commissioner , no one is unaware of the loathing felt in this house for the death penalty , wherever it may occur .
The European Parliament is continuing its long and dedicated battle against this barbaric punishment , and we know that we have a good ally in Commissioner Patten .
Commissioner , we really appreciate your work in this area .
Our joint fight has resulted in one applicant country after another abolishing the death penalty .
This requirement is irrevocable for membership of the European Community .
It is high time that Turkey also abolished the death penalty - without delay .
It can sometimes feel hopeless fighting against the death penalty when the world is the way it is .
Mr Van den Berg has just mentioned figures showing the worldwide situation .
It is important to note that 90 per cent of all executions occur in only four countries .
The worst by far is China with over 1 000 executions this year alone .
It is also deeply tragic to have to place the US on the same list as the dictatorships .
Over and over again , we have appealed to the American leaders to introduce a moratorium on the death penalty and to stop sentencing teenagers and the mentally disabled to death .
Just the suspicion that one single person has been falsely executed - and we know this has happened in the US - should be sufficient reason to abolish the death penalty .
However , there is some light at the end of the tunnel .
It is encouraging that there is a certain , albeit slow , shift in opinion in the US .
It is also the case that , during the 1990s , 30 countries abolished the death penalty .
Here in Strasbourg , a successful conference was held two weeks ago .
Both the EU and the European Council will continue to fight tirelessly .
In order to further strengthen the fight against the death penalty and to ensure that this issue is always on the agenda , a year ago in this House my colleague Mr Rutelli proposed a European day against the death penalty .
We could hold this every year until the death penalty is abolished everywhere .
It is encouraging that this is also the view of this House , and I hope that the Council and the Commission can work with the European Parliament to bring about such a day .
Mr President , I am going to be very brief .
In the last five years , I have had the impression that whenever we place this dramatic issue , this routine horror of the death penalty on the agenda , the House has been a kind of debating society .
Everybody expresses their condemnation and their righteous indignation , but when the moment comes to decide what to do about the indifference , the apathy and the determination of some countries to insist on these barbaric institutions , the mood changes because obviously money talks .
Mercantile relations are very important for everybody , and while it is good to denounce the sin , we need to identify the sinners .
That is why in this resolution that we are going to pass , I would like very much to add the names of the sinners .
First of all , the People 's Republic of China .
We have read yesterday and today what happened with the so-called ' suicide ' of 15 women in a concentration camp .
We passed resolutions in this House two years ago about the trade in human organs transplanted from executed people .
Now we have to start thinking about , for instance , not voting enthusiastically for giving the Olympic Games to the People 's Republic of China without reservation .
The same applies to the United States of America .
That is why I am tabling two amendments to our resolution .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me make one comment first of all .
Our resolution mentions 87 countries which still have the death penalty .
I do not think that figure - which is provided by Amnesty International - is accurate .
There are actually 71 countries which continue to apply the death penalty , and I think the difference is important given that there are 180 countries in the international community and that means the majority of abolitionist countries is much bigger than Amnesty International ' s figures suggest .
Furthermore , I do not think we need to regard Amnesty International either as a bible for a whole series of issues , or indeed as a representative of civil society , which is not at all the case .
It is an association which does a certain job and which , in my opinion , also deserves a critical look from us from time to time , if not more frequently .
Secondly - as Monica Frassoni said , along with Mr van den Berg and Mr Manisco - I think the problem is to come to the United Nations Assembly General with a resolution on the moratorium .
The problem is not to abolish death . I think there are sometimes temptations in that direction .
Our problem is to abolish the death penalty because we believe there is a way to render justice without recourse to it .
The problem therefore consists of obtaining a moratorium , an entirely secular initiative , designed to lead other governments to consider the arguments against the death penalty and conclude , in a wise , secular way , that it is no longer necessary .
Consequently I believe our work over the next few weeks will be important to enable the Belgian Presidency to present a resolution on a moratorium in New York .
Mr President , we in the European Union must support any action leading to the abolition of the death penalty .
The abolitionists , who have met in Strasbourg at the first world conference against the death penalty , can count - and know they can count - on our full and active support .
A European day against the death penalty - as Mr Méndez de Vigo was saying , and I agree with him - is a good idea , but it is not enough .
We must also encourage the Community institutions and the European Union Member States to take our belief to its ultimate consequences - our belief , which without any doubt is reflected in all our legal systems , that the death penalty is against the law and is just as bad as other historical monstrosities , such as slavery .
The European Union should , therefore , as we request in the resolution , consider the abolition of the death penalty to be an essential aspect of its relations with third countries , and consequently this should be reflected in the conclusions of international agreements , aid programmes and trade relations .
Since Mr Van den Berg has already done so , I do not wish to mention such aberrations as the execution of minors or the physically disabled , nor to talk about cases of innocent people condemned to death .
I shall not go into the figures , either - because what Mr Dupuis has just said is true - and in any case I think they are irrelevant : a single case is itself a monstrosity .
The abolition of the death penalty is an elementary principle in the state of civilisation in which we now find ourselves , and nobody should be deprived of their life by a court sentence .
I therefore support both this resolution and the European day against the death penalty , but I believe we still have to go a little further in all our work to achieve the abolition of the death penalty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to salute the initiators of the first World Congress against the Death Penalty , which I consider the crowning achievement of abolitionists the world over .
Very important work was accomplished during those three days and I also salute the personal commitment of our President who , with her counterpart from the Council of Europe , called on the governments to establish a world moratorium on executions .
That moratorium was signed by the 40 countries present , here , in this very Chamber .
Fighting for the abolition of the death penalty - as has been said here - means fighting to strengthen human dignity and extend human rights .
I think the European Union is doing that and it must continue its efforts , but I also think it is sometimes important , in an assembly like the United Nations , to put one ' s own house in order first .
By that I mean that countries like Turkey , Russia and Armenia , members of the Council of Europe and applicants to join the European Union , must eliminate the death penalty from their respective criminal codes .
That , in my opinion , is a sine qua non of whether or not they become members and a guarantee that this fundamental principle of human rights is respected within the European Union .
Then , as Robert Badinter has underlined , the debate has moved forward enormously .
One hundred countries have already abolished the death penalty .
Even in the United States , where 80 % of people were in favour of the death penalty five or six years ago , that figure is down to 66 % today .
That means that the struggle is making progress , and so much the better .
However , that has not prevented the existence of another highly symbolic case in the battle against the death penalty : the case of Moumia Abou Jamal .
From amongst the 3 700 people who are still on death row in the United States , Moumia Abou Jamal stands out as a symbol because he is in prison and on death row for being black , and in that respect his case reminds me a little of the struggle of Nelson Mandela .
He is in prison for being an intellectual writer , and in that he reminds me a little of Solzhenitsyn , and because he dared to write at a time when no one was writing against the atrocities of the Philadelphia police .
And finally he was a militant , an activist as they say in English .
He now finds himself on death row for these three reasons and I think it would be a marvellous signal if a country like the United States , which claims to be the greatest democracy in the world , were to abolish the death penalty and free Moumia Abou Jamal .
Imagine the weight that would carry for countries like China and the other countries that continue this barbaric practice !
I am counting massively on the Belgian Presidency to move this idea forward with the full support of all of us here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , every Member State has undertaken to abide by the general declaration on human rights and hence to oppose capital punishment .
The death penalty violates the right to life and is degrading .
According to Amnesty International , 1457 people were executed in 2000 , of which 85 were executed in the USA , 1000 in China , 75 in Iran and 123 in Saudi Arabia .
In Iran last week , a woman was condemned to death by stoning for adultery .
It puts one in mind of the Middle Ages .
This cruelty outrages and horrifies me .
No death sentences have been carried out in Turkey since 1984 , it is true , but people are still condemned to death .
This is unacceptable , especially in a country which aspires to become a member of the EU .
Turkey must abolish the death penalty before it can be accepted in the European Union .
Every time a death penalty is carried out , there is a possibility that an innocent person has been executed .
Such cases have occurred in the past .
I am particularly concerned about the current debate in Russia on the restoration of the death penalty .
Five years after the last execution , more and more people are calling for the death penalty to be reintroduced for terrorists and drug dealers .
I should like to remind Russia that it undertook to abolish the death penalty when it joined the Council of Europe five years ago .
Armenia and Turkey must also honour this commitment as members of the Council of Europe .
The first world congress against capital punishment was held in Strasbourg in June .
I welcome events such as this , which endeavour to find ways of abolishing the death penalty .
I consider the death penalty to be a barbaric institution .
It is cruel and inhumane .
I condemn all 87 countries which still have the death penalty and call on those responsible to abolish it .
Mr President , I think we also have to thank Mrs Fontaine .
In the Spanish press we have read an article which , I believe , is a good reflection of the feelings of this Parliament against the death penalty .
I do not know if it has appeared in the press in other countries in Europe .
Secondly , I should like to recall here , Mr President , that on the other two occasions on which I spoke against the death penalty I talked about a Spaniard who was on death row in the United States , Joaquín José Martínez .
I had the chance to talk to him and his parents last week , and among other chilling details that they told me was the 100 million pesetas that they had to raise to have their son released .
This is a common situation for minorities in the United States .
I confess that I never thought he could be released , and I am delighted to have seen him here alive .
The death penalty in my view is barbaric , Mr President .
Eighty-eight per cent of these death penalties are concentrated in four countries , and so Europe must talk to these countries to get them to stop murdering each other legally .
Our presence in the United Nations should also be used , as it always has been , to come out against the death penalty .
I very much welcome the fact that all the European Union institutions are united in working towards the abolition of the death penalty and am pleased that once again the European Parliament is in the forefront of these efforts .
As the House knows , both the Council and the Commission have made abolition a priority .
The Council is pursuing implementation of the European Union guidelines where the death penalty still exists .
The European Union calls for its use to be progressively restricted and insists that it be carried out according to minimum standards .
The European Union also presses , where relevant , for moratoria to be introduced .
It might just be helpful if I set out in detail the guidelines of our policy towards third countries on the death penalty .
Those guidelines stipulate that the subject should be mentioned , if appropriate , during political dialogue with those countries .
It was mentioned , for example , in our recent meetings with the United States .
The guidelines stipulate that démarches should be made when there is a threat that the death penalty will be restored or that an official or de facto moratorium will cease .
The guidelines make it clear that supportive démarches or public statements should be made when a country takes steps towards abolition .
We indicate , in the guidelines , that individual démarches should be made when it seems that minimum standards in this area are being violated .
For example : when there is a lack of legal safeguards ; when the death penalty is to be applied to those who were minors when the offence was committed ; to pregnant women or to the mother of a young child or to the mentally ill and the application of the death penalty for non-violent crimes or offences such as crimes of opinion and conscience and financial crimes .
In the recently adopted communication on human rights and democratisation , the Commission identified the campaign for the abolition of the death penalty as one of the four priorities that we would pursue over coming years under the European initiative for democracy and human rights .
We have already funded a number of projects in this area by mobilising public opinion worldwide against capital punishment .
We hope to consign the death penalty to the history books as a form of punishment which has no place in the modern world .
To take an example , and I follow what an honourable Member said a moment or two ago , I find it almost impossible to believe that I am reading a newspaper published in 2001 when I read reports that women in Iran are once again being sentenced to death by stoning .
I agree with honourable Members that the first World Congress to abolish the death penalty in Strasbourg on 21 and 22 June 2001 was a very important gathering .
While I was not able to attend in person , the Commission services represented me and delivered an address .
I understand that the presence of those individuals who came to the Congress to testify about the years they had spent awaiting execution before being declared innocent was particularly moving and particularly valuable .
Also , I believe that the Congress proved useful in highlighting both the difficult problems related to the abolition of the death penalty and in gathering suggestions of a number of innovative policy strategies , in particular , from the American participants .
It was interesting to hear the honourable Member 's remarks about recent converts on this issue .
I also take this opportunity to thank the President for her initiative to invite a number of presidents of parliaments as well as the Congress participants to attend the solemn appeal that took place in the European Parliament in Strasbourg on 22 June last .
This was an important part of the Congress highlighting the important role of parliaments in eliminating the death penalty .
The Strasbourg appeal that was adopted at this event will serve as an important reference document for our continued efforts to abolish the death penalty .
I am sure that as long as it is required , this Parliament along with the other European institutions , will continue to give this issue the priority and the importance which it deserves .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Beijing 's application to host the 2008 Olympic Games
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0487 / 2001 by Mr Thomas Mann and Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ;
B5-0498 / 2001 by Mr van den Berg , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ;
B5-0505 / 2001 by Mrs Malmström and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party ;
B5-0524 / 2001 by Mrs Frassoni and Mr Wuori , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ;
B5-0525 / 2001 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the Technical Group of Independent Members
on Beijing 's application to host the 2008 Olympic Games .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
Mr Patten , you are well acquainted with this region .
Next week the IOC will decide which country is to host the 2008 Olympic Games .
The People 's Republic of China , which is currently seeking political recognition on all fronts , would appear to be the most likely candidate .
Anyone who thinks that Beijing does not stand a chance after failing in its bid in 2000 and 2004 , has not thought hard enough .
Politics in China have nothing in common with the spirit of the Olympic Games .
Human rights are trampled underfoot and freedom of expression and the freedom to demonstrate are countered with aggression .
Tibet has been occupied for over 50 years .
Minorities such as the Uighurs and Mongolians are prevented from exercising their rights and are losing their cultural identity .
Fair hearings are denied .
The death penalty , which we have just debated , is handed out and is often carried out in public as a deterrent .
Sport cannot be divorced from politics .
Berlin in 1936 showed how the rally of the Jugend der Welt , with 100,000 spectators and a million people sitting in front of their radios and televisions , was subverted to the cause of propaganda .
The people 's joy was genuine , the organisation was perfect , but this positive image was hijacked by the nazi regime in order to win recognition for the dictatorship .
The reaction to the boycott of the 1980 Olympic Games in Moscow following the march of the Red Army on Afghanistan varied widely - and rightly so .
There was one common understanding , however .
Whenever international law is violated , it cannot just be business as usual .
In the case of China , our complaint in the PPE-DE Group is that for decades they have been destroying forests , polluting rivers and failing to control emissions to the point at which the whole ecosystem is on the brink of collapse .
Animal rights protestors are rightly horrified by the level of cruelty , which hardly anyone has been able to gauge fully .
Seven thousand bears are locked in harrowingly narrow cages in China and gall is constantly extracted from them , while they are still alive , in order to manufacture cosmetics and medicines .
For that there can be no excuse .
There are therefore a plethora of arguments as to why China should not host the Olympic Games .
Does anyone in this House really believe that anything will change in the next seven years ?
The People 's Republic of China is free to make a new bid and it will be a worthy host of the Olympic Games if it puts the right conditions in place , by ending human rights violations and paving the way for democracy and the rule of law .
Only once China has become a member of our community of values can the IOC say yes to such a bid next week or in the future in good conscience .
Mr President , it is about twelve years ago that on Tienanmen Square , the student protest and the call for democracy was quashed in a bloody fashion .
During that time , Commissioner Patten was very active in Hong Kong in another role , and well known for his commitment to human rights .
One could claim that ever since that period , in fact , the conservative trend in China has dominated , to the detriment of reformers , and that China is , in fact , still looking for a way out of the impasse in which it eventually ended up .
Historically speaking , one could say that those two trends are still present , of course , but over the past couple of years , a decision has been made to occupy the political centre very firmly via a central role of the Communist Party - a very classical , old-fashioned role , in fact - and to open up the economy in a powerful manner .
This creates enormous tension between the two trends , of course , which leads to enormous inequality in the country .
It is clear that China cannot continue in this vein .
In my opinion , and my group shares that view , we need a dual strategy : one of commitment , cooperation , talks and political involvement , for ultimately , they will need to take fresh steps at that Congress in 2002 , which for them is a stepping stone towards a new generation .
They too will eventually need to adopt a different position in such a huge world nation which has the pretension of occupying a place on the world stage of the future and of playing a role there as well .
In the spirit of the Olympic Games , however , and given our position and values in Europe in terms of human rights , we cannot possibly support China ' s application today .
That is why we , as a group , are also critical of China and support the criticism levelled at China .
I believe that commitment also means talking in clear and open terms . That is why we are here : to talk openly .
That is why our group supports this resolution .
China is not the kingdom of darkness , but in terms of human rights , a great deal needs to be done before that country can qualify for the application to host the Olympic Games .
As Commissioner Patten is constantly being described as Chinese , I think it is high time to point out that he was governor of Hong Kong at the time .
Perhaps not everyone knows that , especially our guests .
I point this out so that they can understand the connections .
Mr President , on Friday next week there is a vote on who will be hosting the 2008 Olympic Games .
The Olympic Games are an opportunity for men and women from all around the world to come together to compete on equal terms , in a spirit of peace and cooperation between nations .
That is the theory , despite the fact that a large number of participating countries are brutal dictatorships which hold both democracy and human rights in contempt .
The Olympic Committee has a responsibility to promote the values which lie behind the Olympic Games .
We in the ELDR Group have demanded that the International Olympic Committee set up guidelines for the countries which are to organise the Olympic Games , guidelines which include respect for human rights and democratic principles .
One of the hottest tips for the Olympic Games is Beijing .
Beijing is the capital of one of the world ' s most hardline dictatorships .
Persecution of those with opposing views , torture , censorship of the media and the Internet and more executions than all other countries put together are just a few examples of the way the Chinese regime tries to keep its population in check .
The occupation of Tibet and the oppression of its people continue , and religious minorities are not allowed to practise their religion .
For two years , there has been a systematic persecution of followers of the Falun Gong movement , with tens of thousands of followers being arrested and tortured , in some cases to death .
In recent days , 15 women in a Chinese labour camp were tortured to death , with the authorities saying that it was suicide .
Those who want Beijing to host the Olympic Games say that sport and politics should not be mixed .
However , that is exactly what the Chinese regime will do .
If Beijing were to host the Olympic Games , the propaganda value for the Chinese regime would be enormous , and it would reduce the pressure on the country to change its policy .
In a report on Beijing ' s candidature for the Olympic Games , the International Olympic Committee writes the following : ' The overall presence of strong governmental control and support is healthy and should improve operational efficiency of the Games organisation . '
Calling the oppression ' healthy ' is hair-raising .
Human rights activists of all kinds are united in their demand not to let China organise the Olympic Games .
A decision in favour of the Olympic Games in China is a breach of the whole Olympic ethos .
The ELDR Group would therefore like to appeal to all members of the International Olympic Committee to vote against Beijing on Friday .
Mr President , the Olympics are an event which celebrate man 's beauty , which remind us of all that is most noble in the human character .
If we accept China 's application to host the Olympic Games today , it would be like gilding the executions , the persecution of all political dissidents , the material and environmental destruction and the deportations which take place in China with the fine colours of the Olympic rings and all the flags . The result would certainly not be a reduction in these incidents ; quite the contrary : it is more likely that the show of indifference on the part of the international community would encourage them .
This does not , of course , mean that we are happy with this situation .
We hope that the day will come when we will have the chance to be pleased , or rather to be enthusiastic about celebrating the Olympic Games in China , but that day has not yet come ; it is still a long way in the future and we must be consistent in our actions .
Considering what my colleagues have said I feel that I can stop here , for this is another of those issues on which the whole of Parliament is in agreement .
I hope that our opinion will carry some weight .
Mr President , our resolution starts by quoting the Olympic Charter , which states that Olympianism has as a goal ' to place sport at the service of the harmonious development of humankind , with the object of creating a peaceful society ' .
Lucio Manisco reminded us just now of the traffic in organs , and I remember we had to fight very hard in this Parliament to get that resolution through .
We were literally taken for madmen , for people who were inventing things .
Today , the direct evidence of doctors who participated in the operations is in all the papers , and nobody can deny the evidence any longer .
Nor can anybody deny the evidence of the executions , obviously , or the semantic changes : China now conjugates the verb ' to commit suicide ' as a transitive verb .
Fifteen girls have committed suicide in the last few days in China , and hundreds of Falun Gong militants have committed suicide in the last few weeks and months .
Nothing has changed in Tibet , and for the information of everyone hoping the year 2002 will see a new leadership in China , the favourite to succeed is none other than the former Chinese governor of Tibet , notorious for his policies of destruction and systematic incarceration .
I was very pleased to hear what Mr van den Berg and Thomas Mann had to say , and I think there are more than enough indications for it to be considered at least inappropriate , and I do say inappropriate , for the Olympic Games to be held in Beijing .
Obviously , we all hope that it will rapidly become appropriate , and not just appropriate , but welcome , to hold the Olympic Games in Beijing , but there is still a long way to go , and I think , Commissioner Patten , that is also a result of this policy of critical dialogue which is increasingly becoming a policy of active complicity with the Beijing regime .
Mr President , if the huge sports festival of the Olympic Games is to be celebrated somewhere , then there has to be a cause for celebration .
That is not the case in China .
The human rights situation has not improved since the start of the political dialogue with the European Union .
Quite the contrary , in fact . The regime ' s repression of political opponents carries on undiminished .
Dissidents often disappear behind bars for a ridiculously long period of time .
On a large scale , offenders are given the death penalty after a very brief trial .
The Chinese leaders are extremely frightened of the peaceful , religious movement , Falun Gong .
Followers of this movement are arrested , tortured , admitted to psychiatric hospitals or executed at random .
Recently , another 15 women were tortured to death in a labour camp .
Tibet is being systematically stripped of its own character .
The environmental and animal welfare situation is atrocious .
It is extremely naive to assume that large , international sports events and politics can be kept separate .
The history of the modern Olympic Games shows very clearly how the sports festival can be used to enhance the glory of a political regime .
The global media attention will only exacerbate this potential .
Especially states which could do with a complete make-over of their international reputation will seize the opportunity of setting a new Olympic record in exploiting this event politically .
The Chinese population will derive little pleasure from the Games .
The Games cost approximately USD 20 billion , and part of Beijing will need to be flattened and the inhabitants driven out of the city .
Economic ties between China and the world will also mean that liberal values and standards could enter the country .
That is why there is hope .
More welfare will ultimately lead to more political freedom .
The Chinese are a patient people .
In order to organise the Games , they have to practice patience and ensure that China has something to celebrate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am going to disagree with the majority in the House .
I could accept most of the points made by Thomas Mann and others .
I have voted and shall continue to vote in favour of all the resolutions tabled here on issues of human rights , religious persecution or on the Tibetan situation in China .
I feel , however , that this resolution is on the wrong track , because I am convinced that choosing Beijing as the venue for the Olympic Games will serve to support the reformist forces and that holding the Olympic Games could be a catalyst for major change .
I feel certain of this .
No one can accuse me of complicity and I shall continue to defend human rights in this House . I am certainly not a propagandist for the Chinese government .
It would be a mistake to isolate China and we must continue to level criticism at China in this House and in the appropriate international forums .
We cannot isolate a nation-state of 1.3 billion people .
I was against Chinese isolationism decades ago , when even the Chinese authorities wanted it and I am also against us attempting such a move .
Incidentally , the Cuban situation is a telling example of what can happen : the United States have maintained a stubborn embargo against Cuba for years .
They have achieved nothing and we see that the North American embargo is actually proving to be the main political prop shoring up Fidel Castro ' s dictatorship in Cuba .
This is , therefore , the reason for my vote and the reason why my group does not support this resolution , because we feel that it is the wrong way to support progress on reform in China .
The decision on which country will stage the 2008 Olympics will be decided by the International Olympic Committee when it meets in Moscow on 13 July .
I have some knowledge of the way the International Olympic Committee does its work .
I appeared in front of it in 1990 in support of the magnificent bid by Manchester to host the Olympic games .
It was one of the examples in my life of tilting at windmills , but I know a little about how the IOC works .
The European Union , as a whole and the Commission do not take a position on whether the games should be held in China or elsewhere .
The decision is one for the International Olympic Committee , though I understand why honourable Members have such strong views on the subject .
I do not have to explain to Parliament that I share the concerns which have been expressed about the human rights situation in China - and I will return to that in a moment .
Just as I have always been doubtful about mixing the pursuit of trade objectives and the pursuit of human rights objectives , however , so I have doubts about mixing up sport and human rights .
My worry on both scores is that very often you do not achieve your objective , you simply muddle your objectives .
When I was the Governor of Hong Kong , much involved in the debate and the argument about human rights and democratisation , I still every year went to Washington to plead for China to have most-favoured-nation status and I certainly did not criticise the earlier bid by China to host the Olympic games .
I concede that at the margins , it can be helpful occasionally to take measures in regard to sport .
For example , one could not argue that taking those measures in relation to South Africa during the years of apartheid was anything other than helpful , largely because of the emphasis which the white community in South Africa placed on sporting links .
If you take the issue of the Olympics , while I accept that there are some horrendous examples of the Olympic spirit being abused - and one speaker mentioned the 1936 Olympics in which my late father-in-law ran - one should also take account of the Olympic Games in Seoul .
You would not find many democrats in Seoul who argued that holding the Olympic Games there had set back the pursuit of democracy and human rights , rather the reverse , so the argument is perhaps a little more complex than some honourable Members suggested .
While these are matters of rather subjective judgment , when I argue this case , I am not doing so out of - to borrow a phrase from the honourable Member - supine complicity .
I am doing so out of moderate , but not complete , conviction .
If Beijing is selected to host the games , it will require certainly both welcome and necessary steps on the part of the Chinese authorities if they are to have any chance at all of matching the outstanding performance as host , of Sydney last year .
For example , it would be inconceivable that a country hosting the Olympics would or could prevent both its citizens and its visitors from having access to the news on the Internet about the games themselves .
On a visit I paid to China a few weeks ago , an extremely interesting visit , it was curious that both the BBC and CNN Website were inaccessible .
I do not think that would be possible at the time of an Olympic Games .
I have spoken on many occasions to this Parliament about the European Union / China human rights dialogue .
I accept what the honourable Member said , that we have to be very careful that the dialogue actually produces some progress and it does not turn into , as he said , an act of complicity with the abuse of human rights .
Our dialogue with China is undoubtedly the most complex and multi-faceted dialogue on human rights which we have with any country , as befits discussions with a country in which so many abuses continue , alas , to occur .
The European Union is constantly seeking to work with China to make it more effective and to have more tangible impact on the human rights situation on the ground .
We are encouraging and supporting China in early ratification and implementation of the UN covenants and we continue to urge cooperation with the UN High Commissioner for human rights .
We welcome the Memorandum of Understanding , which China has signed with Mary Robinson , but we hope that they will now implement it .
Within this dialogue , we will continue to press for action in the areas of most concern to us , such as the repression of political dissidents , the suppression of religious freedom , the appalling and excessive use of the death penalty under the strike-hard campaign , the treatment of ethnic minorities , including those in Tibet , and the arbitrary detention conditions .
I also raised during my last visit to China , the reports of torture and ill-treatment of the followers of the Falun Gong movement and there are other issues which we must address .
There is increasing concern about the abuse of psychiatry in dealing with dissidents and members of religious groups in China .
I commend to the House 's attention an article written recently in the Asian Wall Street Journal , which summarised the academic research of Robin Monroe , a very distinguished China-watcher , the author of probably the best book on Tiananmen , Black Hands of Beijing .
I recommend it to the House .
I share Parliament 's concerns for the environment in Beijing and in China more widely and for the effects which preparation for the games could have on the city .
During my visit in May , I met some of the handful of genuine Chinese non-governmental organisations working on environmental issues .
I was left with the strong impression that China will find it impossible to meet the objectives it has set itself for environmental protection without the assistance of a civil society , which has mobilised itself voluntarily .
A relaxation of the rules governing the establishment and operation of genuine grassroots NGOs is essential , so as to harness the energy and commitment of a population of over a billion .
The same is true for any country or city which hosts the Olympic Games .
Sydney 's success derived from the whole-hearted commitment of its citizens to hosting the games and making them a success in the eyes of the world .
Any country which hosts the Olympic Games will have a problem if it does not enlist the support of its citizens .
I do not believe that I am being naive .
I know the appalling problems that exist , but it seems to me at the very least inconceivable that any country like China , although there is no country really like China , but any country with the sort of authoritarian repressive government that China has , would find it impossible to host the Olympic Games without that having a considerable impact on the development of civil society within that country .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 6.30 p.m.
Human rights
Mr President , I have great pleasure in commending the whole of this resolution to the House .
The recognition of the rights of children is of vital importance . I am glad to be able to say that 25 years ago I published an article which , at least from a certain point of view , helped in pushing forward that case .
I do not want to talk about the whole motion for a resolution today , however .
I want to talk about one particular problem which is dealt with in the amendment by my group .
I am old enough to have children over the age of 25 .
I see visitors in our gallery who are about the age of 25 .
Like many people I can just imagine what it would be like to have a child ripped from your hands at the age of 20 days and never to see them again , be yourself in prison for five years under torture and cruel treatment , and then spend the rest of your life at liberty trying to find your lost child .
Sara Méndez from Uruguay was in this Parliament yesterday to press forward the case for recovering her child , or getting information about her son Símon , who was ripped from her arms aged 20 days after her illegal capture in Buenos Aires in 1976 .
That is a dreadful thing to happen and we should add to this admirable motion for a resolution a clause calling upon those who are in authority in Uruguay to recognise the evil of disappearances , to recognise their bounden duty to bring children back to their parents and to end this scandal and disgrace .
I hope we will carry the motion for a resolution and make that point .
Mr President , ten years after the first World Summit for Children , the UN has decided to take stock .
In September 2001 , on the eve of the summit , our group is naturally tabling a resolution in witness of our commitment , as we have always done .
I remember a time when it was difficult to mention the word children in this House .
The Dutroux affair had to happen before budget lines could be freed up and a certain number of resolutions passed for our children .
We have therefore had some successes .
The latest is the reference to children in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and some of us in this House , notably under the leadership of Mary Banotti , have won a few battles .
It is therefore important to restate our commitment and determination on the eve of this summit , and we must also dedicate ourselves even more firmly to the cause of children , not just in Europe , but throughout the world , because there are now 600 million children worldwide in families living on less than a dollar a day , facing the real evils of malnutrition , lack of education and lack of health provision . We must mobilise against those evils .
To that end , our resolution proposes providing an institutional context to serve children . First , the various decisions we take should be subject to assessment of their impact on policy on children and family policy , secondly , the Commission should have a unit to deal with children ' s issues and , thirdly , a special envoy should coordinate policies on children .
Finally , Mr President , we think it is important to be in a position to establish a European solidarity fund for the world ' s children .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our group is pleased with this initiative and with the broad consensus that we were able to achieve on the compromise resolution , in which we saw our main concern included , as it was in our own draft resolution : a deep concern at the terrible situation seen in many armed conflicts and the cruel and barbaric use of great numbers of children who are recruited as soldiers at a very tender age .
Our censure of such behaviour is clearly voiced in the resolution .
I am also , however , going to table some amendments , for which I would request the House ' s support , since it seems the resolution contains a loophole : there is no mention of the family and in any discussion of children , we must also consider the family .
When it comes to these resolutions , we always tend to be concerned about the most terrible situations of suffering and neglect , as I said earlier , involving children used in armed conflict , etc .
Generally , however , children live within a family environment and a policy for children must inevitably also be a policy for the family , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
As I am fond of saying , a world fit for children must also be a world fit for the family . I should also like to say that I was moved by Mr MacCormick ' s words and that we shall be supporting his amendment .
Yesterday , at the compromise meeting , doubts were expressed as to whether or not we should include a specific case , but his words convinced me .
They convinced me perhaps because in Portugal too , the issue of children disappearing and of the terrible suffering endured by the families - and some cases in Portugal have been dragging on for years - is also an issue which is of constant concern to us , given the impotence of the State and of police forces .
These cases involve terrible , heartrending pain , which is also worthy of comment by this House .
Mr President , this week - as other honourable Members have mentioned - Sara Mendez was here in the European Parliament .
It is sometimes good in a wide-ranging resolution and in a broad framework to zoom in for a moment on something very concrete .
Someone who over 24 years after the event is still searching for her son Simon .
The military in her country took life in absolute freedom away from her , but they themselves still enjoy that freedom .
I believe that it is right - and I appreciate the fact that our President , Mrs Fontaine , also lent her support - that we should support her , because it makes something clear about who these people are .
Because if we eventually see the day when in the pandemonium of lawlessness the international rule of law prevails , it will be because of such brave individuals who have persevered for so long .
That is why I hope that we , standing above the parties and quite apart from arguments with each other , will shortly support the amendments made on that point .
A second point on the optional protocol .
I should like to ask the Commissioner something about this .
So 29 countries have signed up to it .
That includes all fifteen European Member States .
The protocol provides for children in armed conflicts to be as it were kept out of the sphere of child exploitation and child soldiery .
Only four countries have ratified it .
At least ten are required for it to come into force .
So there is a great need on our part to say : exert pressure in the Council too , on the various organisations in Europe and on the countries to get them to sign , so that we can achieve a success .
In conclusion I should like to say that I differ on one point from the honourable Members of the People ' s Party .
Not on the content of their amendments on the family .
I very much appreciate them .
There is no disagreement between us on that .
However , in the context of the rights of the child we felt that the treatment of the subject deserves separate attention and as such does not belong here .
We shall not vote against .
We shall abstain , because we have no substantive objections to the texts you have submitted .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the expectations of the Belgian Presidency are rightly high , and with regard to the enforcement of respect for human rights the Belgian Presidency can certainly play a notable role .
The same applies to the determining of a common EU position on the occasion of the extraordinary session on children ' s rights at the United Nations .
It would be generally appreciated if the Belgian Presidency were to succeed in getting the European Union to speak with one voice .
It can build on the efforts already made by the Swedish Presidency to decide on a common strategy .
As far as content is concerned there should be especial emphasis on the fact that as regards free access to education for all children and guaranteed health care provision , binding agreements should be made .
The European Parliament should pay extra attention to the situation of children in the candidate-Member States , specifically Bulgaria and Romania .
For that matter it could be decisive if the European Parliament were to take the initiative of inserting the dimension of the rights of the child into the rights of human beings in general .
In addition I should like to urge the EU in bilateral exchanges between European Member States and third countries to focus attention systematically on the situation of children in the third countries .
This approach will undoubtedly bear fruit if pursued consistently .
Mr President , Commissioner , according to the International Labour Organisation , whether we like it or not , we are indirectly responsible for the fate of 250 million children aged 5 to 14 years .
They make carpets in Nepal and luxury shoes in Thailand , they work in the coffee and cocoa plantations in Africa , and all for export , for us to enjoy .
In Europe it takes more underhand forms : apprenticeships give rise to abuses of working time .
Child models are used . We have child sports stars to entertain us as we watch television .
On top of that are the things no one can tolerate : sexual abuse which destroys whole lives , pornography and prostitution .
I think our position should therefore be implacable .
Forcing children to work restricts their intellectual , physical and psychological development , so I do not think it is any good continuing to have countries signing conventions to get rid of labels , knowing they are doing it as if they were buying a pair of shoes .
The minimum to be demanded at the Conference in September is every child ' s right to education , every child ' s right to leisure , and every child ' s right to be informed of his or her rights .
We must secure that , at least .
If we do not do so , it will effectively mean that children ' s rights are like a pair of shoes .
When they are dirty and full of holes , they end up in the bin .
Mr President , Commissioner , first I would like to say how truly thrilled I was to hear that the Belgian Presidency has made the issue of children 's rights part of its presidency programme .
I would like to congratulate them warmly .
We have great expectations of this presidency and we will be keeping a very steady eye on what is happening and on progress .
I would also agree with Mrs Hermange who rightly pointed out that , up to very recently , children could not even be mentioned in this House .
We were constantly told they were not part of the competence of the Treaties and our concerns for their welfare were beyond the reach of this Parliament .
Happily now we can discuss them .
As long as I have been here in Parliament we have observed the awful dangers that many children in the world live in : a litany of miseries which are listed in this resolution here today .
Not too far from here children are still viewed as disposable objects for international adoption , for example .
We should hang our heads in shame that we have more legislation on the books of the European Union relating to animal welfare than we have relating to the welfare of children .
And lest anyone should attack me on that , I would like to say that I support animal welfare legislation as well .
But the situation is shameful .
There has been a political push forward .
You will see in this resolution that we call , for example , for a dedicated unit in the Commission looking at children 's rights , looking at legislation so that we can assess its impact on the children and also on the lives of their families .
It is with great pleasure that I commend this resolution to the House .
I am happy to be one of the sponsors of Sara Méndez and her lost child .
Through my work in Parliament I too have experienced the fact that so many children are deprived of the company and love of both their parents , very often due to selfishness and lack of understanding about the particular needs of children .
Mr President , the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child has so far been signed by 191 countries .
The purpose of the special session of the United Nations in New York in September must be not just to get this convention ratified but to ensure that all the countries then apply it .
One fundamental element is the fight against child labour .
All too often children are seen as an investment to secure the survival of the family .
The parents who , like their children , never received an education , are by definition the people who are living in poverty and debt .
Children who are exposed from an early age to the harshest physical demands lose not just their innocence and identity , they often lose their whole childhood .
I have seen children who will not survive beyond the age of 14 .
According to estimates by UNICEF , 200 000 children a year are sold in order to work on plantations in west and central Africa .
Two million children in the world , mainly girls , are being exploited by pimps .
There is cause for hope , however .
I have seen positive examples on the ground in India and Nepal .
The Rugmark Foundation is helping children whose parents work in carpet factories to obtain educational qualifications .
This NGO was founded jointly by German development aid organisations and carpet manufacturers .
These rugs rightly carry a quality label stating that they have not been manufactured by children .
In the meantime , 10 % of Indian exporters have successfully applied for a Rugmark licence .
It is a first step in the right direction .
It will only be successful in the long run , however , if consumers change their attitude and demand these products .
Another example which gives cause for hope comes from Brazil .
A pupil 's wage has been introduced for 11 million children from the poorest families .
This special programme has been set up for ten years and children are being paid a total of EUR 850 million a year to go to school .
Examples such as the few which I have been able to cite should set a precedent throughout the world , for the sake of the children .
Religious freedom in Vietnam
Mr President , there is no freedom of religion in Vietnam .
The resolution before us emphasises this serious state of affairs , supporting freedom of religion for religious societies of Buddhists not recognised by the Vietnamese government .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Belder , if you will excuse me , I think that Mr Patten wanted to speak about the previous order of business .
However , Mr Patten , strictly speaking you are down to speak at the end of the debate .
Do you really wish to speak now ?
I would just like to say that it is a pleasure to listen to the debate and to take part in it , not least since it was so ably moved by my friend Mr MacCormick .
It is an important debate as part of the preparatory process for the UN Special Session on Children .
The Commission , in coordination with Member States , firmly supports a rights-based approach founded on the Convention of the Rights of the Child .
Since 1992 , for almost one decade now , all cooperation agreements between the European Union and third countries have incorporated a clause defining human rights as an essential element of the agreement .
This includes the rights of the child and respect for the core labour standards as set out in the eight ILO fundamental conventions .
The Commission strongly supports efforts by the international community to eliminate child labour across the world .
In this regard , the Commission particularly supports the work of the ILO which adopted a convention in 1999 banning the worst forms of child labour , some of which were referred to during the debate .
On 15 September 2000 , the Commission underlined its support for the ILO 's efforts against child labour by adopting a recommendation to the Member States to ratify this new convention .
While there is no specific Community competence in children 's matters , the European Commission recognises children as a particularly vulnerable group within the overarching policy focus on poverty and vulnerability , and the concerns about children as well as about human rights and gender issues are an integral part of our development policy objective of poverty eradication , especially in social sectors such as education and health .
Whereas there is no explicit focus on children in development cooperation , ECHO has made children a priority for our humanitarian assistance this year .
Promotion of the rights of the child is also a high priority for funding under the European initiative for democracy and human rights where the promotion of the rights of the child was chosen as a priority theme for funding under the budget this year .
As a complement to the European Union 's intervention in international fora such as the UN , the Commission offers substantial support to projects designed to address the plight of children affected by conflict , and there were several references to that problem .
Since the beginning of 2000 , more than EUR 40 million have been spent on projects providing assistance and protection to children affected by armed conflict .
The Commission is therefore active in supporting children 's rights both at the political level and through practical initiatives .
I am grateful for your indulgence , President , but this seemed to me to be a sufficiently important subject on which to make those remarks .
You were quite right , Mr Patten .
We shall now continue with religious freedom in Vietnam , and the presidency of this sitting would like to apologise wholeheartedly for having to cut Mr Belder off .
We shall now listen to Mr Belder , the author of the question , for two and a half minutes with increased interest .
Mr President , it was worth waiting a moment for the contribution of Commissioner Patten .
There is no freedom of religion in Vietnam .
The resolution before us emphasises this serious state of affairs , supporting freedom of religion for religious societies of Buddhists , Roman Catholics and Protestants not recognised by the Vietnamese government .
Societies of these three denominations that are recognised by the state are reminiscent of the traditional Communist pattern : they are monitored by the Vietnamese authorities .
A second proof that Vietnamese citizens have no freedom of religion .
This unconstitutional situation issues directly from the nature of the country ' s political constellation .
Obviously the Communist rulers of Vietnam are as terrified as ever of any free association and opinion . That applies even more if this takes place on the basis of definite religious views .
Even today the Vietnamese government indoctrinates its citizens with pure antireligious ideas .
Within this general , restrictive social context the Protestants of the Central Highlands in the south of Vietnam occupy a special place .
They are exposed to double social discrimination , or worse still , persecution .
As members of various ethnic minorities they are literally the doormats of the ' kinh ' , the so-called true Vietnamese , who consider themselves superior .
In addition for the past 15 years a Vietnamese government-encouraged mass exodus of ' kinh ' into the fertile lands of the Central Highlands migration has simply amounted and amounts to common or garden theft of land .
Those ' Non-kinh ' and ' backward ' Christians must simply accept this violation of their rights .
Vietnam wants to be a player in the international field .
See its participation in the ASEM process .
It is therefore perfectly reasonable for the Council and the Commission should take Hanoi seriously to task about the desperate lack of freedom of religion in its own country .
I therefore emphatically call on them to do so .
It is not good enough to embed freedom of religion in the constitution and to practise the opposite .
Surely the era of Stalin and his like must at last be over .
Mr President , for many people , Vietnam would appear to be a long way away .
But here , for example , sits Mr Mayer , who represents Lower Bavaria , one of the most upwardly mobile regions at the heart of Europe .
One might even say that Lower Bavaria borders on Vietnam , because if you go from Lower Bavaria across the Czech border to Bohemia , you will see huge Vietnamese markets , with all that this implies in the border area .
This shows how many waves of refugees have left Vietnam for central Europe and Europe as a whole over the last thirty years and it shows how small the world has become and how closely everything hangs together .
During the last plenary session , Mr Modrow of the Social Democrat Party spoke about the huge crimes committed in Asia in the twentieth century by Germany , the USA and Japan .
He apparently completely forgot , however , that the worst crimes in Asia in the twentieth century were committed by Communists , namely the Khmer Rouge , namely Stalin and Lenin in the east of the Soviet Union , in China and , last but not least , in Vietnam , where people were persecuted for decades after the horrific Vietnam War and still are persecuted .
Vietnam is a Communist country in which religious freedom continues to be trampled underfoot .
We are in favour of contacts with Vietnam and we are in favour of economic contact with south-east Asia .
We take the view , however , that the only basis for economic collaboration is the rule of law and democracy .
Neither the rule of law nor democracy exist in Vietnam .
We must give massive support to the process of reform in Vietnam , which is still in its infancy , by saying quite categorically that freedom of religion and conscience , freedom for the Buddhists , Catholics and Protestants who are brutally persecuted and imprisoned there , is our yardstick for collaboration with this country .
Only when religious freedom is granted and only when these standards are applied can Vietnam become a partner for us .
First of all , I would like to say that this is not anti-communism .
It would be good if communism could co-exist with religious beliefs , and people should have the right to express their religious beliefs if they live in a communist country .
It is quite clear that in Vietnam that is not the situation .
In the resolution , reference is made to two very old Buddhist monks who spent two decades in detention under house arrest for their peaceful support for human rights , democracy and religious freedom .
This is completely unacceptable .
The problem in Vietnam is also that domestic human rights monitoring is not allowed , and that independent human rights monitors continue to be prevented from visiting the country .
We have to put pressure on Vietnam to release all prisoners who are being imprisoned or detained for peacefully expressing their religious and political beliefs .
We should also ask the Vietnamese to stop harassment of prisoners and surveillance of prisoners who have actually been released .
Furthermore , they need to look at their criminal code sections on crimes against national security to ensure that these laws cannot be applied against those merely exercising their right to freedom of expression , as well as at the administrative detention directive which allows for the detaining of individuals for up to two years .
This is completely unacceptable .
One of the things I am disappointed with is that there was no reference to the recent decision of the Vietnam National Assembly backing the concept of a dam in the northern province , which might become Southeast Asia 's largest hydro-power project , possibly involving the relocation of more than 100 000 people .
I wish that they would take into consideration the international aspects of this in relation to the immense social and environmental problems that will be caused .
I think , Mrs McKenna , that our friend Mr Posselt is referring to communist regimes rather than to communists , which is somewhat different .
As some of you may know , I went on a short trip to Vietnam recently .
I accompanied the Most Venerable Quang Do , the number two in the Unified Buddhist Church , in order to enter Vietnam and take the patriarch back to Saigon , where he could , at last , receive the necessary medical care .
The patriarch was imprisoned for 20 years .
He was freed in 1997 and , despite being set free , he is still under ' administrative ' detention and it is still impossible for him to travel freely and freely practice his religion .
Our mission was cut short because today , in the churches , in the Vietnamese pagodas , there are more police officers than monks .
During the day I spent in the pagoda , I myself saw two monks , I managed to see two monks and I saw at least ten police officers and then , when everything happened , I saw more police officers who were obviously plain clothes men appear from the road .
I say all this to describe the situation in Vietnam , a situation which is not confined to Saigon .
In dozens of other pagodas in the country , monks took to the road to accompany the Most Venerable Quang Do but were stopped , very often by louts who beat them up ; in other cases , it was police officers who used force to take them back to their pagodas .
This is the reality of Vietnam today ; it is the reality , once again , of a regime which describes itself as reforming but where there are no reforms to be seen , and I believe that , in this respect , this resolution is important .
It is also important because it calls on our delegation for relations with the Member States of ASEAN , South-east Asia and the Republic of Korea to go to Vietnam and make a clear assessment of the situation in the area of religious freedom .
I call on all our fellow Members to urge the Chair of the Delegation , Mr Nassauer , to make this trip in the next few days , in the coming weeks and not in the coming months .
This is urgent - the lives , freedom , at least a minimum of freedom for these people are at stake .
I would also like to ask the Commission and the Council to make representations to the Vietnamese authorities and remind them that there are examples of former communist countries , such as Poland and Hungary , where the communist classes understood the need to change .
They still exist as political forces today .
In other countries , these communist classes did not understand and were swept aside .
This is an important message which we must send to the Vietnamese authorities without delay .
South Africa
Mr President , in the context of the long-suffering continent of Africa and , in particular , for the whole subcontinent of southern Africa , the Republic of South Africa stands out as a crucial factor for political stability and for development . Today , with even greater importance given the extremely serious crisis in which neighbouring Zimbabwe has become entangled .
The Republic of South Africa proves that there is a way forward for Africa , that there is an alternative to poverty , to underdevelopment , to war , despotism , corruption and poor governance .
We are , nevertheless , familiar with the problems affecting the Republic of South Africa , such as the extremely high incidence of AIDS , the very high level of unemployment , the poverty and the serious social inequalities , economic stagnation and the terrifying level of violent crime .
I must reiterate the genuinely tragic effects of violent crime suffered by the South African people , particularly women , as well as the communities of immigrants from Europe .
The Republic of South Africa will not be able to overcome the enormous challenges it faces without the support and the solidarity of the international community .
We are pleased to note that the European Union is playing an important role in this area , to the extent that is provides , together with its Member States , 70 % of international aid .
The European Union ' s cooperation with the Republic of South Africa has a projected budget for the period until 2006 of around PTE 180 billion , that is around EUR 9.02 billion , to which we can add an equal amount of funding from the EIB , the main aims being to combat poverty , to encourage economic and social development , to create jobs , to stimulate the private sector and to consolidate democracy and the rule of law .
It is nevertheless crucial that under this cooperation , new actions are planned and that measures already in place that have a direct impact in terms of fighting crime are improved , such as measures for providing the police with organisational and institutional support and support for the modernisation and improvement of the judicial system .
We hope that this ambitious cooperation programme , which must be implemented down to the very last euro , will prove decisive in helping the Republic of South Africa to overcome the serious problems it faces .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the beginning of the 1980s , almost all , if not all of us , excitedly and emotionally watched South Africa ' s transition unfold .
We all remember the exemplary way in which President Nelson Mandela led the process , and his choice was not accidental .
South Africa ' s transition was acknowledged by the Nobel Peace Prize being awarded to the two presidents : the last president of the apartheid era and President Nelson Mandela , that great African statesman .
Recently , however , we have seen an increasingly critical situation , particularly with regard to crime .
This is a very serious issue , which is of great concern to the Portuguese citizens resident in that country .
In the last four years , 400 Portuguese citizens have been murdered , and this year alone , 14 Portuguese and therefore European citizens have been killed , which is causing turmoil in the Portuguese community in South Africa and in Portugal . The turmoil generated by these events often obstructs the matter from being debated calmly .
The intervention of the European Union can , therefore , be extremely useful in helping South Africa to address this problem , because the social and economic crisis underlying crime , as well as the increase in crime are issues that are crucial to consolidating South Africa ' s progress on a path that has already impressed us . The alternative , which would be very sad , would ruin an experiment that we all hope will succeed .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is often said that history repeats itself and , with regard to South Africa , this seems to be happening .
We all know what this country has been through .
It has emerged from years of social segregation and apartheid which have left permanent marks .
Today , the crime and problems in this country are related , above all , to the years of social deprivation and segregation it suffered .
Yet today this country is preparing to host the World Conference Against Racism .
Today , Nelson Mandela is fighting anti-white racism .
Today , despite everything , this country has just won a decisive victory over the pharmaceutical industry which had decided not to provide it with any medicines : in any case , the South African people does not have access to tritherapy or AZT , medicines now capable of saving its population .
Now it is my turn to repeat myself and to say that I will keep repeating this here : abolish the third world debt , enable men and women to live in dignity at last and assign this money to education and health , which are at the very basis of this country ' s resurgence - this is what is important .
We have to stop beating about the bush and , at last , raise the real issues after years of apartheid .
Today , we have to fight social segregation , and the only way to do that is through the cancellation of the debts of third world countries and those of , among others , South Africa .
Mr President , as previous speakers have already said , we are gradually losing all hope of South Africa 's becoming a stable factor in Africa .
The tremendous impoverishment of large sections of the population , which goes hand in glove with the massive spread of AIDS and with drug-dealing and racketeering , are real causes for concern .
Do we not realise that poverty and the need for survival are a crisis waiting to happen in Africa ?
This is where the crisis prevention is needed that we have spoken of so frequently over recent weeks , this is where we need self-help development programmes for the black population , health protection , support for preventive health care and , most importantly , educational support , before it is too late .
All this was discussed at length .
We also discussed something else , namely no arms exports to countries where poverty may disturb social peace .
Unfortunately , the Council has not honoured the promise made in the European Parliament .
Sweden , together with Germany , Great Britain and Italy , supplies arms to the value of 43 billion in local currency .
All the intentions expressed here , namely conflict prevention programmes without arms exports , have been forgotten by the Swedish government .
That is not all .
The whole thing was set up by bribing the South African government .
That shows that our code of conduct for arms exports is still full of holes and that we still cannot use it as an instrument for real conflict prevention .
We need to work on this .
We need clear criteria and transparent mechanisms so that this cannot happen again .
Mr President , the document we are about to adopt contains , in my opinion , points that might seem contradictory .
We reiterate our support for the government of South Africa but , at the same time , we ask it to make greater efforts in a number of areas , such as improving the living standards of the black population , reducing inequalities , creating employment , respecting minorities , fighting crime , and preventing and treating AIDS .
By putting pressure on the South African authorities in this way , we are on the one hand covering up the responsibility which many of our countries and the so-called ' western world ' should be assuming for the colossal injustice that the South Africans had to start from in the democratic reconstruction of their society .
On the other hand , it seems that we are giving the message that those who are in power there are not doing everything they can to put an end to the problems we are pointing out , and that conclusion would be another injustice on our part .
These are the priorities of the Pretoria government , and trying to overcome these problems is what makes that country an acceptable model for the whole of southern Africa .
I believe it is vital to emphasise that we understand the effort that South Africa is making , often in a courageous and innovative manner , with significant victories such as the one it has just gained in the matter of AIDS , for instance , against the great pharmaceutical industry .
Furthermore , however , I should like to remind you that I was the rapporteur last year when we debated the trade , development and cooperation agreement with South Africa , and I do not remember from this debate that the European Union was over-generous with our contribution to increasing the South African government ' s ability to overcome all these major challenges .
Now we are the ones who are demanding that they should be more effective .
Of course , we must remain vigilant , but without forgetting the serious difficulties that South Africa is facing , and of course we must turn our concerns into supportive cooperation to give the South Africans a better chance to achieve their objectives , which , moreover , coincide with our own demands .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is fashionable these days to be pessimistic about Africa , sometimes on the basis of rash generalisations .
In an ocean of instability , however , of never-ending wars and conflicts , such as in the long-suffering Angola , one regional power could guarantee a degree of order and peace in southern Africa - the Republic of South Africa .
A real political miracle has taken place there , which is firmly ingrained in our minds : the country moved from apartheid to democracy .
South Africa made a peaceful choice for democracy and thereby put an end to decades of racial oppression .
Nevertheless , South Africa still faces serious problems that have been described here today , from violent crime , into which the country is threatening to sink , and into which it could very well sink , to the terrible disease of AIDS .
The changes in South Africa have given rise to great hope , however .
The wisdom and the prestige of Nelson Mandela gave South Africa enormous authority in the world .
His political successors now have great responsibilities to history and to the heritage of values bequeathed to them by Nelson Mandela .
South Africa can only be a power that has a positive influence on the destinies of its region and of the world if it avoids sliding into racial or ethnic conflict .
The immigrant communities are living in fear and anxiety .
The Portuguese community , one of the largest and most affected by the violence , has already been brave enough to demonstrate on the streets and demand protective measures .
We must support South Africa , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , and help it , without adopting a paternalistic attitude , to develop and to combat a lack of safety , conflict , violent death and murder .
A drift towards violence would be a tragedy not only for South Africa but also for Europe and for the whole world .
Amongst the many resolutions adopted by this Parliament , this is one of the most important and topical .
The Portuguese and other European citizens living in South Africa will then feel that Europe is not abandoning them to their fate and will keep the flame of hope alight . Most effective in achieving the remainder of what needs to be done , however , will be the diplomacy of the Commission and the Member States .
I would remind you of the words of the great French philosopher , Montaigne , who said : ' Every man contains within him the entire form of the human condition ' .
To a certain extent , it is the human condition that is at stake in that great country .
Belarus
Mr President , these are tense times for President Lukashenko .
In just over two months ' time presidential elections will be taking place in his country , White Russia .
Not without reason the power-hungry White Russian head of state is rather concerned about the outcome .
For example , will the opposition succeed in uniting behind one candidate ?
Will it , moreover , be able to develop a strategy for cooperation with the growing number of critics in the Lukashenko camp ?
In addition the neutral attitude of his Russian counterpart Putin must be uncomfortable .
What is more , recent opinion polls cannot be reassuring either .
Finally , the grave accusations of two senior magistrates of the White Russian Public Prosecutor ' s Office , place the president himself , together with the country ' s present Attorney General , in a very unflattering light : it is alleged that on their orders specially formed death squads liquidated no less than 30 citizens in the period 1998-2000 .
These include prominent missing persons such as the former White Russian Minister of Internal Affairs Zacharenko , the opposition politician Gontshar and the White Russian television reporter Sawadski .
In order to secure his reelection above everything else the autocrat in Minsk eschews no means of neutralising his political rivals - ' depicted ' in the state media as enemies of the people and criminals - in advance .
No wonder that over half the population state in opinion polls that they do not expect fair and free presidential elections on 9 September .
Once again , an understandable attitude .
Because President Lukashenko is trying to frustrate all efforts in that direction - specifically a network of local , officially registered observers , actively supported by the OSCE mission in Minsk .
In this connection see particularly the presidential decree of 12 March , approved by parliament on 7 June .
In view of the influence on developments that Moscow can exert on developments in Minsk , participation of Russian monitors in an OSCE mission to observe the presidential elections of 9 September would be advisable .
I should like to know whether Commissioner Patten is able and willing to take initiatives in this direction .
I would like to address Commissioner Patten and , in particular , ask him and everyone else to note point 7 of the resolution on Belarus .
In this point , the European Parliament " calls on the Russian government and President Putin to support , within the political union between Russia and Belarus , a democratic multi-party system and pluralistic development in Belarus " .
There is a way to influence Belarus via Russia .
The political union which exists between these two states should be exploited to the full by the European Union .
We have great faith in Commissioner Patten and would like him , in all contexts , to bear this in mind within the framework of the Union .
Let me finally say that , in the parliamentary elections in Belarus in October 2000 , a quarter of the candidates refused to stand .
This shows what kind of regime we are dealing with .
Mr President , first of all I should like to mention that two years ago the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy asked me to produce a report on the relations of the European Union with Belarus , and I confess that I should very much like to be able to finish it as soon as possible and in a positive fashion .
My visits to Belarus on several occasions have left me with a pessimistic , hopeless image .
It is an authoritarian , personality-centred regime , in which the opposition has no chance to express itself .
The opposition ranges from democratic communists to Christian democrats via social democrats , within a framework of a lack of freedom , as I have said repeatedly .
The constant violation of human rights is also very worrying .
I therefore think that the European Commission , the European Union , the Council , Parliament , all have to give a clear signal , together with the OSCE and the Council of Europe , for the Belarus government to adopt democratic rules and give some hope to its people .
Mr President , yet again I must concur with the previous speakers : our future neighbour Belarus is still a long way from being a democracy and democracy is now the only basis on which we can live together in Europe .
It is with concern that we must concede that even the four basic conditions which we set for preparations for the presidential elections have not been met .
The opposition is still being persecuted and criminalised .
It still has no free or fair access to the media , especially state television .
Disappearances are still not explained , especially the fate of Mr Kontscha and the Russian cameraman Mr Zawadski , for whom journalists are now holding a commemorative week .
However , today , I should like to highlight the case of Professor Bandaschewski , who has tried for years to enlighten the people in the areas contaminated by Chernobyl .
Because he told the truth and because he opposed people moving back into these areas , he has now ended up in prison serving an eight-year sentence .
Can you imagine ?
It is intolerable .
Belarus still represents a challenge for European diplomacy .
We must be critical where criticism is needed but we must also provide support where we can .
Belarus is of strategic importance to the EU , which is why we must do everything we can to ensure that democracy is restored there .
Mr President , when we talk of Belarus , we are talking about more than just the situation in an albeit important country .
We are talking about the future of the whole of Eastern Europe .
The Pope was recently in Ukraine and voices were raised both for and against him .
Not between denominations , however , as everyone would have us believe , because pro-Europeans of all denominations welcomed his visit . It was the anti-Europeans who criticised him .
The Russian patriarch Alexei travelled to Belarus , not to criticise the repression of human rights and religious freedom there , but to campaign - with the support of the state - for the restoration of the single state of Russia , Ukraine and Belarus .
This shows that we are talking about an important political force here , which is why it is important to support the freedom of the people of Belarus and ensure that democracy and the rule of law are established there .
Now that Milosevic has been toppled , the last real Communist dictatorship in Europe is the regime in Belarus .
It is most important to ensure , and here my support goes above all to Mrs Schroedter , who has done a great deal of work here , that prisoners of conscience are released , that political prisoners are released , that the opposition is at last given a fair chance and that free elections can at last be held in Belarus , so that this country can return to where it has belonged since the beginning of its history , namely in the community of Europeans .
Situation of refugees from Burundi in Tanzania
Mr President , Hutus of Bantu origin form the majority tribe in Burundi with a population of 6 million .
The Tutsis of Nilotic origin are the minority tribe , but they dominate the government and the army .
Such tribal polarisation as we often see in Africa has been a major factor in the internal conflict , not only in Burundi but in neighbouring states .
In 1993 Burundi 's Hutu President was assassinated and within a month over 100,000 civilians were killed .
A further 150,000 civilians have been killed since then .
More than half a million are refugees in Tanzania 's refugee camps to this day .
The Democratic Republic of Congo has experienced similar conflict and almost 2 million civilians have been killed there or are missing over the last two to three years .
In the Horn , East and Central Africa covering 12 countries , there are 20 million displaced persons , displaced from their homes and their villages .
These people were poor before .
They are even poorer today .
They have no education , no access to health care , no employment and no shelter .
They depend totally on the World Food Programme for their food and they fear those who run the refugee camps where they live .
It is not surprising , therefore , that these refugee camps are breeding grounds for disease , discontent and disorder .
Young men and women are lured by the warlords to join their unruly gangs .
These innocent and desperate people , who were ordinary civilians before , probably farmers , are easily persuaded to train and be armed to support the greed and power struggle of the warlords .
The Lusaka and Arusha peace accords have failed to end the violence and internal conflict .
Repatriation of refugees is not satisfactory as the people are simply afraid to return to villages devastated , overrun and terrorised by the terrorists or the warlords .
How can we allow these displaced millions , these desperate refugees , to live in their camps as beggars for life .
How can we extinguish the fires of conflict and civil war in these developing countries ?
Containers full of medicines , tents , food , blankets and other such things bring temporary relief , but this is not enough .
We must be more active and rethink our strategy .
We must first of all give the poor a stake in their rural economies so that they may own their own land and have an opportunity to build their lives .
Secondly , we must give them the appropriate technology - third world technology - which they can then use to start local enterprises to break this cycle of dependency on us .
We must rethink our strategy and reassess the quality of people that we have in place as our ambassadors and representatives , their experience , and see how we can perhaps use local experts with international reputation and competence to advise us , to act on our behalf , to use the limited resources that we have to its best effectiveness .
We must embark on this with great urgency .
I have great confidence in Commissioner Patten to lead this , and Commissioner Nielson , and I hope that they will get together and make sure that the EU 's next decade is much better than the last 40 years , a period in which , I consider , much time and resources were wasted .
Thank you very much Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Illegal exploitation of natural resources in Democratic Republic of Congo
The next item is the joint debate on five motions for resolutions :
B5-0485 / 2001 by Mrs Maes , Mrs Isler Béguin and Mrs Lucas , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of Congo ;
B5-0492 / 2001 by Mr Van Hecke , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the looting of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of Congo ;
B5-0502 / 2001 by Mr Van den Berg , Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and Mrs Carlotti , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of Congo ;
B5-0510 / 2001 by Mr Van den Bos and Mrs Dybkjær , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of Congo ;
B5-0517 / 2001 by Mr Miranda , Mr Vinci and Mr Sylla , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to call special attention to a problem that forms part of a tidal wave of disaster engulfing a whole region , a million people .
The Democratic Republic of Congo is at this moment being ravaged by war .
A war that turns mainly on the considerable natural wealth of the country .
For years the land has been used and abused , a population has been sidelined for the sake of the lucrative exploitation of what nature has to offer .
War is an ideal situation for very lucrative deals , because there is seldom any control or accountability .
The example which most fires the imagination today is the extraction of and trade in coltan , a material without which none of us could communicate with such mobility and ease .
We pay ridiculously little for this material , while today the local population , for the first time in history , is facing serious famine .
The war that is currently raging permits not only so-called ' legal ' exploitation of this type , but also much less covert forms of plunder .
In addition it is clear that the lucrative trade in uranium and nuclear waste almost exclusively benefits Western interests .
We could also ask questions about the role of Western embassies and their associated agencies .
I should particularly like to draw attention to one aspect of this long-drawn-out state of abuse .
For many years the European countries and the United States have extracted uranium , which was responsible for such horrors as Hiroshima and Nagasaki .
To make matters worse Western nuclear waste is dumped in the same region .
Radioactive waste from the 1960s and 1970s is still an unmistakable direct threat to the population .
Consequently it is encouraging that Prime Minister Verhofstadt spoke ambitious words yesterday about tackling the situation in the region .
It must not stop at empty words .
The end of the cold war and the arms race means that the demand for the termination of the trade in uranium and nuclear waste is not an exaggerated one , but extremely reasonable , a demand that as it were flows naturally from the values to which Europe is pledged .
Mr President , the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is one of access , control and trade in key mineral resources .
The wealth of the country is appealing to its greedy neighbours .
All six nations involved in this conflict share responsibility for their illegal actions , as must those in other countries who have helped this profiteering .
Is long-term regional instability a price worth paying for short-term theft ?
Alongside plundering , looting and racketeering by foreign armies , criminal cartels see the DRC as a weak link .
The United National panel of experts warns : " These criminal cartels have ramifications and connections worldwide and they represent the next serious security problem in the region " .
I would like to ask the Commissioner what the difference is between Milosevic ethnically cleansing his neighbours and African leaders looting and killing 2.5 million of their Congolese neighbours ?
When can we see some of these leaders sitting in the dock in The Hague ?
I see no difference between one sort of killing and another , expect that one is white and the other black .
When the final United Nations findings are published , the EU and the UN should respond by considering freezing financial assets of rebel movements and of the leaders of criminal cartels and foreign powers that do not withdraw .
We , in the centre right of Parliament , want firm action to prevent the DRC 's destruction .
The irony is that the wealth stolen from the Congolese could provide the foundations for real long-term regional growth and stability .
This needs African leaders to lay down their guns , however .
With our historic connections with Africa - particularly during the Belgian Presidency - there is a real opportunity for something to be done very soon .
Mr President , the report of the panel of experts on the illegal exploitation of natural sources of energy is particularly brave .
Normally those reports are quite vague about names and surnames , but here the names of the various people responsible are listed .
In that respect too it is an extraordinarily useful report .
It makes it clear that not only government leaders in the region and of course a number of the ' war lords ' in the areas involved but also a number of industries in Europe with export and import operations that are illegal , or at least involve the use of illegal material , share a great part of the responsibility .
The report is lucid and clear in its recommendations .
It is in fact the second such report after the Fowler diamond report .
It also gives us the opportunity to operate quite effectively as an international community .
Mr Verhofstadt said here earlier in the week that if we had this in Europe , it would be called a world war .
The number of people affected by this disaster is extremely high .
I believe that it is right - in terms of equal treatment and application of the right criteria - to use the same standards in the Congo as we use elsewhere .
We are capable of doing so , because we know a number of the companies .
We can get them round the table .
We know a number of the governments with whom we have links .
We can also exert heavy pressure on this point .
It is a complicated game .
That is clear .
Uganda , Rwanda , Congo , the new debate , the Lusaka agreements , the facilitation of a dialogue .
If we do not remove the source , however , the financing of the arms trade and armed conflict , will continue .
We can make everything dry up there .
I would consider it of extreme importance if the European Commission , in fact Mr Patten with his colleague Mr Solana , would think about ways of mounting specific operations in the context of the UN Security Council to exert sufficient pressure to bring it to a halt .
On that point one more comment for the Belgian Presidency .
When he was here this weekend , Mr Verhofstadt , together with Minister Reynders and others , very quickly released credits that had been blocked .
Now of course I understand that there is a need to get the parties around a table and get them moving .
At the same time , though , you must of course be careful .
Making loans available and not at the same time making firm demands and meanwhile allowing the illegal exploitation of natural resources , is not the most credible way of going about it .
I am in favour - and that is a lesson from the past and on that point we need not be outdone by the Americans - of being hard and clear .
In fact exactly what we have said in previous debates : deeply committed , but also hard and clear and making our demands , on our own industry , our own Member States and the six countries involved .
I hope - and expect - that you will support the Belgian Presidency in such a way that it will lead to some effectiveness on this point .
Mr President it is sad that Europe seems to be giving real political priority to Congo only now that Belgium is president .
The Balkans and the Middle East demand all our attention .
Does this not basically indicate that strategic and geographical considerations are ultimately more important to Europe than purely humanitarian ones ?
For from the point of view of human misery there is every reason for the Union to concern itself intensively with Congo .
There are already one and a half million dead to mourn in the country .
Hundreds of thousands have become refugees and some 28 million people are being oppressed , plundered and violated under the military occupation .
A weak central authority is not capable of governing the huge country with its many natural resources .
Congo is extremely vulnerable to merciless neighbouring countries , which by military force are systematically robbing the country of its principal sources of income .
The population sees none of the proceeds .
It is difficult to state that the European Union has allowed Rwanda , Uganda and Burundi to go their shameless way and allows them to continue their occupation with development aid .
Angola , Zimbabwe and Zambia also participate without scruples in the violence in this country .
It is high time that clear conditions were imposed on these foreign profiteers .
Continuation of development aid will be possible only if all foreign troops leave the country .
Western companies involved in the illegal exploitation of Congolese riches should also be exposed .
They are also contributing to the continuation of the war .
We may expect Kabila to finally initiate an inter-Congolese dialogue , and carry through the process of democratisation .
It is the task of the Belgian Presidency and the Commission to win over the European Union once and for all for the lamentable fate of the people of Congo .
The Commission is well aware of the information referred to in the proposals for a resolution submitted to Parliament and in the press concerning illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
This information has been broadly confirmed by the Commission 's interlocutors on the spot , including non-governmental organisations and in an interim report by the United Nations , to which a number of honourable Members referred .
The honourable Member referred to that report during a speech which made a powerful case for an international criminal court able to extend its remit around the world , not unlike the Tribunal at The Hague focused on the Balkans .
That report covers the illegal exploitation of the DRCs natural resources and other wealth .
It was presented to the Security Council by the Secretary-General , Kofi Annan , on 14 April 2001 and it was the subject of a heated debate .
The Secretary-General decided to extend the mandate of the experts who compiled the report by three months , so that they could add to the research and the information already provided .
The report will be an important point of departure for the international community , which will have to take a position on it .
The profits to be made from coltan mining and other mining by the warring parties in Congo are bound to have an impact on the devastation in Kivu .
The region 's decline began under President Mobutu and has a number of causes , one of the most significant being ethnic tensions .
The situation became much worse following the genocide in Rwanda and Rwanda 's intervention in both the country 's wars which were originally fought to secure external borders .
The international community is aware of the link between economic interests and the continuation of the war in Kivu .
The only lasting solution is nonetheless to advance the peace process and to build legitimate institutions able to regulate the exploitation of resources .
This is the objective supported by the Commission through its activity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
That is the context in which we envisaged the gradual resumption of aid in tandem with the implementation of the Lusaka agreement and the progress of the Congolese dialogue .
Honourable Members , and particularly Mr van den Berg , focused their arguments on the relationship between the illicit trade in some commodities and the conflict .
We know the problems that have been caused with diamonds elsewhere and the arms trade .
It is extremely important , where we can , to take initiatives and pursue them on both .
That is why we have been so active in working at the United Nations on small arms and we must make use of the Community 's competences , when we can , and with the Member States deal effectively with the illicit diamond and with other illicit trades which have caused so much suffering and impoverishment in Africa in particular , but in other countries as well .
Thank you very much Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Earthquake in Peru
Mr President , the city of Arequipa will never be the same again .
The loss of human life that has happened there , the economic damage and also the irreparable destruction of the historical and monumental heritage of this most beautiful city have astounded us all .
Southern Peru is experiencing a tragic situation caused by the earthquake of 23 June , the devastating effects of which have left over a hundred dead , over a thousand injured , and have destroyed over ten thousand homes , leaving over 40 000 people homeless in the provinces of Arequipa , Moquegua and Tacna .
The earthquake has also caused severe destruction in northern Chile and in Bolivia .
The economic damage has set these regions back by more than 20 years .
The scale of the disaster has affected infrastructure and economic development .
Some towns , villages , districts , settlements and roads have been destroyed by the earthquake .
Faced by such a disaster , the forces of international solidarity and especially European solidarity were swift to act .
The European Union humanitarian office mobilised in record time , and I should like to congratulate those responsible in the European Commission on their rapid intervention with a package of measures which , right from the first few hours , included food aid , temporary accommodation , supplies of products for purifying water and deliveries of medicines .
In this context I must also feel proud of the solidarity expressed by the Spanish government and people , who have contributed very generously .
At times like these we have to look to the future , and the reconstruction and rehabilitation plans must be coordinated quickly and effectively .
To these ends , a strategic communication should be drawn up covering all aspects of aid coordination and the reconstruction and rehabilitation plans that I have mentioned for the affected areas .
This sad human tragedy may be an occasion for Latin Americans to be more united and determined when facing their numerous difficulties , and also for them to deepen their ties and their process of regional integration with , perhaps , larger doses of solidarity .

Mr President , both the Commissioner , Mr Patten , and the Members of this House are well aware of the situation in Peru , and the last speaker , Mr Ojeda , has summed up the situation very well .
The starting point for Parliament ' s resolution is , in effect , the Commission ' s rapid action , and I should like to join in congratulating the Commission and particularly the Commissioner , Mr Patten , on this rapid action .
Nevertheless , the purpose of our resolution is to remind us that this initial aid is likely to be insufficient , given the extent of the disaster .
We have in fact just been visited by the new President-elect of Peru , Mr Alejandro Toledo , who has met members of Parliament and also the Commission and has told them of his needs .
We do not think this is the moment to adopt a resolution on Peru ' s economic policy and , in this respect , we do not consider it prudent to support the amendment tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , since we believe it is a subject that requires rather more time for consideration .
Above all , we do not believe it is the right moment to tell the government of Peru how it should prepare its budget for 2002 .
We do hope , however , that , regardless of the overall context of the resolution , the Commission will over the coming weeks and months consider the special situation of this country , which has been through quite a critical time from a constitutional and economic standpoint , and which now , after an impeccable electoral process , seems to have started on the road to recovery in democracy and with the confidence of the whole population .
We hope that , based on these views - I repeat , regardless of what happens here - the Commission will go ahead .
There is a subject to which the Commissioner , Mr Patten , is quite sensitive : the effectiveness of Community aid .
It seems that , in the past , the financial resources earmarked for the Latin American area have not been used fully effectively .
Since the start of his mandate , Mr Patten has been concerned with the effectiveness of the operations , and we should like to know whether at this moment ( although it may still be premature ) the aid that the Community sends is achieving its results , and also what measures he foresees for the development of future aid .
While aid is being granted , it is important that it should be monitored and that the Commission should inform us whether in effect this aid that we are approving , which is paid for with our taxpayers ' money , is achieving positive results .
Apart from that , I repeat , I want to join in congratulating the Commission and the Commissioner , Mr Patten .
I hope that in this new stage Peru may find an important ally in the Commission and the European Union , and that the Commission may soon present to us proposals for aid for the recovery of Peru and aid for cooperation with the Andean Community , which , as we know , finds itself in difficulties , not only in Peru but also in other countries .
Mr President , I would like to make some additional remarks regarding the humanitarian resolution that we have signed .
It is indeed important to attempt , as a matter of urgency , to do something to address the damage caused by the terrible earthquake on 23 June this year .
The consequences of this earthquake have been described by the previous speakers .
I will not go over them again as we already know what they are .
I just want to point out that the quake reached 8.3 on the Richter scale .
That says it all .
Unfortunately , there is no Richter scale to gauge the extent of the institutional , economic , social and cultural devastation brought about by almost ten years of dictatorship under Alberto Fujimori and his henchman , Vladimiro Montesinos .
In a room in this Parliament not far from this one , only the day before yesterday , Alfredo Toledo , the future president of Peru , painted an uncompromising picture of the situation in his country .
He described institutions in ruin , an economy in dire straits .
He told us that he is going to start the task of rebuilding as soon as he has been sworn in , which should happen on 28 July , Peru ' s national holiday .
In particular , he told us that he was against impunity for those responsible for this situation .
We therefore believe that Japan should be asked to extradite the former dictator Alberto Fujimori , and that he and his accomplice , Montesinos , should be tried in Peru itself .
We call for the ' Truth ' commission , which was promised by the candidates , to be set up , for the committee to establish responsibilities and to carry out the purge that must follow of the armed forces , which colluded with the dictatorship . We also call for the return of the money stolen by the dictatorship from the Peruvian people , which totals 43 billion dollars , and which is probably tucked away in a European bank somewhere .
Lastly , our institutions should find out whether the money stolen from the Peruvian people is indeed in our banks .
As the House knows , a strong earthquake struck southern Peru on 23 June 2001 .
Up-dated figures from the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs indicate that almost 190 000 people were affected and some 35 000 homes damaged or destroyed .
Through its humanitarian aid office ECHO , the Commission reacted , and I am grateful for the generous remarks made by the honourable Member , Mr Medina .
The Commission reacted very promptly .
A decision to allocate humanitarian aid amounting to EUR 1.15m was taken two days after the earthquake to help meet the first urgent needs of the victims .
This is the first time , in fact , that the Commission has made use of its new system for responding immediately to the sudden onset of humanitarian crises which came into operation less than two weeks ago .
Furthermore , five emergency humanitarian operations are already under way .
The Spanish Red Cross is distributing food aid and emergency relief items for 1 000 families to the tune of EUR 250 000 .
Oxfam is spending EUR 200 000 on emergency water storage and distribution facilities and sanitation .
Save the Children Fund - EUR 300 000 on blankets and tents .
Medicos Del Mundo - EUR 100 000 on blankets , medicines , water tanks and plastic sheets for shelter .
The International Federation of the Red Cross - EUR 300 000 on shelter , food and support to the rescue efforts for health , water , sanitation and other relief supplies .
That is how our emergency relief is being spent and I think it is being spent in sensible ways .
According to information received from the field , the international response has been generous and the immediate needs seem to be covered .
Nevertheless , the Commission services continue to monitor the situation in case additional aid is required .
A debate on a resolution on the Peruvian earthquake is not perhaps the most appropriate framework to discuss the political situation in Peru , but I would nevertheless like to stress that we are extremely satisfied with the capacity shown by Peru and its transitional government to carry out transparent and clean elections after the political disasters described very effectively by the honourable Member in his maiden speech .
We shall look forward to hearing from him many times in the future .
It was a pretty vigorous maiden as maidens go !
The European Union Observation Mission for the elections was extremely positive .
Like honourable Members , I discussed the catastrophe and the European response on Tuesday with President Toledo during his visit to Parliament .
We want to congratulate the interim government and the people of Peru for the maturity shown in this situation and for the support and cooperation provided to our team in the field .
I was able to say to President Toledo when he was here with us that the approximately EUR 60m in programmes for the alleviation of poverty blocked by the conduct of the elections in 2000 will now be released .
We want to proceed with those projects as rapidly as possible .
I follow very much the point raised by Mr Medina , you want to get on with those projects as soon as possible and I know that poverty alleviation is one of the new President 's priorities .
We also want to sit down with the new government to discuss programming our future assistance .
The President himself underlined his commitment to reforming the judiciary and making sure that there is in place a rule of law in the institutions to make that rule of law effective .
I feel that that is a very important way in which we can see the encouragement of more private investment in Peru and more confidence on the part of the international community .
We all express our condolences to those who have been affected by this terrible earthquake but at least it has given us the opportunity of expressing in this House once again our solidarity with democracy in Peru and our encouragement of the new Peruvian government .
Thank you very much indeed Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Results of the multiannual guidance programmes for fishing fleets
The next item is the report ( A5-0188 / 2001 ) by Mr Busk , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the Annual Report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the results of the multiannual guidance programmes for the fishing fleets at the end of 1999 ( COM ( 2000 ) 738 - C5-0107 / 2001 - 2001 / 2056 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to thank my colleagues in the Committee on Fisheries for the considerable interest and support elicited by my report on the multiannual guidance programmes for fishing fleets .
It shows that this is a very important report .
The multiannual guidance programmes proposed by the Commission make a lot of sense .
The overriding problem is that they are not being implemented in the Member States .
Therefore , we never find out whether or not they would be a success .
It is quite simply unacceptable that they are not being implemented in their entirety .
According to the Commission , there are 7 or 8 Member States which do not comply with MAGPs .
If one adds to these the countries which do not have a fishing fleet at all , not many countries are left which comply with the common decisions .
We simply have too large a fleet fishing for too few fish in the EU .
There has only just recently been a ban on cod fishing in the North Sea , and this clearly shows that there are some very weak links in the chain when it comes to the ability of the common fisheries policy to secure sustainable fisheries .
European fishermen are entitled to a more stable fisheries and quota policy as a basis on which to organise their industry .
One of the most important tools for securing sustainable fisheries is simply to ensure that the size of the fishing fleet corresponds to the quantity of the fish that can be caught .
Technological progress entails a still greater need to reduce fishing fleets .
We are now , of course , in the unfortunate and regrettable position arising from the failure to renegotiate a fisheries agreement with Morocco .
The EU ' s over-capacity when it comes to the fishing fleet is therefore a great weakness .
I look forward to the Commission ' s using the new tools in the form of Articles 6 and 10 of the Council Regulation which of course enable the Commission to withhold aid for , respectively , fleet renewal and the modernisation of vessels .
It is naturally sad that the Member States do not have a greater incentive to implement those decisions which they themselves have been involved in taking on a joint basis and that some countries feel superior about the fact that they are to implement the guidance programmes , given that they are not exceeding the quotas .
I find that deeply regrettable .
One is almost tempted to propose introducing a system of rewards for those countries which comply with the common decisions and reduce their fishing fleets .
I am obliged to criticise the form taken by the Commission ' s annual report , which is impossible to read unless one is an expert in the area .
The various figures are set out without any comments as to their reliability .
For that matter , they are included in the report in such a way that it is largely up to the reader to interpret the figures and make what he considers to be the correct interpretations .
In other words , the annual report is not easy to read and it provides absolutely no overview of the situation .
For example , there is no clearly set-out table to permit comparison of the individual Member States .
It is , unfortunately , a very poor point of departure for the reform of the common fisheries policy in 2002 .
The Commission therefore has a very great deal of work ahead of it , Commissioner , if a new and better guidance programme for the reduction of the fishing fleet is to be carried out and if this is to be implemented in all the Member States .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Busk , because he has done an excellent job .
Our group is going to support this report from the first line to the last .
I also thank him for the collaboration which we have had with him at all times in the work we have carried out .
The report echoes yet again the request by this Parliament that the European Commission should make an example of and apply truly dissuasive penalties to those Member States that repeatedly fail to comply with the fleet objectives they have been assigned , so as to avoid once and for all that the general objectives for the Community fleet should be forever jeopardised , despite the very high social and economic sacrifices made in some regions of the Member States that have traditionally complied .
This lack of compliance with the MAGPs has led the European Commission to present its proposal to extend MAGP IV until the end of 2002 , unfortunately setting out a number of conditions which are absolutely unacceptable .
In a further attempt to adapt the fleet to the resources , the Commission has again forgotten that there are countries that have broadly complied with their objectives , and is presenting a global proposal which will punish everybody with the threat of new cuts in fleet size and the intention of withholding aid for the modernisation of the fleet .
As I have said so many times ( the last time was right here , during the last part-session ) , the structural aid for modernisation is the only guarantee to maintain a competitive fleet and to ensure the best conditions for the quality of Community fisheries products and the quality of life and safety of our crews .
Far from understanding it in this way , the Commission shows it has completely lost touch with reality by persisting in suppressing such aid , and in real terms the new MAGP proposal literally says that it will suppress the article that allows fleets to seek modernisation , for safety reasons .
With the review of the common fisheries policy , the Commission talks a lot about listening to those involved and consulting the industry and the administrations .
Time and time again , they have all made it perfectly clear - and they are unanimous in this - that they consider the modernisation budget to be indispensable .
Because of all this , I ask the Commissioner to explain to me the reasoning behind this proposal
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the common fisheries policy has the difficult and , at times , thankless task of reconciling the interests of an activity as old as mankind with preserving fishery resources and marine ecosystems .
The continual erosion of fish populations will , in the long term , threaten the survival of European fishermen and the preservation of the species .
And without fish , it goes without saying , there can be no fishing .
It is therefore crucial , as Commissioner Fischler suggested , that we make a clear decision to accept short-term losses in order to achieve economic and environmental benefits in the long term .
The overcapacity of the Community fishing fleet , which marine scientists estimate to be 40 % , a figure adopted in the March 2001 Green Paper on the future of the common fisheries policy , is one of the main causes of the excessive pressure that fishing exerts on fish stocks .
It must not be forgotten , however , that other activities apart from fishing , namely tourism and various forms of pollution , also contribute to the destruction of the marine environment .
For this reason , the multiannual programmes for reducing the fishing fleets are an important component of the measure that has been implemented in order to protect species that are being fished at dangerous levels .
The basic aim of these programmes , which are truly complex and hard to implement , is to achieve a balance between resources and catches , not to punish fishermen .
A permanent reduction of the fishing fleets is , of course , viewed with apprehension by fishermen and others in the industry .
The reduction must therefore be implemented rigorously and transparently and with fairness to all those concerned .
The results for 1999 are mediocre and disappointing and it is , therefore , worth emphasising the recommendations contained in Mr Busk ' s report , calling on the Commission and the Member States to adopt clear and precise criteria for measuring the capacity of ships and fishing fleet categories so as to guarantee control of developments in the fishing fleets and the multiannual plan objectives .
Member States must have the courage to respect the limits that have been set .
Fishing must , increasingly , become an activity which is not predatory but rather one which is friendly to the sea and to marine life .
Mr President , once again we are seeing the same situation .
Several Member States are behind in their obligations to reduce their fleets and once again nothing is being done to improve matters .
The next report , by Mr Nicholson on cod in the Irish Sea , clearly shows the failure of the present approach to fleet management .
The Commission is proposing to extend the MAGP by one more year in order to debate fleet policy in the context of the Green Paper .
We support that .
We think it is a good idea .
However , there needs to be a major rethink about fleet policy .
We would agree with the Commission that fleets are too large and must be reduced .
We also feel that the Council should wake up and join the real world , because it seems to think that this is unnecessary .
As a step in the right direction the Greens support the idea of penalties for those countries which are not observing their legally binding commitments to reduce fleets .
We must get serious about this problem and also look at the countries that are claiming to have met their obligations under the MAGP , to ensure that they are not transferring their vessels to other flags .
We must ensure that they are doing what the MAGP intends they do in the long run .
Mr President , the structure of the fishing fleet is determined by the socio-economic circumstances of a region , by the Total Allowed Catch ( TAC ) and the quota in combination with technical measures .
The multiannual guidance programme ( MGP ) has generally acted too much as an end in itself and too little as a means to an end in all this .
The end is to maintain fish stocks in a sustainable way .
If a Member State ' s fleet keeps to its quota , it has met the principal objective .
Threatening to reduce the quota if the MGP targets are not met ignores that objective .
One then finds the odd situation that fleets that meet the MGP target but structurally overfish go unpunished , while fishing fleets that do not overfish are penalised because their engine capacity is too great .
On the latter point it was a considerable step forward that in 1999 account was taken for the first time of countries that regulate their fleet capacity through a days-at-sea scheme , in other words capacity limited by activity .
Unfortunately an end has not yet been put to the confusing number of units to denote fleet capacity such as gross registered ton , gross ton and kilowatt propulsion capacity .
It is an illustration of the lack of vision of fleet structure and the inflexibility of the Commission ' s fisheries policy that as yet no proper unit has been found for fleet activity .
With the increasing catching efficiency , the need for an indisputable indicator of the catch per unit of effort is great .
On the other hand , great engine capacity need not indicate a greater fishing effort if we consider that the freezing capacity also requires extra engine quality as on some ships .
Sustainable fishing can only be achieved if there is room for an efficient fleet within the permitted catches .
Grants for newly-built ships disrupt the operation of market forces and encourage an expansion of capacity .
I therefore call on the Commission to end these grants , and I know that I have the support of Dutch fishermen in this .
The Commission needs support among the fishermen , if it is to have a chance of succeeding .
The MGP must not be seen as a separate instrument with independent objectives from the other policy measures such as the TACs and the quota .
By giving fishermen in their product organisations scope to shape policy for themselves within a single framework , such support can be created .
These producers ' organisations can then be tackled on the division of the quota , transparency of catches and the registration of ships .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am going to speak on behalf of my fellow Member , Dominique Souchet , and set out the position she upheld - which I also share - in the Committee on Fisheries .
This Annual Report - whatever the rapporteur ' s qualities and however much work he puts in - appears repetitive , conventional and quite pointless each time .
The pointlessness of this exercise underlines , if there were any doubt , the vacuity of a process , namely the MGPs or multiannual guidance programmes , the principal effect of which is to encourage fraudulent behaviour , favouring certain fleets to the detriment of others .
The purchase of virtual wrecks from outside , in order to break them and thereby have unjustified reserves of kilowatts available , distorted the mechanism from the start .
This corruption has even become a veritable national sport in certain States .
Indefinitely lamenting the poor quality of the statistical data on MGPs therefore does not make much sense .
To embark , as the Commission proposes , on a course of punishment and penalties for Member States - which would , in fact , hit the workers - would be dangerous .
What we need is simply to take note of the failure of the MGPs instead of trying to artificially prolong the life of this ineffective and counter-productive measure .
Despite their elevated cost , these MGPs have not achieved their objective .
Adding to the total allowed catches - the TACs - they were badly designed from the outset and have made the second-hand market rocket to the detriment , in particular , of young small-scale fishermen who are just starting out in this profession .
Everyone recognises this failure in private .
It would be sensible to have the courage to recognise it publicly and draw conclusions from it .
The main conclusion should be the need to include in the new common fisheries policy , along with the abolition of the MGPs , reorientation of the sustainable management of resources according to a reformed system of TACs and improved , fine-tuned multiannual quotas based on refined assessments of resources made possible by a substantial increase in scientific research and close collaboration with workers in the process .
In wishing to prolong the MGP policy the Commission is in danger of committing itself to a dangerous path , and we are warning it against this .
This is not the way to reconcile fishermen with the common fisheries policy .
First of all , may I take the opportunity of congratulating the rapporteur .
He , like myself , has been given the great problem of trying to deal with a highly technical report and trying to find a way through .
My report comes later .
I want to take the opportunity to congratulate him on an excellent report .
I think those of us who participate in the fisheries committee in this parliament do not always get the credit for what they achieve or indeed what the Commission achieves .
I have to ask the Commission and indeed , we all have to ask ourselves , why is the multiannual guidance programme not being implemented ?
It is all very well to complain about it , but we have to ask the question ' why ' ?
The main reason why it is not being implemented is because Member States and national governments are not prepared on many occasions to find the matching funding required to bring about what is necessary to restructure an industry which we all know and agree must be restructured .
Until we find a way of encouraging all the Member States to do this , there is no point in one Member State doing it , there is no point in two or even three , four or five Member States : it has to be right across the board of all Member States or else you will end up with massive recriminations between Member States as to who is doing what .
The fact that we have not been able to give it that priority in the Member States is certainly something that we all view with great concern .
I would be inclined to say to the Commissioner that , no matter what you call it or how you achieve it , what you should do is to take the problem , give it a good shaking , get on with it and to try and force Member States to bring about the result everyone agrees is required and sort out how it will really affect the industry .
We have the Member States going one way , we have the Commission going another way , we have scientists telling us another thing and in the middle we have fishermen and the fishing industry wondering what way they can go .
Mr President , it is essential that fishing effort - and I mean effort as opposed to capacity - is matched to fishery resources .
Member States must also be obliged to fulfil their fleet reduction targets so I welcome the general thrust of Mr Busk 's report .
Unfortunately , an amendment in committee added a reference to the Cunha report and brought with it the concept of quota penalties , a proposal which is against the acquis communautaire .
As the Commission itself stated in this House on a previous occasion , and I quote : " The automatic reduction in quotas for non-complying countries seriously undermines the basic principle of the common fisheries policy which is that of relative stability " .
Quota penalties are impractical as well as unjust , punishing fishermen for their Member State 's wrongdoing .
Quotas should be based on science and conservation objectives , not misused as automatic penalties .
I ask therefore for a separate and split vote on paragraph 4 of this text and I urge Members to reject the references to the Cunha report and make sure that effective sanctions are targeted against those who are obliged to fulfil MAGP targets , that is , Member State governments , and not fishermen .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
May I start by thanking Mr Busk for his excellent report .
As we all know , the multi-annual guidance programmes are important instruments for fleet policy .
I agree with you wholeheartedly there .
According to the information in the annual report , not only were the MAGP IV targets not ambitious enough , even these modest targets were not all met .
Now I should like to comment on the two main demands contained in the report : measurements of vessels and sanctions for Member States which fail to meet their MAGP targets .
First , Mr Busk , you call for precise and clear criteria for measuring capacity .
In theory , we introduced a uniform definition of tonnage which applies throughout the Community in 1994 in Regulation No 3259 .
According to this regulation , the Member States had to file tonnage estimates by 1995 and have until 2003 to measure all vessels in accordance with uniform regulations and notify the actual values .
So far , we have only received estimates and now they must gradually be replaced by actual values .
This means that we shall have to work with a mixture of accurate measurements and estimates until the end of 2003 .
In theory , there are also harmonised definitions for engine power .
There is a problem here with controls , however , because the actual engine power is often higher than the value declared or is subsequently increased .
We must put a stop to this practice and the Commission will be organising a workshop of experts from the Member States in the autumn of this year in order to find solutions to these problems .
In all honesty , however , there is good cause to question , over and above this , if these two criteria , that is , engine power and tonnage , really are the only possible and the most suitable criteria for assessing the fishing effort of a vessel accurately .
In all events , I intend to raise this question again when we consider the reform of the common fisheries policy and investigate it more closely .
Secondly , Mr Busk , you call for effective sanctions against Member States which fail to honour their obligations under MAGP IV .
You refer in this context to earlier resolutions by Parliament on the Cunha report on the same subject .
I agree with you wholeheartedly here .
We need more effective sanctions which will have the right impact .
The most effective method in the past , with the exception of legal recourse , has been to freeze state aid for fleets .
This is , of course , completely pointless in Member States which do not grant state aid , such as the Netherlands or the United Kingdom .
The only legal recourse available if the MAGP IV targets are exceeded is to go to the European Court and institute infringement proceedings .
We have prepared infringement proceedings against several Member States and we now intend to set them in motion because there is no other way of making sure they toe the line .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
Cod stock in the Irish Sea
The next item is the report ( A5-0213 / 2001 ) by James Nicholson , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 2549 / 2000 establishing additional technical measures for the recovery of the stock of cod in the Irish Sea ( ICES Division VIIa ) ( COM ( 2001 ) 165 - C5-0140 / 2001 - 2001 / 0083 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I am grateful for the support I had in producing this report .
As I indicated in the earlier debate , it is a technical report .
Sometimes it requires a bit of knowledge to get to the bottom of the problem .
Thanks also to the Commission .
To some extent we are dealing with the issue of Box 7 ( A ) in the Irish Sea , which has been closed off at times recently , in cooperation with the fishermen .
I certainly welcome that .
Discussions were based on the debate about what happened in the North Sea .
That area was also closed when the Norwegians were working on the project , and scientists came forward with new conclusions that did not affect the industry .
This report also helps French fishermen .
It operates in conjunction with the cod recovery plan in the Irish Sea .
Everyone accepts now that there is a problem of cod stocks .
No one has been able to agree on how you work towards their recovery , however .
I certainly hope this study and the proposals that come forward will , in conjunction with the fishermen , help the fishing industry , the fleet and those who actually work at sea .
To a large extent this report is technical , as I have said .
It involves the difference between a 4mm thick double twine that is equivalent to a 6mm thick single twine on the cod-ends on the actual net that catches the fish .
I hope the scientists are right and that this improves .
We all have to accept that this is about the protection of juvenile cod in the Irish Sea .
I hope it is successful .
If stocks are to recover then the juveniles have to be allowed to mature and develop if the industry is to recover .
One area I am encouraged about is the fact that there is better cooperation and dialogue between the Commission and those involved in the industry .
That must be welcomed by everyone .
We all have a part to play in this : fishermen , the Member States , scientists , and the Commission .
Each has to know where the other is coming from if we are going to succeed .
Everyone has to cooperate if we are to succeed .
I would like the Commissioner here tonight to confirm that this cooperation is working to the maximum and as well as he would wish .
Perhaps he could suggest ways of improving that , especially in the months ahead when , near Christmas , we decide what the TACs and quotas are for those areas and are bound to face grave difficulties .
The Commissioner may be aware that for the last two years the Irish Sea has been closed at spawning time to aid stock recovery .
Fishermen in that area have cooperated fully , as they have this year about the North Sea .
Do these new methods have an effect ?
Can you tell us that the desired effect has been achieved , as far as the scientists are concerned ?
There is growing realism that there is a problem .
But are we on the way to solving that problem ?
Have we got the right methods and mechanisms in place to resolve it ?
All these new measures create extra costs , at a time when we have reduced fishing and have a fleet that is , to some extent , in financial difficulty .
We seriously require support through the industry : decommissioning , a reduction in size of the fishing fleet and fishing time so that we can at least leave those left in the industry some hope of survival .
I hope , Commissioner , you will encourage the cooperation that is required .
It has come about to achieve this technical agreement .
I hope that you will encourage cooperation between your staff , scientists and those involved in the industry .
That is the way forward .
Can I first of all congratulate my friend and colleague , Jim Nicholson , on his report .
Technical measures to aid the recovery of cod stocks in the Irish Sea are of very great importance and they are of considerable consequence to fishermen in Scotland who are now desperately searching for ways to rejuvenate cod stocks in the North Sea .
We are therefore studying the success of the measures taken in the Irish Sea with huge interest .
Fish stocks , as you know , have collapsed in the North Sea , recently forcing the Commission to introduce emergency measures for the first time , when they closed 40 000 sq miles to cod fishing for 12 weeks , and to introduce emergency measures to protect northern hake stocks .
Our once proud Scottish fleet , which landed 400 000 tonnes of cod per year in Scottish ports in 1970 , is now limited by strict TACs and quotas to a mere 20 000 tonnes per year .
The situation is no longer sustainable .
The Commission Green Paper on reform of the CFP contains proposals , which have received widespread support from the industry , for maintaining the 6- and 12-mile limits to protect in-shore fisheries , preserving the successful conservation zones such as the Shetland Box and maintaining the concept of relative stability to limit access to the North Sea .
The Commission has also recommended devolving some aspects of fisheries management to zonal committees , involving key stakeholders such as fishermen and scientists in an advisory role .
All of this is highly commendable and will assist in the process of stock recovery and juvenile recruitment .
It is also necessary , however , as the rapporteur has pointed out , to introduce a wide range of technical measures such as mesh sizes .
For this reason alone , I am alarmed that we continue to allow industrial fishing for sand eels and Norway pout in the North Sea .
Industrial fishing is completely incompatible with the development of a sustainable fishery .
How can we force our fishermen to utilise 110 mm mesh sizes in the EU sector from 1 January 2002 for cod , haddock and whiting when we continue to allow these Klondykers to scoop up everything in their path using small-mesh nets .
This destructive practice has got to stop , and I hope that the Commission will take the necessary steps to control industrial fishing as part of the overall CFP reform .
Mr President , this is a very necessary technical proposal and I fully endorse Mr Nicholson 's report and the proposal to which it refers .
But speaking of recovery plans in general , of course it is not only the Irish Sea that has seen catastrophic declines .
The North Sea too has been confronted with drastic depletion of stock leading to partial sea closures and another cod recovery plan and the hake recovery plan .
There is a manifest need in fisheries management to take account of the local eco-system and the regional differentials which exist .
The broad brush approach , I would contend , has not worked with stocks on the decline and recovery very slow , if evident at all .
That is why regional management is the way forward .
In addition to the short-term technical proposals referred in this type of report , the approach of the Commission 's Green Paper , which is both more regional and conservation-orientated , must be embraced .
In this regard , I also welcome proposals to make additional funds available for tie-up schemes as a necessary part of the management tool box for conservation purposes , going in tandem with the recovery plans .
Compensated tie-up schemes are also essential for the preservation of the CFPs social role .
In Scotland , the need for recovery is acknowledged by all the stake-holders , but fishermen also must have the financial and the social protection that they need to encourage them while taking responsible actions .
Therefore , I ask the Commission to ensure that a system is set in place which allows for compensated tie-ups , but without being subject to the whims of Member State governments , to ensure that a more level playing field exists between fishing industries in the different Member States , which from time-to-time will be affected by recovery plans .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can keep it brief .
First I should like to thank Mr Nicholson for his report and , secondly , I should like to state that the Commission fully supports this report .
Scientists have come to the conclusion that 6 mm thick single-twine netting is equivalent in terms of selectivity to 4 mm thick double-twine netting .
There was therefore no reason to prohibit 4 mm thick double-twine netting for fisheries in the Irish Sea .
We have therefore amended the regulation accordingly .
I should like to thank you for your positive attitude to this Commission proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended until voting time at 6.30 p.m. )
VOTE
The next item is the vote .
Report ( A5-0213 / 2001 ) by James Nicholson , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 2549 / 2000 establishing additional technical measures for the recovery of the stock of cod in the Irish Sea ( ICES Division VIIa ) ( COM ( 2001 ) 165 - C5-0140 / 2001 - 2001 / 0083 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0327 / 2001 ) by Caroline F. Jackson , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the European Union 's strategy for the Bonn Conference on Climate Change ( COP-6 , part 2 )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0214 / 2001 ) by Jonas Sjöstedt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Commission communication on safe operation of mining activities : a follow-up to recent mining accidents ( COM ( 2000 ) 664 - C5-0013 / 2001 - 2001 / 2005 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0188 / 2001 ) by Niels Busk , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the annual report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the results of the multi-annual guidance programmes for the fishing fleets at the end of 1999 ( COM ( 2000 ) 738 - C5-0107 / 2001 - 2001 / 2056 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- Resolution B5-0327 / 2001
We shall be voting for the resolution on the European Union 's strategy for the Bonn Conference on Climate Change .
It responds to an urgent need , by confirming the intention to forge ahead in the face of President Bush ' s unilateral opposition to the Kyoto Protocol .
It also contains positive articles , such as the article which reaffirms the need to promote ' clean development ' by encouraging technologies which excl